

===== BOOK: atec.txt =====


    
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

At the Earth's Core

  

By Edgar Rice Burroughs

  

Chicago: A.C. McClurg & Co.

  

[1914]

Created by Judith Boss, Omaha, Nebraska

Click to enlarge
Map of Pellucidar

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

PROLOGUE

In the first place please bear in mind that I do not expect you to believe this story. Nor could you wonder had you witnessed a recent experience of mine when, in the armor of blissful and stupendous ignorance, I gaily narrated the gist of it to a Fellow of the Royal Geological Society on the occasion of my last trip to London.

You would surely have thought that I had been detected in no less a heinous crime than the purloining of the Crown Jewels from the Tower, or putting poison in the coffee of His Majesty the King.

The erudite gentleman in whom I confided congealed before I was half through!--it is all that saved him from exploding--and my dreams of an Honorary Fellowship, gold medals, and a niche in the Hall of Fame faded into the thin, cold air of his arctic atmosphere.

But I believe the story, and so would you, and so would the learned Fellow of the Royal Geological Society, had you and he heard it from the lips of the man who told it to me. Had you seen, as I did, the fire of truth in those gray eyes; had you felt the ring of sincerity in that quiet voice; had you realized the pathos of it all--you, too, would believe. You would not have needed the final ocular proof that I had--the weird rhamphorhynchus-like creature which he had brought back with him from the inner world.

I came upon him quite suddenly, and no less unexpectedly, upon the rim of the great Sahara Desert. He was standing before a goat-skin tent amidst a clump of date palms within a tiny oasis. Close by was an Arab douar of some eight or ten tents.

I had come down from the north to hunt lion. My party consisted of a dozen children of the desert--I was the only "white" man. As we approached the little clump of verdure I saw the man come from his tent and with hand-shaded eyes peer intently at us. At sight of me he advanced rapidly to meet us.

"A white man!" he cried. "May the good Lord be praised! I have been watching you for hours, hoping against hope that this time there would be a white man. Tell me the date. What year is it?"

And when I had told him he staggered as though he had been struck full in the face, so that he was compelled to grasp my stirrup leather for support.

"It cannot be!" he cried after a moment. "It cannot be! Tell me that you are mistaken, or that you are but joking."

"I am telling you the truth, my friend," I replied. "Why should I deceive a stranger, or attempt to, in so simple a matter as the date?"

For some time he stood in silence, with bowed head.

"Ten years!" he murmured, at last. "Ten years, and I thought that at the most it could be scarce more than one!" That night he told me his story--the story that I give you here as nearly in his own words as I can recall them.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

I

  

TOWARD THE ETERNAL FIRES

I was born in Connecticut about thirty years ago. My name is David Innes. My father was a wealthy mine owner. When I was nineteen he died. All his property was to be mine when I had attained my majority--provided that I had devoted the two years intervening in close application to the great business I was to inherit.

I did my best to fulfil the last wishes of my parent--not because of the inheritance, but because I loved and honored my father. For six months I toiled in the mines and in the counting-rooms, for I wished to know every minute detail of the business.

Then Perry interested me in his invention. He was an old fellow who had devoted the better part of a long life to the perfection of a mechanical subterranean prospector. As relaxation he studied paleontology. I looked over his plans, listened to his arguments, inspected his working model--and then, convinced, I advanced the funds necessary to construct a full-sized, practical prospector.

I shall not go into the details of its construction--it lies out there in the desert now--about two miles from here. Tomorrow you may care to ride out and see it. Roughly, it is a steel cylinder a hundred feet long, and jointed so that it may turn and twist through solid rock if need be. At one end is a mighty revolving drill operated by an engine which Perry said generated more power to the cubic inch than any other engine did to the cubic foot. I remember that he used to claim that that invention alone would make us fabulously wealthy--we were going to make the whole thing public after the successful issue of our first secret trial--but Perry never returned from that trial trip, and I only after ten years.

I recall as it were but yesterday the night of that momentous occasion upon which we were to test the practicality of that wondrous invention. It was near midnight when we repaired to the lofty tower in which Perry had constructed his "iron mole" as he was wont to call the thing. The great nose rested upon the bare earth of the floor. We passed through the doors into the outer jacket, secured them, and then passing on into the cabin, which contained the controlling mechanism within the inner tube, switched on the electric lights.

Perry looked to his generator; to the great tanks that held the life-giving chemicals with which he was to manufacture fresh air to replace that which we consumed in breathing; to his instruments for recording temperatures, speed, distance, and for examining the materials through which we were to pass.

He tested the steering device, and overlooked the mighty cogs which transmitted its marvelous velocity to the giant drill at the nose of his strange craft.

Our seats, into which we strapped ourselves, were so arranged upon transverse bars that we would be upright whether the craft were ploughing her way downward into the bowels of the earth, or running horizontally along some great seam of coal, or rising vertically toward the surface again.

At length all was ready. Perry bowed his head in prayer. For a moment we were silent, and then the old man's hand grasped the starting lever. There was a frightful roaring beneath us--the giant frame trembled and vibrated--there was a rush of sound as the loose earth passed up through the hollow space between the inner and outer jackets to be deposited in our wake. We were off!

The noise was deafening. The sensation was frightful. For a full minute neither of us could do aught but cling with the proverbial desperation of the drowning man to the handrails of our swinging seats. Then Perry glanced at the thermometer.

"Gad!" he cried, "it cannot be possible--quick! What does the distance meter read?"

That and the speedometer were both on my side of the cabin, and as I turned to take a reading from the former I could see Perry muttering.

"Ten degrees rise--it cannot be possible!" and then I saw him tug frantically upon the steering wheel.

As I finally found the tiny needle in the dim light I translated Perry's evident excitement, and my heart sank within me. But when I spoke I hid the fear which haunted me. "It will be seven hundred feet, Perry," I said, "by the time you can turn her into the horizontal."

"You'd better lend me a hand then, my boy," he replied, "for I cannot budge her out of the vertical alone. God give that our combined strength may be equal to the task, for else we are lost."

I wormed my way to the old man's side with never a doubt but that the great wheel would yield on the instant to the power of my young and vigorous muscles. Nor was my belief mere vanity, for always had my physique been the envy and despair of my fellows. And for that very reason it had waxed even greater than nature had intended, since my natural pride in my great strength had led me to care for and develop my body and my muscles by every means within my power. What with boxing, football, and baseball, I had been in training since childhood.

And so it was with the utmost confidence that I laid hold of the huge iron rim; but though I threw every ounce of my strength into it, my best effort was as unavailing as Perry's had been--the thing would not budge--the grim, insensate, horrible thing that was holding us upon the straight road to death!

At length I gave up the useless struggle, and without a word returned to my seat. There was no need for words--at least none that I could imagine, unless Perry desired to pray. And I was quite sure that he would, for he never left an opportunity neglected where he might sandwich in a prayer. He prayed when he arose in the morning, he prayed before he ate, he prayed when he had finished eating, and before he went to bed at night he prayed again. In between he often found excuses to pray even when the provocation seemed far-fetched to my worldly eyes--now that he was about to die I felt positive that I should witness a perfect orgy of prayer--if one may allude with such a simile to so solemn an act.

But to my astonishment I discovered that with death staring him in the face Abner Perry was transformed into a new being. From his lips there flowed--not prayer--but a clear and limpid stream of undiluted profanity, and it was all directed at that quietly stubborn piece of unyielding mechanism.

"I should think, Perry," I chided, "that a man of your professed religiousness would rather be at his prayers than cursing in the presence of imminent death."

"Death!" he cried. "Death is it that appalls you? That is nothing by comparison with the loss the world must suffer. Why, David within this iron cylinder we have demonstrated possibilities that science has scarce dreamed. We have harnessed a new principle, and with it animated a piece of steel with the power of ten thousand men. That two lives will be snuffed out is nothing to the world calamity that entombs in the bowels of the earth the discoveries that I have made and proved in the successful construction of the thing that is now carrying us farther and farther toward the eternal central fires."

I am frank to admit that for myself I was much more concerned with our own immediate future than with any problematic loss which the world might be about to suffer. The world was at least ignorant of its bereavement, while to me it was a real and terrible actuality.

"What can we do?" I asked, hiding my perturbation beneath the mask of a low and level voice.

"We may stop here, and die of asphyxiation when our atmosphere tanks are empty," replied Perry, "or we may continue on with the slight hope that we may later sufficiently deflect the prospector from the vertical to carry us along the arc of a great circle which must eventually return us to the surface. If we succeed in so doing before we reach the higher internal temperature we may even yet survive. There would seem to me to be about one chance in several million that we shall succeed--otherwise we shall die more quickly but no more surely than as though we sat supinely waiting for the torture of a slow and horrible death."

I glanced at the thermometer. It registered 110 degrees. While we were talking the mighty iron mole had bored its way over a mile into the rock of the earth's crust.

"Let us continue on, then," I replied. "It should soon be over at this rate. You never intimated that the speed of this thing would be so high, Perry. Didn't you know it?"

"No," he answered. "I could not figure the speed exactly, for I had no instrument for measuring the mighty power of my generator. I reasoned, however, that we should make about five hundred yards an hour."

"And we are making seven miles an hour," I concluded for him, as I sat with my eyes upon the distance meter. "How thick is the Earth's crust, Perry?" I asked.

"There are almost as many conjectures as to that as there are geologists," was his answer. "One estimates it thirty miles, because the internal heat, increasing at the rate of about one degree to each sixty to seventy feet depth, would be sufficient to fuse the most refractory substances at that distance beneath the surface. Another finds that the phenomena of precession and nutation require that the earth, if not entirely solid, must at least have a shell not less than eight hundred to a thousand miles in thickness. So there you are. You may take your choice."

"And if it should prove solid?" I asked.

"It will be all the same to us in the end, David," replied Perry. "At the best our fuel will suffice to carry us but three or four days, while our atmosphere cannot last to exceed three. Neither, then, is sufficient to bear us in the safety through eight thousand miles of rock to the antipodes."

"If the crust is of sufficient thickness we shall come to a final stop between six and seven hundred miles beneath the earth's surface; but during the last hundred and fifty miles of our journey we shall be corpses. Am I correct?" I asked.

"Quite correct, David. Are you frightened?"

"I do not know. It all has come so suddenly that I scarce believe that either of us realizes the real terrors of our position. I feel that I should be reduced to panic; but yet I am not. I imagine that the shock has been so great as to partially stun our sensibilities."

Again I turned to the thermometer. The mercury was rising with less rapidity. It was now but 140 degrees, although we had penetrated to a depth of nearly four miles. I told Perry, and he smiled.

"We have shattered one theory at least," was his only comment, and then he returned to his self-assumed occupation of fluently cursing the steering wheel. I once heard a pirate swear, but his best efforts would have seemed like those of a tyro alongside of Perry's masterful and scientific imprecations.

Once more I tried my hand at the wheel, but I might as well have essayed to swing the earth itself. At my suggestion Perry stopped the generator, and as we came to rest I again threw all my strength into a supreme effort to move the thing even a hair's breadth--but the results were as barren as when we had been traveling at top speed.

I shook my head sadly, and motioned to the starting lever. Perry pulled it toward him, and once again we were plunging downward toward eternity at the rate of seven miles an hour. I sat with my eyes glued to the thermometer and the distance meter. The mercury was rising very slowly now, though even at 145 degrees it was almost unbearable within the narrow confines of our metal prison.

About noon, or twelve hours after our start upon this unfortunate journey, we had bored to a depth of eighty-four miles, at which point the mercury registered 153 degrees F.

Perry was becoming more hopeful, although upon what meager food he sustained his optimism I could not conjecture. From cursing he had turned to singing--I felt that the strain had at last affected his mind. For several hours we had not spoken except as he asked me for the readings of the instruments from time to time, and I announced them. My thoughts were filled with vain regrets. I recalled numerous acts of my past life which I should have been glad to have had a few more years to live down. There was the affair in the Latin Commons at Andover when Calhoun and I had put gunpowder in the stove--and nearly killed one of the masters. And then--but what was the use, I was about to die and atone for all these things and several more. Already the heat was sufficient to give me a foretaste of the hereafter. A few more degrees and I felt that I should lose consciousness.

"What are the readings now, David?" Perry's voice broke in upon my somber reflections.

"Ninety miles and 153 degrees," I replied.

"Gad, but we've knocked that thirty-mile-crust theory into a cocked hat!" he cried gleefully.

"Precious lot of good it will do us," I growled back.

"But my boy," he continued, "doesn't that temperature reading mean anything to you? Why it hasn't gone up in six miles. Think of it, son!"

"Yes, I'm thinking of it," I answered; "but what difference will it make when our air supply is exhausted whether the temperature is 153 degrees or 153,000? We'll be just as dead, and no one will know the difference, anyhow." But I must admit that for some unaccountable reason the stationary temperature did renew my waning hope. What I hoped for I could not have explained, nor did I try. The very fact, as Perry took pains to explain, of the blasting of several very exact and learned scientific hypotheses made it apparent that we could not know what lay before us within the bowels of the earth, and so we might continue to hope for the best, at least until we were dead--when hope would no longer be essential to our happiness. It was very good, and logical reasoning, and so I embraced it.

At one hundred miles the temperature had dropped to 152 1/2 degrees! When I announced it Perry reached over and hugged me.

From then on until noon of the second day, it continued to drop until it became as uncomfortably cold as it had been unbearably hot before. At the depth of two hundred and forty miles our nostrils were assailed by almost overpowering ammonia fumes, and the temperature had dropped to ten below zero! We suffered nearly two hours of this intense and bitter cold, until at about two hundred and forty-five miles from the surface of the earth we entered a stratum of solid ice, when the mercury quickly rose to 32 degrees. During the next three hours we passed through ten miles of ice, eventually emerging into another series of ammonia-impregnated strata, where the mercury again fell to ten degrees below zero.

Slowly it rose once more until we were convinced that at last we were nearing the molten interior of the earth. At four hundred miles the temperature had reached 153 degrees. Feverishly I watched the thermometer. Slowly it rose. Perry had ceased singing and was at last praying.

Our hopes had received such a deathblow that the gradually increasing heat seemed to our distorted imaginations much greater than it really was. For another hour I saw that pitiless column of mercury rise and rise until at four hundred and ten miles it stood at 153 degrees. Now it was that we began to hang upon those readings in almost breathless anxiety.

One hundred and fifty-three degrees had been the maximum temperature above the ice stratum. Would it stop at this point again, or would it continue its merciless climb? We knew that there was no hope, and yet with the persistence of life itself we continued to hope against practical certainty.

Already the air tanks were at low ebb--there was barely enough of the precious gases to sustain us for another twelve hours. But would we be alive to know or care? It seemed incredible.

At four hundred and twenty miles I took another reading.

"Perry!" I shouted. "Perry, man! She's going down! She's going down! She's 152 degrees again."

"Gad!" he cried. "What can it mean? Can the earth be cold at the center?"

"I do not know, Perry," I answered; "but thank God, if I am to die it shall not be by fire--that is all that I have feared. I can face the thought of any death but that."

Down, down went the mercury until it stood as low as it had seven miles from the surface of the earth, and then of a sudden the realization broke upon us that death was very near. Perry was the first to discover it. I saw him fussing with the valves that regulate the air supply. And at the same time I experienced difficulty in breathing. My head felt dizzy--my limbs heavy.

I saw Perry crumple in his seat. He gave himself a shake and sat erect again. Then he turned toward me.

"Good-bye, David," he said. "I guess this is the end," and then he smiled and closed his eyes.

"Good-bye, Perry, and good luck to you," I answered, smiling back at him. But I fought off that awful lethargy. I was very young--I did not want to die.

For an hour I battled against the cruelly enveloping death that surrounded me upon all sides. At first I found that by climbing high into the framework above me I could find more of the precious life-giving elements, and for a while these sustained me. It must have been an hour after Perry had succumbed that I at last came to the realization that I could no longer carry on this unequal struggle against the inevitable.

With my last flickering ray of consciousness I turned mechanically toward the distance meter. It stood at exactly five hundred miles from the earth's surface--and then of a sudden the huge thing that bore us came to a stop. The rattle of hurtling rock through the hollow jacket ceased. The wild racing of the giant drill betokened that it was running loose in air--and then another truth flashed upon me. The point of the prospector was above us. Slowly it dawned on me that since passing through the ice strata it had been above. We had turned in the ice and sped upward toward the earth's crust. Thank God! We were safe!

I put my nose to the intake pipe through which samples were to have been taken during the passage of the prospector through the earth, and my fondest hopes were realized--a flood of fresh air was pouring into the iron cabin. The reaction left me in a state of collapse, and I lost consciousness.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

  

A STRANGE WORLD

I was unconscious little more than an instant, for as I lunged forward from the crossbeam to which I had been clinging, and fell with a crash to the floor of the cabin, the shock brought me to myself.

My first concern was with Perry. I was horrified at the thought that upon the very threshold of salvation he might be dead. Tearing open his shirt I placed my ear to his breast. I could have cried with relief--his heart was beating quite regularly.

At the water tank I wetted my handkerchief, slapping it smartly across his forehead and face several times. In a moment I was rewarded by the raising of his lids. For a time he lay wide-eyed and quite uncomprehending. Then his scattered wits slowly foregathered, and he sat up sniffing the air with an expression of wonderment upon his face.

"Why, David," he cried at last, "it's air, as sure as I live. Why--why what does it mean? Where in the world are we? What has happened?"

"It means that we're back at the surface all right, Perry," I cried; "but where, I don't know. I haven't opened her up yet. Been too busy reviving you. Lord, man, but you had a close squeak!"

"You say we're back at the surface, David? How can that be? How long have I been unconscious?"

"Not long. We turned in the ice stratum. Don't you recall the sudden whirling of our seats? After that the drill was above you instead of below. We didn't notice it at the time; but I recall it now."

"You mean to say that we turned back in the ice stratum, David? That is not possible. The prospector cannot turn unless its nose is deflected from the outside--by some external force or resistance--the steering wheel within would have moved in response. The steering wheel has not budged, David, since we started. You know that."

I did know it; but here we were with our drill racing in pure air, and copious volumes of it pouring into the cabin.

"We couldn't have turned in the ice stratum, Perry, I know as well as you," I replied; "but the fact remains that we did, for here we are this minute at the surface of the earth again, and I am going out to see just where."

"Better wait till morning, David--it must be midnight now."

I glanced at the chronometer.

"Half after twelve. We have been out seventy-two hours, so it must be midnight. Nevertheless I am going to have a look at the blessed sky that I had given up all hope of ever seeing again," and so saying I lifted the bars from the inner door, and swung it open. There was quite a quantity of loose material in the jacket, and this I had to remove with a shovel to get at the opposite door in the outer shell.

In a short time I had removed enough of the earth and rock to the floor of the cabin to expose the door beyond. Perry was directly behind me as I threw it open. The upper half was above the surface of the ground. With an expression of surprise I turned and looked at Perry--it was broad day-light without!

"Something seems to have gone wrong either with our calculations or the chronometer," I said. Perry shook his head--there was a strange expression in his eyes.

"Let's have a look beyond that door, David," he cried.

Together we stepped out to stand in silent contemplation of a landscape at once weird and beautiful. Before us a low and level shore stretched down to a silent sea. As far as the eye could reach the surface of the water was dotted with countless tiny isles--some of towering, barren, granitic rock--others resplendent in gorgeous trappings of tropical vegetation, myriad starred with the magnificent splendor of vivid blooms.

Behind us rose a dark and forbidding wood of giant arborescent ferns intermingled with the commoner types of a primeval tropical forest. Huge creepers depended in great loops from tree to tree, dense under-brush overgrew a tangled mass of fallen trunks and branches. Upon the outer verge we could see the same splendid coloring of countless blossoms that glorified the islands, but within the dense shadows all seemed dark and gloomy as the grave.

And upon all the noonday sun poured its torrid rays out of a cloudless sky.

"Where on earth can we be?" I asked, turning to Perry.

For some moments the old man did not reply. He stood with bowed head, buried in deep thought. But at last he spoke.

"David," he said, "I am not so sure that we are on earth."

"What do you mean Perry?" I cried. "Do you think that we are dead, and this is heaven?" He smiled, and turning, pointing to the nose of the prospector protruding from the ground at our backs.

"But for that, David, I might believe that we were indeed come to the country beyond the Styx. The prospector renders that theory untenable--it, certainly, could never have gone to heaven. However I am willing to concede that we actually may be in another world from that which we have always known. If we are not on earth, there is every reason to believe that we may be in it."

"We may have quartered through the earth's crust and come out upon some tropical island of the West Indies," I suggested. Again Perry shook his head.

"Let us wait and see, David," he replied, "and in the meantime suppose we do a bit of exploring up and down the coast--we may find a native who can enlighten us."

As we walked along the beach Perry gazed long and earnestly across the water. Evidently he was wrestling with a mighty problem.

"David," he said abruptly, "do you perceive anything unusual about the horizon?"

As I looked I began to appreciate the reason for the strangeness of the landscape that had haunted me from the first with an illusive suggestion of the bizarre and unnatural--there was no horizon! As far as the eye could reach out the sea continued and upon its bosom floated tiny islands, those in the distance reduced to mere specks; but ever beyond them was the sea, until the impression became quite real that one was looking up at the most distant point that the eyes could fathom--the distance was lost in the distance. That was all--there was no clear-cut horizontal line marking the dip of the globe below the line of vision.

"A great light is commencing to break on me," continued Perry, taking out his watch. "I believe that I have partially solved the riddle. It is now two o'clock. When we emerged from the prospector the sun was directly above us. Where is it now?"

I glanced up to find the great orb still motionless in the center of the heaven. And such a sun! I had scarcely noticed it before. Fully thrice the size of the sun I had known throughout my life, and apparently so near that the sight of it carried the conviction that one might almost reach up and touch it.

"My God, Perry, where are we?" I exclaimed. "This thing is beginning to get on my nerves."

"I think that I may state quite positively, David," he commenced, "that we are--" but he got no further. From behind us in the vicinity of the prospector there came the most thunderous, awe-inspiring roar that ever had fallen upon my ears. With one accord we turned to discover the author of that fearsome noise.

Had I still retained the suspicion that we were on earth the sight that met my eyes would quite entirely have banished it. Emerging from the forest was a colossal beast which closely resembled a bear. It was fully as large as the largest elephant and with great forepaws armed with huge claws. Its nose, or snout, depended nearly a foot below its lower jaw, much after the manner of a rudimentary trunk. The giant body was covered by a coat of thick, shaggy hair.

Roaring horribly it came toward us at a ponderous, shuffling trot. I turned to Perry to suggest that it might be wise to seek other surroundings--the idea had evidently occurred to Perry previously, for he was already a hundred paces away, and with each second his prodigious bounds increased the distance. I had never guessed what latent speed possibilities the old gentleman possessed.

I saw that he was headed toward a little point of the forest which ran out toward the sea not far from where we had been standing, and as the mighty creature, the sight of which had galvanized him into such remarkable action, was forging steadily toward me. I set off after Perry, though at a somewhat more decorous pace. It was evident that the massive beast pursuing us was not built for speed, so all that I considered necessary was to gain the trees sufficiently ahead of it to enable me to climb to the safety of some great branch before it came up.

Notwithstanding our danger I could not help but laugh at Perry's frantic capers as he essayed to gain the safety of the lower branches of the trees he now had reached. The stems were bare for a distance of some fifteen feet--at least on those trees which Perry attempted to ascend, for the suggestion of safety carried by the larger of the forest giants had evidently attracted him to them. A dozen times he scrambled up the trunks like a huge cat only to fall back to the ground once more, and with each failure he cast a horrified glance over his shoulder at the oncoming brute, simultaneously emitting terror-stricken shrieks that awoke the echoes of the grim forest.

At length he spied a dangling creeper about the bigness of one's wrist, and when I reached the trees he was racing madly up it, hand over hand. He had almost reached the lowest branch of the tree from which the creeper depended when the thing parted beneath his weight and he fell sprawling at my feet.

The misfortune now was no longer amusing, for the beast was already too close to us for comfort. Seizing Perry by the shoulder I dragged him to his feet, and rushing to a smaller tree--one that he could easily encircle with his arms and legs--I boosted him as far up as I could, and then left him to his fate, for a glance over my shoulder revealed the awful beast almost upon me.

It was the great size of the thing alone that saved me. Its enormous bulk rendered it too slow upon its feet to cope with the agility of my young muscles, and so I was enabled to dodge out of its way and run completely behind it before its slow wits could direct it in pursuit.

The few seconds of grace that this gave me found me safely lodged in the branches of a tree a few paces from that in which Perry had at last found a haven.

Did I say safely lodged? At the time I thought we were quite safe, and so did Perry. He was praying--raising his voice in thanksgiving at our deliverance--and had just completed a sort of paeon of gratitude that the thing couldn't climb a tree when without warning it reared up beneath him on its enormous tail and hind feet, and reached those fearfully armed paws quite to the branch upon which he crouched.

The accompanying roar was all but drowned in Perry's scream of fright, and he came near tumbling headlong into the gaping jaws beneath him, so precipitate was his impetuous haste to vacate the dangerous limb. It was with a deep sigh of relief that I saw him gain a higher branch in safety.

And then the brute did that which froze us both anew with horror. Grasping the tree's stem with his powerful paws he dragged down with all the great weight of his huge bulk and all the irresistible force of those mighty muscles. Slowly, but surely, the stem began to bend toward him. Inch by inch he worked his paws upward as the tree leaned more and more from the perpendicular. Perry clung chattering in a panic of terror. Higher and higher into the bending and swaying tree he clambered. More and more rapidly was the tree top inclining toward the ground.

I saw now why the great brute was armed with such enormous paws. The use that he was putting them to was precisely that for which nature had intended them. The sloth-like creature was herbivorous, and to feed that mighty carcass entire trees must be stripped of their foliage. The reason for its attacking us might easily be accounted for on the supposition of an ugly disposition such as that which the fierce and stupid rhinoceros of Africa possesses. But these were later reflections. At the moment I was too frantic with apprehension on Perry's behalf to consider aught other than a means to save him from the death that loomed so close.

Realizing that I could outdistance the clumsy brute in the open, I dropped from my leafy sanctuary intent only on distracting the thing's attention from Perry long enough to enable the old man to gain the safety of a larger tree. There were many close by which not even the terrific strength of that titanic monster could bend.

As I touched the ground I snatched a broken limb from the tangled mass that matted the jungle-like floor of the forest and, leaping unnoticed behind the shaggy back, dealt the brute a terrific blow. My plan worked like magic. From the previous slowness of the beast I had been led to look for no such marvelous agility as he now displayed. Releasing his hold upon the tree he dropped on all fours and at the same time swung his great, wicked tail with a force that would have broken every bone in my body had it struck me; but, fortunately, I had turned to flee at the very instant that I felt my blow land upon the towering back.

As it started in pursuit of me I made the mistake of running along the edge of the forest rather than making for the open beach. In a moment I was knee-deep in rotting vegetation, and the awful thing behind me was gaining rapidly as I floundered and fell in my efforts to extricate myself.

A fallen log gave me an instant's advantage, for climbing upon it I leaped to another a few paces farther on, and in this way was able to keep clear of the mush that carpeted the surrounding ground. But the zigzag course that this necessitated was placing such a heavy handicap upon me that my pursuer was steadily gaining upon me.

Suddenly from behind I heard a tumult of howls, and sharp, piercing barks--much the sound that a pack of wolves raises when in full cry. Involuntarily I glanced backward to discover the origin of this new and menacing note with the result that I missed my footing and went sprawling once more upon my face in the deep muck.

My mammoth enemy was so close by this time that I knew I must feel the weight of one of his terrible paws before I could rise, but to my surprise the blow did not fall upon me. The howling and snapping and barking of the new element which had been infused into the melee now seemed centered quite close behind me, and as I raised myself upon my hands and glanced around I saw what it was that had distracted the Dyryth, as I afterward learned the thing is called, from my trail.

It was surrounded by a pack of some hundred wolf-like creatures--wild dogs they seemed--that rushed growling and snapping in upon it from all sides, so that they sank their white fangs into the slow brute and were away again before it could reach them with its huge paws or sweeping tail.

But these were not all that my startled eyes perceived. Chattering and gibbering through the lower branches of the trees came a company of manlike creatures evidently urging on the dog pack. They were to all appearances strikingly similar in aspect to the Negro of Africa. Their skins were very black, and their features much like those of the more pronounced Negroid type except that the head receded more rapidly above the eyes, leaving little or no forehead. Their arms were rather longer and their legs shorter in proportion to the torso than in man, and later I noticed that their great toes protruded at right angles from their feet--because of their arboreal habits, I presume. Behind them trailed long, slender tails which they used in climbing quite as much as they did either their hands or feet.

I had stumbled to my feet the moment that I discovered that the wolf-dogs were holding the dyryth at bay. At sight of me several of the savage creatures left off worrying the great brute to come slinking with bared fangs toward me, and as I turned to run toward the trees again to seek safety among the lower branches, I saw a number of the man-apes leaping and chattering in the foliage of the nearest tree.

Between them and the beasts behind me there was little choice, but at least there was a doubt as to the reception these grotesque parodies on humanity would accord me, while there was none as to the fate which awaited me beneath the grinning fangs of my fierce pursuers.

And so I raced on toward the trees intending to pass beneath that which held the man-things and take refuge in another farther on; but the wolf-dogs were very close behind me--so close that I had despaired of escaping them, when one of the creatures in the tree above swung down headforemost, his tail looped about a great limb, and grasping me beneath my armpits swung me in safety up among his fellows.

There they fell to examining me with the utmost excitement and curiosity. They picked at my clothing, my hair, and my flesh. They turned me about to see if I had a tail, and when they discovered that I was not so equipped they fell into roars of laughter. Their teeth were very large and white and even, except for the upper canines which were a trifle longer than the others--protruding just a bit when the mouth was closed.

When they had examined me for a few moments one of them discovered that my clothing was not a part of me, with the result that garment by garment they tore it from me amidst peals of the wildest laughter. Apelike, they essayed to don the apparel themselves, but their ingenuity was not sufficient to the task and so they gave it up.

In the meantime I had been straining my eyes to catch a glimpse of Perry, but nowhere about could I see him, although the clump of trees in which he had first taken refuge was in full view. I was much exercised by fear that something had befallen him, and though I called his name aloud several times there was no response.

Tired at last of playing with my clothing the creatures threw it to the ground, and catching me, one on either side, by an arm, started off at a most terrifying pace through the tree tops. Never have I experienced such a journey before or since--even now I oftentimes awake from a deep sleep haunted by the horrid remembrance of that awful experience.

From tree to tree the agile creatures sprang like flying squirrels, while the cold sweat stood upon my brow as I glimpsed the depths beneath, into which a single misstep on the part of either of my bearers would hurl me. As they bore me along, my mind was occupied with a thousand bewildering thoughts. What had become of Perry? Would I ever see him again? What were the intentions of these half-human things into whose hands I had fallen? Were they inhabitants of the same world into which I had been born? No! It could not be. But yet where else? I had not left that earth--of that I was sure. Still neither could I reconcile the things which I had seen to a belief that I was still in the world of my birth. With a sigh I gave it up.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

  

A CHANGE OF MASTERS

We must have traveled several miles through the dark and dismal wood when we came suddenly upon a dense village built high among the branches of the trees. As we approached it my escort broke into wild shouting which was immediately answered from within, and a moment later a swarm of creatures of the same strange race as those who had captured me poured out to meet us. Again I was the center of a wildly chattering horde. I was pulled this way and that. Pinched, pounded, and thumped until I was black and blue, yet I do not think that their treatment was dictated by either cruelty or malice--I was a curiosity, a freak, a new plaything, and their childish minds required the added evidence of all their senses to back up the testimony of their eyes.

Presently they dragged me within the village, which consisted of several hundred rude shelters of boughs and leaves supported upon the branches of the trees.

Between the huts, which sometimes formed crooked streets, were dead branches and the trunks of small trees which connected the huts upon one tree to those within adjoining trees; the whole network of huts and pathways forming an almost solid flooring a good fifty feet above the ground.

I wondered why these agile creatures required connecting bridges between the trees, but later when I saw the motley aggregation of half-savage beasts which they kept within their village I realized the necessity for the pathways. There were a number of the same vicious wolf-dogs which we had left worrying the dyryth, and many goatlike animals whose distended udders explained the reasons for their presence.

My guard halted before one of the huts into which I was pushed; then two of the creatures squatted down before the entrance--to prevent my escape, doubtless. Though where I should have escaped to I certainly had not the remotest conception. I had no more than entered the dark shadows of the interior than there fell upon my ears the tones of a familiar voice, in prayer.

"Perry!" I cried. "Dear old Perry! Thank the Lord you are safe."

"David! Can it be possible that you escaped?" And the old man stumbled toward me and threw his arms about me.

He had seen me fall before the dyryth, and then he had been seized by a number of the ape-creatures and borne through the tree tops to their village. His captors had been as inquisitive as to his strange clothing as had mine, with the same result. As we looked at each other we could not help but laugh.

"With a tail, David," remarked Perry, "you would make a very handsome ape."

"Maybe we can borrow a couple," I rejoined. "They seem to be quite the thing this season. I wonder what the creatures intend doing with us, Perry. They don't seem really savage. What do you suppose they can be? You were about to tell me where we are when that great hairy frigate bore down upon us--have you really any idea at all?"

"Yes, David," he replied, "I know precisely where we are. We have made a magnificent discovery, my boy! We have proved that the earth is hollow. We have passed entirely through its crust to the inner world."

"Perry, you are mad!"

"Not at all, David. For two hundred and fifty miles our prospector bore us through the crust beneath our outer world. At that point it reached the center of gravity of the five-hundred-mile-thick crust. Up to that point we had been descending--direction is, of course, merely relative. Then at the moment that our seats revolved--the thing that made you believe that we had turned about and were speeding upward--we passed the center of gravity and, though we did not alter the direction of our progress, yet we were in reality moving upward--toward the surface of the inner world. Does not the strange fauna and flora which we have seen convince you that you are not in the world of your birth? And the horizon--could it present the strange aspects which we both noted unless we were indeed standing upon the inside surface of a sphere?"

"But the sun, Perry!" I urged. "How in the world can the sun shine through five hundred miles of solid crust?"

"It is not the sun of the outer world that we see here. It is another sun--an entirely different sun--that casts its eternal noonday effulgence upon the face of the inner world. Look at it now, David--if you can see it from the doorway of this hut--and you will see that it is still in the exact center of the heavens. We have been here for many hours--yet it is still noon.

"And withal it is very simple, David. The earth was once a nebulous mass. It cooled, and as it cooled it shrank. At length a thin crust of solid matter formed upon its outer surface--a sort of shell; but within it was partially molten matter and highly expanded gases. As it continued to cool, what happened? Centrifugal force burled the particles of the nebulous center toward the crust as rapidly as they approached a solid state. You have seen the same principle practically applied in the modern cream separator. Presently there was only a small super-heated core of gaseous matter remaining within a huge vacant interior left by the contraction of the cooling gases. The equal attraction of the solid crust from all directions maintained this luminous core in the exact center of the hollow globe. What remains of it is the sun you saw today--a relatively tiny thing at the exact center of the earth. Equally to every part of this inner world it diffuses its perpetual noonday light and torrid heat.

"This inner world must have cooled sufficiently to support animal life long ages after life appeared upon the outer crust, but that the same agencies were at work here is evident from the similar forms of both animal and vegetable creation which we have already seen. Take the great beast which attacked us, for example. Unquestionably a counterpart of the Megatherium of the post-Pliocene period of the outer crust, whose fossilized skeleton has been found in South America."

"But the grotesque inhabitants of this forest?" I urged. "Surely they have no counterpart in the earth's history."

"Who can tell?" he rejoined. "They may constitute the link between ape and man, all traces of which have been swallowed by the countless convulsions which have racked the outer crust, or they may be merely the result of evolution along slightly different lines--either is quite possible."

Further speculation was interrupted by the appearance of several of our captors before the entrance of the hut. Two of them entered and dragged us forth. The perilous pathways and the surrounding trees were filled with the black ape-men, their females, and their young. There was not an ornament, a weapon, or a garment among the lot.

"Quite low in the scale of creation," commented Perry.

"Quite high enough to play the deuce with us, though," I replied. "Now what do you suppose they intend doing with us?"

We were not long in learning. As on the occasion of our trip to the village we were seized by a couple of the powerful creatures and whirled away through the tree tops, while about us and in our wake raced a chattering, jabbering, grinning horde of sleek, black ape-things.

Twice my bearers missed their footing, and my heart ceased beating as we plunged toward instant death among the tangled deadwood beneath. But on both occasions those lithe, powerful tails reached out and found sustaining branches, nor did either of the creatures loosen their grasp upon me. In fact, it seemed that the incidents were of no greater moment to them than would be the stubbing of one's toe at a street crossing in the outer world--they but laughed uproariously and sped on with me.

For some time they continued through the forest--how long I could not guess for I was learning, what was later borne very forcefully to my mind, that time ceases to be a factor the moment means for measuring it cease to exist. Our watches were gone, and we were living beneath a stationary sun. Already I was puzzled to compute the period of time which had elapsed since we broke through the crust of the inner world. It might be hours, or it might be days--who in the world could tell where it was always noon! By the sun, no time had elapsed--but my judgment told me that we must have been several hours in this strange world.

Presently the forest terminated, and we came out upon a level plain. A short distance before us rose a few low, rocky hills. Toward these our captors urged us, and after a short time led us through a narrow pass into a tiny, circular valley. Here they got down to work, and we were soon convinced that if we were not to die to make a Roman holiday, we were to die for some other purpose. The attitude of our captors altered immediately as they entered the natural arena within the rocky hills. Their laughter ceased. Grim ferocity marked their bestial faces--bared fangs menaced us.

We were placed in the center of the amphitheater--the thousand creatures forming a great ring about us. Then a wolf-dog was brought--hyaenadon Perry called it--and turned loose with us inside the circle. The thing's body was as large as that of a full-grown mastiff, its legs were short and powerful, and its jaws broad and strong. Dark, shaggy hair covered its back and sides, while its breast and belly were quite white. As it slunk toward us it presented a most formidable aspect with its upcurled lips baring its mighty fangs.

Perry was on his knees, praying. I stooped and picked up a small stone. At my movement the beast veered off a bit and commenced circling us. Evidently it had been a target for stones before. The ape-things were dancing up and down urging the brute on with savage cries, until at last, seeing that I did not throw, he charged us.

At Andover, and later at Yale, I had pitched on winning ball teams. My speed and control must both have been above the ordinary, for I made such a record during my senior year at college that overtures were made to me in behalf of one of the great major-league teams; but in the tightest pitch that ever had confronted me in the past I had never been in such need for control as now.

As I wound up for the delivery, I held my nerves and muscles under absolute command, though the grinning jaws were hurtling toward me at terrific speed. And then I let go, with every ounce of my weight and muscle and science in back of that throw. The stone caught the hyaenodon full upon the end of the nose, and sent him bowling over upon his back.

At the same instant a chorus of shrieks and howls arose from the circle of spectators, so that for a moment I thought that the upsetting of their champion was the cause; but in this I soon saw that I was mistaken. As I looked, the ape-things broke in all directions toward the surrounding hills, and then I distinguished the real cause of their perturbation. Behind them, streaming through the pass which leads into the valley, came a swarm of hairy men--gorilla-like creatures armed with spears and hatchets, and bearing long, oval shields. Like demons they set upon the ape-things, and before them the hyaenodon, which had now regained its senses and its feet, fled howling with fright. Past us swept the pursued and the pursuers, nor did the hairy ones accord us more than a passing glance until the arena had been emptied of its former occupants. Then they returned to us, and one who seemed to have authority among them directed that we be brought with them.

When we had passed out of the amphitheater onto the great plain we saw a caravan of men and women--human beings like ourselves--and for the first time hope and relief filled my heart, until I could have cried out in the exuberance of my happiness. It is true that they were a half-naked, wild-appearing aggregation; but they at least were fashioned along the same lines as ourselves--there was nothing grotesque or horrible about them as about the other creatures in this strange, weird world.

But as we came closer, our hearts sank once more, for we discovered that the poor wretches were chained neck to neck in a long line, and that the gorilla-men were their guards. With little ceremony Perry and I were chained at the end of the line, and without further ado the interrupted march was resumed.

Up to this time the excitement had kept us both up; but now the tiresome monotony of the long march across the sun-baked plain brought on all the agonies consequent to a long-denied sleep. On and on we stumbled beneath that hateful noonday sun. If we fell we were prodded with a sharp point. Our companions in chains did not stumble. They strode along proudly erect. Occasionally they would exchange words with one another in a monosyllabic language. They were a noble-appearing race with well-formed heads and perfect physiques. The men were heavily bearded, tall and muscular; the women, smaller and more gracefully molded, with great masses of raven hair caught into loose knots upon their heads. The features of both sexes were well proportioned--there was not a face among them that would have been called even plain if judged by earthly standards. They wore no ornaments; but this I later learned was due to the fact that their captors had stripped them of everything of value. As garmenture the women possessed a single robe of some light-colored, spotted hide, rather similar in appearance to a leopard's skin. This they wore either supported entirely about the waist by a leathern thong, so that it hung partially below the knee on one side, or possibly looped gracefully across one shoulder. Their feet were shod with skin sandals. The men wore loin cloths of the hide of some shaggy beast, long ends of which depended before and behind nearly to the ground. In some instances these ends were finished with the strong talons of the beast from which the hides had been taken.

Our guards, whom I already have described as gorilla-like men, were rather lighter in build than a gorilla, but even so they were indeed mighty creatures. Their arms and legs were proportioned more in conformity with human standards, but their entire bodies were covered with shaggy, brown hair, and their faces were quite as brutal as those of the few stuffed specimens of the gorilla which I had seen in the museums at home.

Their only redeeming feature lay in the development of the head above and back of the ears. In this respect they were not one whit less human than we. They were clothed in a sort of tunic of light cloth which reached to the knees. Beneath this they wore only a loin cloth of the same material, while their feet were shod with thick hide of some mammoth creature of this inner world.

Their arms and necks were encircled by many ornaments of metal--silver predominating--and on their tunics were sewn the heads of tiny reptiles in odd and rather artistic designs. They talked among themselves as they marched along on either side of us, but in a language which I perceived differed from that employed by our fellow prisoners. When they addressed the latter they used what appeared to be a third language, and which I later learned is a mongrel tongue rather analogous to the Pidgin-English of the Chinese coolie.

How far we marched I have no conception, nor has Perry. Both of us were asleep much of the time for hours before a halt was called--then we dropped in our tracks. I say "for hours," but how may one measure time where time does not exist! When our march commenced the sun stood at zenith. When we halted our shadows still pointed toward nadir. Whether an instant or an eternity of earthly time elapsed who may say. That march may have occupied nine years and eleven months of the ten years that I spent in the inner world, or it may have been accomplished in the fraction of a second--I cannot tell. But this I do know that since you have told me that ten years have elapsed since I departed from this earth I have lost all respect for time--I am commencing to doubt that such a thing exists other than in the weak, finite mind of man.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

  

DIAN THE BEAUTIFUL

When our guards aroused us from sleep we were much refreshed. They gave us food. Strips of dried meat it was, but it put new life and strength into us, so that now we too marched with high-held heads, and took noble strides. At least I did, for I was young and proud; but poor Perry hated walking. On earth I had often seen him call a cab to travel a square--he was paying for it now, and his old legs wobbled so that I put my arm about him and half carried him through the balance of those frightful marches.

The country began to change at last, and we wound up out of the level plain through mighty mountains of virgin granite. The tropical verdure of the lowlands was replaced by hardier vegetation, but even here the effects of constant heat and light were apparent in the immensity of the trees and the profusion of foliage and blooms. Crystal streams roared through their rocky channels, fed by the perpetual snows which we could see far above us. Above the snowcapped heights hung masses of heavy clouds. It was these, Perry explained, which evidently served the double purpose of replenishing the melting snows and protecting them from the direct rays of the sun.

By this time we had picked up a smattering of the bastard language in which our guards addressed us, as well as making good headway in the rather charming tongue of our co-captives. Directly ahead of me in the chain gang was a young woman. Three feet of chain linked us together in a forced companionship which I, at least, soon rejoiced in. For I found her a willing teacher, and from her I learned the language of her tribe, and much of the life and customs of the inner world--at least that part of it with which she was familiar.

She told me that she was called Dian the Beautiful, and that she belonged to the tribe of Amoz, which dwells in the cliffs above the Darel Az, or shallow sea.

"How came you here?" I asked her.

"I was running away from Jubal the Ugly One," she answered, as though that was explanation quite sufficient.

"Who is Jubal the Ugly One?" I asked. "And why did you run away from him?"

She looked at me in surprise.

"Why does a woman run away from a man?" she answered my question with another.

"They do not, where I come from," I replied. "Sometimes they run after them."

But she could not understand. Nor could I get her to grasp the fact that I was of another world. She was quite as positive that creation was originated solely to produce her own kind and the world she lived in as are many of the outer world.

"But Jubal," I insisted. "Tell me about him, and why you ran away to be chained by the neck and scourged across the face of a world."

"Jubal the Ugly One placed his trophy before my father's house. It was the head of a mighty tandor. It remained there and no greater trophy was placed beside it. So I knew that Jubal the Ugly One would come and take me as his mate. None other so powerful wished me, or they would have slain a mightier beast and thus have won me from Jubal. My father is not a mighty hunter. Once he was, but a sadok tossed him, and never again had he the full use of his right arm. My brother, Dacor the Strong One, had gone to the land of Sari to steal a mate for himself. Thus there was none, father, brother, or lover, to save me from Jubal the Ugly One, and I ran away and hid among the hills that skirt the land of Amoz. And there these Sagoths found me and made me captive."

"What will they do with you?" I asked. "Where are they taking us?"

Again she looked her incredulity.

"I can almost believe that you are of another world," she said, "for otherwise such ignorance were inexplicable. Do you really mean that you do not know that the Sagoths are the creatures of the Mahars--the mighty Mahars who think they own Pellucidar and all that walks or grows upon its surface, or creeps or burrows beneath, or swims within its lakes and oceans, or flies through its air? Next you will be telling me that you never before heard of the Mahars!"

I was loath to do it, and further incur her scorn; but there was no alternative if I were to absorb knowledge, so I made a clean breast of my pitiful ignorance as to the mighty Mahars. She was shocked. But she did her very best to enlighten me, though much that she said was as Greek would have been to her. She described the Mahars largely by comparisons. In this way they were like unto thipdars, in that to the hairless lidi.

About all I gleaned of them was that they were quite hideous, had wings, and webbed feet; lived in cities built beneath the ground; could swim under water for great distances, and were very, very wise. The Sagoths were their weapons of offense and defense, and the races like herself were their hands and feet--they were the slaves and servants who did all the manual labor. The Mahars were the heads--the brains--of the inner world. I longed to see this wondrous race of supermen.

Perry learned the language with me. When we halted, as we occasionally did, though sometimes the halts seemed ages apart, he would join in the conversation, as would Ghak the Hairy One, he who was chained just ahead of Dian the Beautiful. Ahead of Ghak was Hooja the Sly One. He too entered the conversation occasionally. Most of his remarks were directed toward Dian the Beautiful. It didn't take half an eye to see that he had developed a bad case; but the girl appeared totally oblivious to his thinly veiled advances. Did I say thinly veiled? There is a race of men in New Zealand, or Australia, I have forgotten which, who indicate their preference for the lady of their affections by banging her over the head with a bludgeon. By comparison with this method Hooja's lovemaking might be called thinly veiled. At first it caused me to blush violently although I have seen several Old Years out at Rectors, and in other less fashionable places off Broadway, and in Vienna, and Hamburg.

But the girl! She was magnificent. It was easy to see that she considered herself as entirely above and apart from her present surroundings and company. She talked with me, and with Perry, and with the taciturn Ghak because we were respectful; but she couldn't even see Hooja the Sly One, much less hear him, and that made him furious. He tried to get one of the Sagoths to move the girl up ahead of him in the slave gang, but the fellow only poked him with his spear and told him that he had selected the girl for his own property--that he would buy her from the Mahars as soon as they reached Phutra. Phutra, it seemed, was the city of our destination.

After passing over the first chain of mountains we skirted a salt sea, upon whose bosom swam countless horrid things. Seal-like creatures there were with long necks stretching ten and more feet above their enormous bodies and whose snake heads were split with gaping mouths bristling with countless fangs. There were huge tortoises too, paddling about among these other reptiles, which Perry said were Plesiosaurs of the Lias. I didn't question his veracity--they might have been most anything.

Dian told me they were tandorazes, or tandors of the sea, and that the other, and more fearsome reptiles, which occasionally rose from the deep to do battle with them, were azdyryths, or sea-dyryths--Perry called them Ichthyosaurs. They resembled a whale with the head of an alligator.

I had forgotten what little geology I had studied at school--about all that remained was an impression of horror that the illustrations of restored prehistoric monsters had made upon me, and a well-defined belief that any man with a pig's shank and a vivid imagination could "restore" most any sort of paleolithic monster he saw fit, and take rank as a first class paleontologist. But when I saw these sleek, shiny carcasses shimmering in the sunlight as they emerged from the ocean, shaking their giant heads; when I saw the waters roll from their sinuous bodies in miniature waterfalls as they glided hither and thither, now upon the surface, now half submerged; as I saw them meet, open-mouthed, hissing and snorting, in their titanic and interminable warring I realized how futile is man's poor, weak imagination by comparison with Nature's incredible genius.

And Perry! He was absolutely flabbergasted. He said so himself.

"David," he remarked, after we had marched for a long time beside that awful sea. "David, I used to teach geology, and I thought that I believed what I taught; but now I see that I did not believe it--that it is impossible for man to believe such things as these unless he sees them with his own eyes. We take things for granted, perhaps, because we are told them over and over again, and have no way of disproving them--like religions, for example; but we don't believe them, we only think we do. If you ever get back to the outer world you will find that the geologists and paleontologists will be the first to set you down a liar, for they know that no such creatures as they restore ever existed. It is all right to imagine them as existing in an equally imaginary epoch--but now? poof!"

At the next halt Hooja the Sly One managed to find enough slack chain to permit him to worm himself back quite close to Dian. We were all standing, and as he edged near the girl she turned her back upon him in such a truly earthly feminine manner that I could scarce repress a smile; but it was a short-lived smile for on the instant the Sly One's hand fell upon the girl's bare arm, jerking her roughly toward him.

I was not then familiar with the customs or social ethics which prevailed within Pellucidar; but even so I did not need the appealing look which the girl shot to me from her magnificent eyes to influence my subsequent act. What the Sly One's intention was I paused not to inquire; but instead, before he could lay hold of her with his other hand, I placed a right to the point of his jaw that felled him in his tracks.

A roar of approval went up from those of the other prisoners and the Sagoths who had witnessed the brief drama; not, as I later learned, because I had championed the girl, but for the neat and, to them, astounding method by which I had bested Hooja.

And the girl? At first she looked at me with wide, wondering eyes, and then she dropped her head, her face half averted, and a delicate flush suffused her cheek. For a moment she stood thus in silence, and then her head went high, and she turned her back upon me as she had upon Hooja. Some of the prisoners laughed, and I saw the face of Ghak the Hairy One go very black as he looked at me searchingly. And what I could see of Dian's cheek went suddenly from red to white.

Immediately after we resumed the march, and though I realized that in some way I had offended Dian the Beautiful I could not prevail upon her to talk with me that I might learn wherein I had erred--in fact I might quite as well have been addressing a sphinx for all the attention I got. At last my own foolish pride stepped in and prevented my making any further attempts, and thus a companionship that without my realizing it had come to mean a great deal to me was cut off. Thereafter I confined my conversation to Perry. Hooja did not renew his advances toward the girl, nor did he again venture near me.

Again the weary and apparently interminable marching became a perfect nightmare of horrors to me. The more firmly fixed became the realization that the girl's friendship had meant so much to me, the more I came to miss it; and the more impregnable the barrier of silly pride. But I was very young and would not ask Ghak for the explanation which I was sure he could give, and that might have made everything all right again.

On the march, or during halts, Dian refused consistently to notice me--when her eyes wandered in my direction she looked either over my head or directly through me. At last I became desperate, and determined to swallow my self-esteem, and again beg her to tell me how I had offended, and how I might make reparation. I made up my mind that I should do this at the next halt. We were approaching another range of mountains at the time, and when we reached them, instead of winding across them through some high-flung pass we entered a mighty natural tunnel--a series of labyrinthine grottoes, dark as Erebus.

The guards had no torches or light of any description. In fact we had seen no artificial light or sign of fire since we had entered Pellucidar. In a land of perpetual noon there is no need of light above ground, yet I marveled that they had no means of lighting their way through these dark, subterranean passages. So we crept along at a snail's pace, with much stumbling and falling--the guards keeping up a singsong chant ahead of us, interspersed with certain high notes which I found always indicated rough places and turns.

Halts were now more frequent, but I did not wish to speak to Dian until I could see from the expression of her face how she was receiving my apologies. At last a faint glow ahead forewarned us of the end of the tunnel, for which I for one was devoutly thankful. Then at a sudden turn we emerged into the full light of the noonday sun.

But with it came a sudden realization of what meant to me a real catastrophe--Dian was gone, and with her a half-dozen other prisoners. The guards saw it too, and the ferocity of their rage was terrible to behold. Their awesome, bestial faces were contorted in the most diabolical expressions, as they accused each other of responsibility for the loss. Finally they fell upon us, beating us with their spear shafts, and hatchets. They had already killed two near the head of the line, and were like to have finished the balance of us when their leader finally put a stop to the brutal slaughter. Never in all my life had I witnessed a more horrible exhibition of bestial rage--I thanked God that Dian had not been one of those left to endure it.

Of the twelve prisoners who had been chained ahead of me each alternate one had been freed commencing with Dian. Hooja was gone. Ghak remained. What could it mean? How had it been accomplished? The commander of the guards was investigating. Soon he discovered that the rude locks which had held the neckbands in place had been deftly picked.

"Hooja the Sly One," murmured Ghak, who was now next to me in line. "He has taken the girl that you would not have," he continued, glancing at me.

"That I would not have!" I cried. "What do you mean?"

He looked at me closely for a moment.

"I have doubted your story that you are from another world," he said at last, "but yet upon no other grounds could your ignorance of the ways of Pellucidar be explained. Do you really mean that you do not know that you offended the Beautiful One, and how?"

"I do not know, Ghak," I replied.

"Then shall I tell you. When a man of Pellucidar intervenes between another man and the woman the other man would have, the woman belongs to the victor. Dian the Beautiful belongs to you. You should have claimed her or released her. Had you taken her hand, it would have indicated your desire to make her your mate, and had you raised her hand above her head and then dropped it, it would have meant that you did not wish her for a mate and that you released her from all obligation to you. By doing neither you have put upon her the greatest affront that a man may put upon a woman. Now she is your slave. No man will take her as mate, or may take her honorably, until he shall have overcome you in combat, and men do not choose slave women as their mates--at least not the men of Pellucidar."

"I did not know, Ghak," I cried. "I did not know. Not for all Pellucidar would I have harmed Dian the Beautiful by word, or look, or act of mine. I do not want her as my slave. I do not want her as my--" but here I stopped. The vision of that sweet and innocent face floated before me amidst the soft mists of imagination, and where I had on the second believed that I clung only to the memory of a gentle friendship I had lost, yet now it seemed that it would have been disloyalty to her to have said that I did not want Dian the Beautiful as my mate. I had not thought of her except as a welcome friend in a strange, cruel world. Even now I did not think that I loved her.

I believe Ghak must have read the truth more in my expression than in my words, for presently he laid his hand upon my shoulder.

"Man of another world," he said, "I believe you. Lips may lie, but when the heart speaks through the eyes it tells only the truth. Your heart has spoken to me. I know now that you meant no affront to Dian the Beautiful. She is not of my tribe; but her mother is my sister. She does not know it--her mother was stolen by Dian's father who came with many others of the tribe of Amoz to battle with us for our women--the most beautiful women of Pellucidar. Then was her father king of Amoz, and her mother was daughter of the king of Sari--to whose power I, his son, have succeeded. Dian is the daughter of kings, though her father is no longer king since the sadok tossed him and Jubal the Ugly One wrested his kingship from him. Because of her lineage the wrong you did her was greatly magnified in the eyes of all who saw it. She will never forgive you."

I asked Ghak if there was not some way in which I could release the girl from the bondage and ignominy I had unwittingly placed upon her.

"If ever you find her, yes," he answered. "Merely to raise her hand above her head and drop it in the presence of others is sufficient to release her; but how may you ever find her, you who are doomed to a life of slavery yourself in the buried city of Phutra?"

"Is there no escape?" I asked.

"Hooja the Sly One escaped and took the others with him," replied Ghak. "But there are no more dark places on the way to Phutra, and once there it is not so easy--the Mahars are very wise. Even if one escaped from Phutra there are the thipdars--they would find you, and then--" the Hairy One shuddered. "No, you will never escape the Mahars."

It was a cheerful prospect. I asked Perry what he thought about it; but he only shrugged his shoulders and continued a longwinded prayer he had been at for some time. He was wont to say that the only redeeming feature of our captivity was the ample time it gave him for the improvisation of prayers--it was becoming an obsession with him. The Sagoths had begun to take notice of his habit of declaiming throughout entire marches. One of them asked him what he was saying--to whom he was talking. The question gave me an idea, so I answered quickly before Perry could say anything.

"Do not interrupt him," I said. "He is a very holy man in the world from which we come. He is speaking to spirits which you cannot see--do not interrupt him or they will spring out of the air upon you and rend you limb from limb--like that," and I jumped toward the great brute with a loud "Boo!" that sent him stumbling backward.

I took a long chance, I realized, but if we could make any capital out of Perry's harmless mania I wanted to make it while the making was prime. It worked splendidly. The Sagoths treated us both with marked respect during the balance of the journey, and then passed the word along to their masters, the Mahars.

Two marches after this episode we came to the city of Phutra. The entrance to it was marked by two lofty towers of granite, which guarded a flight of steps leading to the buried city. Sagoths were on guard here as well as at a hundred or more other towers scattered about over a large plain.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

  

SLAVES

As we descended the broad staircase which led to the main avenue of Phutra I caught my first sight of the dominant race of the inner world. Involuntarily I shrank back as one of the creatures approached to inspect us. A more hideous thing it would be impossible to imagine. The all-powerful Mahars of Pellucidar are great reptiles, some six or eight feet in length, with long narrow heads and great round eyes. Their beak-like mouths are lined with sharp, white fangs, and the backs of their huge, lizard bodies are serrated into bony ridges from their necks to the end of their long tails. Their feet are equipped with three webbed toes, while from the fore feet membranous wings, which are attached to their bodies just in front of the hind legs, protrude at an angle of 45 degrees toward the rear, ending in sharp points several feet above their bodies.

I glanced at Perry as the thing passed me to inspect him. The old man was gazing at the horrid creature with wide astonished eyes. When it passed on, he turned to me.

"A rhamphorhynchus of the Middle Olitic, David," he said, "but, gad, how enormous! The largest remains we ever have discovered have never indicated a size greater than that attained by an ordinary crow."

As we continued on through the main avenue of Phutra we saw many thousand of the creatures coming and going upon their daily duties. They paid but little attention to us. Phutra is laid out underground with a regularity that indicates remarkable engineering skill. It is hewn from solid limestone strata. The streets are broad and of a uniform height of twenty feet. At intervals tubes pierce the roof of this underground city, and by means of lenses and reflectors transmit the sunlight, softened and diffused, to dispel what would otherwise be Cimmerian darkness. In like manner air is introduced.

Perry and I were taken, with Ghak, to a large public building, where one of the Sagoths who had formed our guard explained to a Maharan official the circumstances surrounding our capture. The method of communication between these two was remarkable in that no spoken words were exchanged. They employed a species of sign language. As I was to learn later, the Mahars have no ears, not any spoken language. Among themselves they communicate by means of what Perry says must be a sixth sense which is cognizant of a fourth dimension.

I never did quite grasp him, though he endeavored to explain it to me upon numerous occasions. I suggested telepathy, but he said no, that it was not telepathy since they could only communicate when in each others' presence, nor could they talk with the Sagoths or the other inhabitants of Pellucidar by the same method they used to converse with one another.

"What they do," said Perry, "is to project their thoughts into the fourth dimension, when they become appreciable to the sixth sense of their listener. Do I make myself quite clear?"

"You do not, Perry," I replied. He shook his head in despair, and returned to his work. They had set us to carrying a great accumulation of Maharan literature from one apartment to another, and there arranging it upon shelves. I suggested to Perry that we were in the public library of Phutra, but later, as he commenced to discover the key to their written language, he assured me that we were handling the ancient archives of the race.

During this period my thoughts were continually upon Dian the Beautiful. I was, of course, glad that she had escaped the Mahars, and the fate that had been suggested by the Sagoth who had threatened to purchase her upon our arrival at Phutra. I often wondered if the little party of fugitives had been overtaken by the guards who had returned to search for them. Sometimes I was not so sure but that I should have been more contented to know that Dian was here in Phutra, than to think of her at the mercy of Hooja the Sly One. Ghak, Perry, and I often talked together of possible escape, but the Sarian was so steeped in his lifelong belief that no one could escape from the Mahars except by a miracle, that he was not much aid to us--his attitude was of one who waits for the miracle to come to him.

At my suggestion Perry and I fashioned some swords of scraps of iron which we discovered among some rubbish in the cells where we slept, for we were permitted almost unrestrained freedom of action within the limits of the building to which we had been assigned. So great were the number of slaves who waited upon the inhabitants of Phutra that none of us was apt to be overburdened with work, nor were our masters unkind to us.

We hid our new weapons beneath the skins which formed our beds, and then Perry conceived the idea of making bows and arrows--weapons apparently unknown within Pellucidar. Next came shields; but these I found it easier to steal from the walls of the outer guardroom of the building.

We had completed these arrangements for our protection after leaving Phutra when the Sagoths who had been sent to recapture the escaped prisoners returned with four of them, of whom Hooja was one. Dian and two others had eluded them. It so happened that Hooja was confined in the same building with us. He told Ghak that he had not seen Dian or the others after releasing them within the dark grotto. What had become of them he had not the faintest conception--they might be wandering yet, lost within the labyrinthine tunnel, if not dead from starvation.

I was now still further apprehensive as to the fate of Dian, and at this time, I imagine, came the first realization that my affection for the girl might be prompted by more than friendship. During my waking hours she was constantly the subject of my thoughts, and when I slept her dear face haunted my dreams. More than ever was I determined to escape the Mahars.

"Perry," I confided to the old man, "if I have to search every inch of this diminutive world I am going to find Dian the Beautiful and right the wrong I unintentionally did her." That was the excuse I made for Perry's benefit.

"Diminutive world!" he scoffed. "You don't know what you are talking about, my boy," and then he showed me a map of Pellucidar which he had recently discovered among the manuscript he was arranging.

"Look," he cried, pointing to it, "this is evidently water, and all this land. Do you notice the general configuration of the two areas? Where the oceans are upon the outer crust, is land here. These relatively small areas of ocean follow the general lines of the continents of the outer world.

"We know that the crust of the globe is 500 miles in thickness; then the inside diameter of Pellucidar must be 7,000 miles, and the superficial area 165,480,000 square miles. Three-fourths of this is land. Think of it! A land area of 124,110,000 square miles! Our own world contains but 53,000,000 square miles of land, the balance of its surface being covered by water. Just as we often compare nations by their relative land areas, so if we compare these two worlds in the same way we have the strange anomaly of a larger world within a smaller one!

"Where within vast Pellucidar would you search for your Dian? Without stars, or moon, or changing sun how could you find her even though you knew where she might be found?"

The proposition was a corker. It quite took my breath away; but I found that it left me all the more determined to attempt it.

"If Ghak will accompany us we may be able to do it," I suggested.

Perry and I sought him out and put the question straight to him.

"Ghak," I said, "we are determined to escape from this bondage. Will you accompany us?"

"They will set the thipdars upon us," he said, "and then we shall be killed; but--" he hesitated--"I would take the chance if I thought that I might possibly escape and return to my own people."

"Could you find your way back to your own land?" asked Perry. "And could you aid David in his search for Dian?"

"Yes."

"But how," persisted Perry, "could you travel to strange country without heavenly bodies or a compass to guide you?"

Ghak didn't know what Perry meant by heavenly bodies or a compass, but he assured us that you might blindfold any man of Pellucidar and carry him to the farthermost corner of the world, yet he would be able to come directly to his own home again by the shortest route. He seemed surprised to think that we found anything wonderful in it. Perry said it must be some sort of homing instinct such as is possessed by certain breeds of earthly pigeons. I didn't know, of course, but it gave me an idea.

"Then Dian could have found her way directly to her own people?" I asked.

"Surely," replied Ghak, "unless some mighty beast of prey killed her."

I was for making the attempted escape at once, but both Perry and Ghak counseled waiting for some propitious accident which would insure us some small degree of success. I didn't see what accident could befall a whole community in a land of perpetual day-light where the inhabitants had no fixed habits of sleep. Why, I am sure that some of the Mahars never sleep, while others may, at long intervals, crawl into the dark recesses beneath their dwellings and curl up in protracted slumber. Perry says that if a Mahar stays awake for three years he will make up all his lost sleep in a long year's snooze. That may be all true, but I never saw but three of them asleep, and it was the sight of these three that gave me a suggestion for our means of escape.

I had been searching about far below the levels that we slaves were supposed to frequent--possibly fifty feet beneath the main floor of the building--among a network of corridors and apartments, when I came suddenly upon three Mahars curled up upon a bed of skins. At first I thought they were dead, but later their regular breathing convinced me of my error. Like a flash the thought came to me of the marvelous opportunity these sleeping reptiles offered as a means of eluding the watchfulness of our captors and the Sagoth guards.

Hastening back to Perry where he pored over a musty pile of, to me, meaningless hieroglyphics, I explained my plan to him. To my surprise he was horrified.

"It would be murder, David," he cried.

"Murder to kill a reptilian monster?" I asked in astonishment.

"Here they are not monsters, David," he replied. "Here they are the dominant race--we are the 'monsters'--the lower orders. In Pellucidar evolution has progressed along different lines than upon the outer earth. These terrible convulsions of nature time and time again wiped out the existing species--but for this fact some monster of the Saurozoic epoch might rule today upon our own world. We see here what might well have occurred in our own history had conditions been what they have been here.

"Life within Pellucidar is far younger than upon the outer crust. Here man has but reached a stage analogous to the Stone Age of our own world's history, but for countless millions of years these reptiles have been progressing. Possibly it is the sixth sense which I am sure they possess that has given them an advantage over the other and more frightfully armed of their fellows; but this we may never know. They look upon us as we look upon the beasts of our fields, and I learn from their written records that other races of Mahars feed upon men--they keep them in great droves, as we keep cattle. They breed them most carefully, and when they are quite fat, they kill and eat them."

I shuddered.

"What is there horrible about it, David?" the old man asked. "They understand us no better than we understand the lower animals of our own world. Why, I have come across here very learned discussions of the question as to whether gilaks, that is men, have any means of communication. One writer claims that we do not even reason--that our every act is mechanical, or instinctive. The dominant race of Pellucidar, David, have not yet learned that men converse among themselves, or reason. Because we do not converse as they do it is beyond them to imagine that we converse at all. It is thus that we reason in relation to the brutes of our own world. They know that the Sagoths have a spoken language, but they cannot comprehend it, or how it manifests itself, since they have no auditory apparatus. They believe that the motions of the lips alone convey the meaning. That the Sagoths can communicate with us is incomprehensible to them.

"Yes, David," he concluded, "it would entail murder to carry out your plan."

"Very well then, Perry." I replied. "I shall become a murderer."

He got me to go over the plan again most carefully, and for some reason which was not at the time clear to me insisted upon a very careful description of the apartments and corridors I had just explored.

"I wonder, David," he said at length, "as you are determined to carry out your wild scheme, if we could not accomplish something of very real and lasting benefit for the human race of Pellucidar at the same time. Listen, I have learned much of a most surprising nature from these archives of the Mahars. That you may not appreciate my plan I shall briefly outline the history of the race.

"Once the males were all-powerful, but ages ago the females, little by little, assumed the mastery. For other ages no noticeable change took place in the race of Mahars. It continued to progress under the intelligent and beneficent rule of the ladies. Science took vast strides. This was especially true of the sciences which we know as biology and eugenics. Finally a certain female scientist announced the fact that she had discovered a method whereby eggs might be fertilized by chemical means after they were laid--all true reptiles, you know, are hatched from eggs.

"What happened? Immediately the necessity for males ceased to exist--the race was no longer dependent upon them. More ages elapsed until at the present time we find a race consisting exclusively of females. But here is the point. The secret of this chemical formula is kept by a single race of Mahars. It is in the city of Phutra, and unless I am greatly in error I judge from your description of the vaults through which you passed today that it lies hidden in the cellar of this building.

"For two reasons they hide it away and guard it jealously. First, because upon it depends the very life of the race of Mahars, and second, owing to the fact that when it was public property as at first so many were experimenting with it that the danger of over-population became very grave.

"David, if we can escape, and at the same time take with us this great secret what will we not have accomplished for the human race within Pellucidar!" The very thought of it fairly overpowered me. Why, we two would be the means of placing the men of the inner world in their rightful place among created things. Only the Sagoths would then stand between them and absolute supremacy, and I was not quite sure but that the Sagoths owed all their power to the greater intelligence of the Mahars--I could not believe that these gorilla-like beasts were the mental superiors of the human race of Pellucidar.

"Why, Perry," I exclaimed, "you and I may reclaim a whole world! Together we can lead the races of men out of the darkness of ignorance into the light of advancement and civilization. At one step we may carry them from the Age of Stone to the twentieth century. It's marvelous--absolutely marvelous just to think about it."

"David," said the old man, "I believe that God sent us here for just that purpose--it shall be my life work to teach them His word--to lead them into the light of His mercy while we are training their hearts and hands in the ways of culture and civilization."

"You are right, Perry," I said, "and while you are teaching them to pray I'll be teaching them to fight, and between us we'll make a race of men that will be an honor to us both."

Ghak had entered the apartment some time before we concluded our conversation, and now he wanted to know what we were so excited about. Perry thought we had best not tell him too much, and so I only explained that I had a plan for escape. When I had outlined it to him, he seemed about as horror-struck as Perry had been; but for a different reason. The Hairy One only considered the horrible fate that would be ours were we discovered; but at last I prevailed upon him to accept my plan as the only feasible one, and when I had assured him that I would take all the responsibility for it were we captured, he accorded a reluctant assent.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

  

THE BEGINNING OF HORROR

Within Pellucidar one time is as good as another. There were no nights to mask our attempted escape. All must be done in broad day-light--all but the work I had to do in the apartment beneath the building. So we determined to put our plan to an immediate test lest the Mahars who made it possible should awake before I reached them; but we were doomed to disappointment, for no sooner had we reached the main floor of the building on our way to the pits beneath, than we encountered hurrying bands of slaves being hastened under strong Sagoth guard out of the edifice to the avenue beyond.

Other Sagoths were darting hither and thither in search of other slaves, and the moment that we appeared we were pounced upon and hustled into the line of marching humans.

What the purpose or nature of the general exodus we did not know, but presently through the line of captives ran the rumor that two escaped slaves had been recaptured--a man and a woman--and that we were marching to witness their punishment, for the man had killed a Sagoth of the detachment that had pursued and overtaken them.

At the intelligence my heart sprang to my throat, for I was sure that the two were of those who escaped in the dark grotto with Hooja the Sly One, and that Dian must be the woman. Ghak thought so too, as did Perry.

"Is there naught that we may do to save her?" I asked Ghak.

"Naught," he replied.

Along the crowded avenue we marched, the guards showing unusual cruelty toward us, as though we, too, had been implicated in the murder of their fellow. The occasion was to serve as an object-lesson to all other slaves of the danger and futility of attempted escape, and the fatal consequences of taking the life of a superior being, and so I imagine that Sagoths felt amply justified in making the entire proceeding as uncomfortable and painful to us as possible.

They jabbed us with their spears and struck at us with the hatchets at the least provocation, and at no provocation at all. It was a most uncomfortable half-hour that we spent before we were finally herded through a low entrance into a huge building the center of which was given up to a good-sized arena. Benches surrounded this open space upon three sides, and along the fourth were heaped huge bowlders which rose in receding tiers toward the roof.

At first I couldn't make out the purpose of this mighty pile of rock, unless it were intended as a rough and picturesque background for the scenes which were enacted in the arena before it, but presently, after the wooden benches had been pretty well filled by slaves and Sagoths, I discovered the purpose of the bowlders, for then the Mahars began to file into the enclosure.

They marched directly across the arena toward the rocks upon the opposite side, where, spreading their bat-like wings, they rose above the high wall of the pit, settling down upon the bowlders above. These were the reserved seats, the boxes of the elect.

Reptiles that they are, the rough surface of a great stone is to them as plush as upholstery to us. Here they lolled, blinking their hideous eyes, and doubtless conversing with one another in their sixth-sense-fourth-dimension language.

For the first time I beheld their queen. She differed from the others in no feature that was appreciable to my earthly eyes, in fact all Mahars look alike to me: but when she crossed the arena after the balance of her female subjects had found their bowlders, she was preceded by a score of huge Sagoths, the largest I ever had seen, and on either side of her waddled a huge thipdar, while behind came another score of Sagoth guardsmen.

At the barrier the Sagoths clambered up the steep side with truly apelike agility, while behind them the haughty queen rose upon her wings with her two frightful dragons close beside her, and settled down upon the largest bowlder of them all in the exact center of that side of the amphitheater which is reserved for the dominant race. Here she squatted, a most repulsive and uninteresting queen; though doubtless quite as well assured of her beauty and divine right to rule as the proudest monarch of the outer world.

And then the music started--music without sound! The Mahars cannot hear, so the drums and fifes and horns of earthly bands are unknown among them. The "band" consists of a score or more Mahars. It filed out in the center of the arena where the creatures upon the rocks might see it, and there it performed for fifteen or twenty minutes.

Their technic consisted in waving their tails and moving their heads in a regular succession of measured movements resulting in a cadence which evidently pleased the eye of the Mahar as the cadence of our own instrumental music pleases our ears. Sometimes the band took measured steps in unison to one side or the other, or backward and again forward--it all seemed very silly and meaningless to me, but at the end of the first piece the Mahars upon the rocks showed the first indications of enthusiasm that I had seen displayed by the dominant race of Pellucidar. They beat their great wings up and down, and smote their rocky perches with their mighty tails until the ground shook. Then the band started another piece, and all was again as silent as the grave. That was one great beauty about Mahar music--if you didn't happen to like a piece that was being played all you had to do was shut your eyes.

When the band had exhausted its repertory it took wing and settled upon the rocks above and behind the queen. Then the business of the day was on. A man and woman were pushed into the arena by a couple of Sagoth guardsmen. I leaned forward in my seat to scrutinize the female--hoping against hope that she might prove to be another than Dian the Beautiful. Her back was toward me for a while, and the sight of the great mass of raven hair piled high upon her head filled me with alarm.

Presently a door in one side of the arena wall was opened to admit a huge, shaggy, bull-like creature.

"A Bos," whispered Perry, excitedly. "His kind roamed the outer crust with the cave bear and the mammoth ages and ages ago. We have been carried back a million years, David, to the childhood of a planet--is it not wondrous?"

But I saw only the raven hair of a half-naked girl, and my heart stood still in dumb misery at the sight of her, nor had I any eyes for the wonders of natural history. But for Perry and Ghak I should have leaped to the floor of the arena and shared whatever fate lay in store for this priceless treasure of the Stone Age.

With the advent of the Bos--they call the thing a thag within Pellucidar--two spears were tossed into the arena at the feet of the prisoners. It seemed to me that a bean shooter would have been as effective against the mighty monster as these pitiful weapons.

As the animal approached the two, bellowing and pawing the ground with the strength of many earthly bulls, another door directly beneath us was opened, and from it issued the most terrific roar that ever had fallen upon my outraged ears. I could not at first see the beast from which emanated this fearsome challenge, but the sound had the effect of bringing the two victims around with a sudden start, and then I saw the girl's face--she was not Dian! I could have wept for relief.

And now, as the two stood frozen in terror, I saw the author of that fearsome sound creeping stealthily into view. It was a huge tiger--such as hunted the great Bos through the jungles primeval when the world was young. In contour and markings it was not unlike the noblest of the Bengals of our own world, but as its dimensions were exaggerated to colossal proportions so too were its colorings exaggerated. Its vivid yellows fairly screamed aloud; its whites were as eider down; its blacks glossy as the finest anthracite coal, and its coat long and shaggy as a mountain goat. That it is a beautiful animal there is no gainsaying, but if its size and colors are magnified here within Pellucidar, so is the ferocity of its disposition. It is not the occasional member of its species that is a man hunter--all are man hunters; but they do not confine their foraging to man alone, for there is no flesh or fish within Pellucidar that they will not eat with relish in the constant efforts which they make to furnish their huge carcasses with sufficient sustenance to maintain their mighty thews.

Upon one side of the doomed pair the thag bellowed and advanced, and upon the other tarag, the frightful, crept toward them with gaping mouth and dripping fangs.

The man seized the spears, handing one of them to the woman. At the sound of the roaring of the tiger the bull's bellowing became a veritable frenzy of rageful noise. Never in my life had I heard such an infernal din as the two brutes made, and to think it was all lost upon the hideous reptiles for whom the show was staged!

The thag was charging now from one side, and the tarag from the other. The two puny things standing between them seemed already lost, but at the very moment that the beasts were upon them the man grasped his companion by the arm and together they leaped to one side, while the frenzied creatures came together like locomotives in collision.

There ensued a battle royal which for sustained and frightful ferocity transcends the power of imagination or description. Time and again the colossal bull tossed the enormous tiger high into the air, but each time that the huge cat touched the ground he returned to the encounter with apparently undiminished strength, and seemingly increased ire.

For a while the man and woman busied themselves only with keeping out of the way of the two creatures, but finally I saw them separate and each creep stealthily toward one of the combatants. The tiger was now upon the bull's broad back, clinging to the huge neck with powerful fangs while its long, strong talons ripped the heavy hide into shreds and ribbons.

For a moment the bull stood bellowing and quivering with pain and rage, its cloven hoofs widespread, its tail lashing viciously from side to side, and then, in a mad orgy of bucking it went careening about the arena in frenzied attempt to unseat its rending rider. It was with difficulty that the girl avoided the first mad rush of the wounded animal.

All its efforts to rid itself of the tiger seemed futile, until in desperation it threw itself upon the ground, rolling over and over. A little of this so disconcerted the tiger, knocking its breath from it I imagine, that it lost its hold and then, quick as a cat, the great thag was up again and had buried those mighty horns deep in the tarag's abdomen, pinning him to the floor of the arena.

The great cat clawed at the shaggy head until eyes and ears were gone, and naught but a few strips of ragged, bloody flesh remained upon the skull. Yet through all the agony of that fearful punishment the thag still stood motionless pinning down his adversary, and then the man leaped in, seeing that the blind bull would be the least formidable enemy, and ran his spear through the tarag's heart.

As the animal's fierce clawing ceased, the bull raised his gory, sightless head, and with a horrid roar ran headlong across the arena. With great leaps and bounds he came, straight toward the arena wall directly beneath where we sat, and then accident carried him, in one of his mighty springs, completely over the barrier into the midst of the slaves and Sagoths just in front of us. Swinging his bloody horns from side to side the beast cut a wide swath before him straight upward toward our seats. Before him slaves and gorilla-men fought in mad stampede to escape the menace of the creature's death agonies, for such only could that frightful charge have been.

Forgetful of us, our guards joined in the general rush for the exits, many of which pierced the wall of the amphitheater behind us. Perry, Ghak, and I became separated in the chaos which reigned for a few moments after the beast cleared the wall of the arena, each intent upon saving his own hide.

I ran to the right, passing several exits choked with the fear mad mob that were battling to escape. One would have thought that an entire herd of thags was loose behind them, rather than a single blinded, dying beast; but such is the effect of panic upon a crowd.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

  

FREEDOM

Once out of the direct path of the animal, fear of it left me, but another emotion as quickly gripped me--hope of escape that the demoralized condition of the guards made possible for the instant.

I thought of Perry, but for the hope that I might better encompass his release if myself free I should have put the thought of freedom from me at once. As it was I hastened on toward the right searching for an exit toward which no Sagoths were fleeing, and at last I found it--a low, narrow aperture leading into a dark corridor.

Without thought of the possible consequence, I darted into the shadows of the tunnel, feeling my way along through the gloom for some distance. The noises of the amphitheater had grown fainter and fainter until now all was as silent as the tomb about me. Faint light filtered from above through occasional ventilating and lighting tubes, but it was scarce sufficient to enable my human eyes to cope with the darkness, and so I was forced to move with extreme care, feeling my way along step by step with a hand upon the wall beside me.

Presently the light increased and a moment later, to my delight, I came upon a flight of steps leading upward, at the top of which the brilliant light of the noonday sun shone through an opening in the ground.

Cautiously I crept up the stairway to the tunnel's end, and peering out saw the broad plain of Phutra before me. The numerous lofty, granite towers which mark the several entrances to the subterranean city were all in front of me--behind, the plain stretched level and unbroken to the nearby foothills. I had come to the surface, then, beyond the city, and my chances for escape seemed much enhanced.

My first impulse was to await darkness before attempting to cross the plain, so deeply implanted are habits of thought; but of a sudden I recollected the perpetual noonday brilliance which envelopes Pellucidar, and with a smile I stepped forth into the day-light.

Rank grass, waist high, grows upon the plain of Phutra--the gorgeous flowering grass of the inner world, each particular blade of which is tipped with a tiny, five-pointed blossom--brilliant little stars of varying colors that twinkle in the green foliage to add still another charm to the weird, yet lovely, landscape.

But then the only aspect which attracted me was the distant hills in which I hoped to find sanctuary, and so I hastened on, trampling the myriad beauties beneath my hurrying feet. Perry says that the force of gravity is less upon the surface of the inner world than upon that of the outer. He explained it all to me once, but I was never particularly brilliant in such matters and so most of it has escaped me. As I recall it the difference is due in some part to the counter-attraction of that portion of the earth's crust directly opposite the spot upon the face of Pellucidar at which one's calculations are being made. Be that as it may, it always seemed to me that I moved with greater speed and agility within Pellucidar than upon the outer surface--there was a certain airy lightness of step that was most pleasing, and a feeling of bodily detachment which I can only compare with that occasionally experienced in dreams.

And as I crossed Phutra's flower-bespangled plain that time I seemed almost to fly, though how much of the sensation was due to Perry's suggestion and how much to actuality I am sure I do not know. The more I thought of Perry the less pleasure I took in my new-found freedom. There could be no liberty for me within Pellucidar unless the old man shared it with me, and only the hope that I might find some way to encompass his release kept me from turning back to Phutra.

Just how I was to help Perry I could scarce imagine, but I hoped that some fortuitous circumstance might solve the problem for me. It was quite evident however that little less than a miracle could aid me, for what could I accomplish in this strange world, naked and unarmed? It was even doubtful that I could retrace my steps to Phutra should I once pass beyond view of the plain, and even were that possible, what aid could I bring to Perry no matter how far I wandered?

The case looked more and more hopeless the longer I viewed it, yet with a stubborn persistency I forged ahead toward the foothills. Behind me no sign of pursuit developed, before me I saw no living thing. It was as though I moved through a dead and forgotten world.

I have no idea, of course, how long it took me to reach the limit of the plain, but at last I entered the foothills, following a pretty little canyon upward toward the mountains. Beside me frolicked a laughing brooklet, hurrying upon its noisy way down to the silent sea. In its quieter pools I discovered many small fish, of four-or five-pound weight I should imagine. In appearance, except as to size and color, they were not unlike the whale of our own seas. As I watched them playing about I discovered, not only that they suckled their young, but that at intervals they rose to the surface to breathe as well as to feed upon certain grasses and a strange, scarlet lichen which grew upon the rocks just above the water line.

It was this last habit that gave me the opportunity I craved to capture one of these herbivorous cetaceans--that is what Perry calls them--and make as good a meal as one can on raw, warm-blooded fish; but I had become rather used, by this time, to the eating of food in its natural state, though I still balked on the eyes and entrails, much to the amusement of Ghak, to whom I always passed these delicacies.

Crouching beside the brook, I waited until one of the diminutive purple whales rose to nibble at the long grasses which overhung the water, and then, like the beast of prey that man really is, I sprang upon my victim, appeasing my hunger while he yet wriggled to escape.

Then I drank from the clear pool, and after washing my hands and face continued my flight. Above the source of the brook I encountered a rugged climb to the summit of a long ridge. Beyond was a steep declivity to the shore of a placid, inland sea, upon the quiet surface of which lay several beautiful islands.

The view was charming in the extreme, and as no man or beast was to be seen that might threaten my new-found liberty, I slid over the edge of the bluff, and half sliding, half falling, dropped into the delightful valley, the very aspect of which seemed to offer a haven of peace and security.

The gently sloping beach along which I walked was thickly strewn with strangely shaped, colored shells; some empty, others still housing as varied a multitude of mollusks as ever might have drawn out their sluggish lives along the silent shores of the antediluvian seas of the outer crust. As I walked I could not but compare myself with the first man of that other world, so complete the solitude which surrounded me, so primal and untouched the virgin wonders and beauties of adolescent nature. I felt myself a second Adam wending my lonely way through the childhood of a world, searching for my Eve, and at the thought there rose before my mind's eye the exquisite outlines of a perfect face surmounted by a loose pile of wondrous, raven hair.

As I walked, my eyes were bent upon the beach so that it was not until I had come quite upon it that I discovered that which shattered all my beautiful dream of solitude and safety and peace and primal overlordship. The thing was a hollowed log drawn upon the sands, and in the bottom of it lay a crude paddle.

The rude shock of awakening to what doubtless might prove some new form of danger was still upon me when I heard a rattling of loose stones from the direction of the bluff, and turning my eyes in that direction I beheld the author of the disturbance, a great copper-colored man, running rapidly toward me.

There was that in the haste with which he came which seemed quite sufficiently menacing, so that I did not need the added evidence of brandishing spear and scowling face to warn me that I was in no safe position, but whither to flee was indeed a momentous question.

The speed of the fellow seemed to preclude the possibility of escaping him upon the open beach. There was but a single alternative--the rude skiff--and with a celerity which equaled his, I pushed the thing into the sea and as it floated gave a final shove and clambered in over the end.

A cry of rage rose from the owner of the primitive craft, and an instant later his heavy, stone-tipped spear grazed my shoulder and buried itself in the bow of the boat beyond. Then I grasped the paddle, and with feverish haste urged the awkward, wobbly thing out upon the surface of the sea.

A glance over my shoulder showed me that the copper-colored one had plunged in after me and was swimming rapidly in pursuit. His mighty strokes bade fair to close up the distance between us in short order, for at best I could make but slow progress with my unfamiliar craft, which nosed stubbornly in every direction but that which I desired to follow, so that fully half my energy was expended in turning its blunt prow back into the course.

I had covered some hundred yards from shore when it became evident that my pursuer must grasp the stern of the skiff within the next half-dozen strokes. In a frenzy of despair, I bent to the grandfather of all paddles in a hopeless effort to escape, and still the copper giant behind me gained and gained.

His hand was reaching upward for the stern when I saw a sleek, sinuous body shoot from the depths below. The man saw it too, and the look of terror that overspread his face assured me that I need have no further concern as to him, for the fear of certain death was in his look.

And then about him coiled the great, slimy folds of a hideous monster of that prehistoric deep--a mighty serpent of the sea, with fanged jaws, and darting forked tongue, with bulging eyes, and bony protuberances upon head and snout that formed short, stout horns.

As I looked at that hopeless struggle my eyes met those of the doomed man, and I could have sworn that in his I saw an expression of hopeless appeal. But whether I did or not there swept through me a sudden compassion for the fellow. He was indeed a brother-man, and that he might have killed me with pleasure had he caught me was forgotten in the extremity of his danger.

Unconsciously I had ceased paddling as the serpent rose to engage my pursuer, so now the skiff still drifted close beside the two. The monster seemed to be but playing with his victim before he closed his awful jaws upon him and dragged him down to his dark den beneath the surface to devour him. The huge, snakelike body coiled and uncoiled about its prey. The hideous, gaping jaws snapped in the victim's face. The forked tongue, lightning-like, ran in and out upon the copper skin.

Nobly the giant battled for his life, beating with his stone hatchet against the bony armor that covered that frightful carcass; but for all the damage he inflicted he might as well have struck with his open palm.

At last I could endure no longer to sit supinely by while a fellowman was dragged down to a horrible death by that repulsive reptile. Embedded in the prow of the skiff lay the spear that had been cast after me by him whom I suddenly desired to save. With a wrench I tore it loose, and standing upright in the wobbly log drove it with all the strength of my two arms straight into the gaping jaws of the hydrophidian.

With a loud hiss the creature abandoned its prey to turn upon me, but the spear, imbedded in its throat, prevented it from seizing me though it came near to overturning the skiff in its mad efforts to reach me.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

  

THE MAHAR TEMPLE

The aborigine, apparently uninjured, climbed quickly into the skiff, and seizing the spear with me helped to hold off the infuriated creature. Blood from the wounded reptile was now crimsoning the waters about us and soon from the weakening struggles it became evident that I had inflicted a death wound upon it. Presently its efforts to reach us ceased entirely, and with a few convulsive movements it turned upon its back quite dead.

And then there came to me a sudden realization of the predicament in which I had placed myself. I was entirely within the power of the savage man whose skiff I had stolen. Still clinging to the spear I looked into his face to find him scrutinizing me intently, and there we stood for some several minutes, each clinging tenaciously to the weapon the while we gazed in stupid wonderment at each other.

What was in his mind I do not know, but in my own was merely the question as to how soon the fellow would recommence hostilities.

Presently he spoke to me, but in a tongue which I was unable to translate. I shook my head in an effort to indicate my ignorance of his language, at the same time addressing him in the bastard tongue that the Sagoths use to converse with the human slaves of the Mahars.

To my delight he understood and answered me in the same jargon.

"What do you want of my spear?" he asked.

"Only to keep you from running it through me," I replied.

"I would not do that," he said, "for you have just saved my life," and with that he released his hold upon it and squatted down in the bottom of the skiff.

"Who are you," he continued, "and from what country do you come?"

I too sat down, laying the spear between us, and tried to explain how I came to Pellucidar, and wherefrom, but it was as impossible for him to grasp or believe the strange tale I told him as I fear it is for you upon the outer crust to believe in the existence of the inner world. To him it seemed quite ridiculous to imagine that there was another world far beneath his feet peopled by beings similar to himself, and he laughed uproariously the more he thought upon it. But it was ever thus. That which has never come within the scope of our really pitifully meager world-experience cannot be--our finite minds cannot grasp that which may not exist in accordance with the conditions which obtain about us upon the outside of the insignificant grain of dust which wends its tiny way among the bowlders of the universe--the speck of moist dirt we so proudly call the World.

So I gave it up and asked him about himself. He said he was a Mezop, and that his name was Ja.

"Who are the Mezops?" I asked. "Where do they live?"

He looked at me in surprise.

"I might indeed believe that you were from another world," he said, "for who of Pellucidar could be so ignorant! The Mezops live upon the islands of the seas. In so far as I ever have heard no Mezop lives elsewhere, and no others than Mezops dwell upon islands, but of course it may be different in other far-distant lands. I do not know. At any rate in this sea and those near by it is true that only people of my race inhabit the islands.

"We are fishermen, though we be great hunters as well, often going to the mainland in search of the game that is scarce upon all but the larger islands. And we are warriors also," he added proudly. "Even the Sagoths of the Mahars fear us. Once, when Pellucidar was young, the Sagoths were wont to capture us for slaves as they do the other men of Pellucidar, it is handed down from father to son among us that this is so; but we fought so desperately and slew so many Sagoths, and those of us that were captured killed so many Mahars in their own cities that at last they learned that it were better to leave us alone, and later came the time that the Mahars became too indolent even to catch their own fish, except for amusement, and then they needed us to supply their wants, and so a truce was made between the races. Now they give us certain things which we are unable to produce in return for the fish that we catch, and the Mezops and the Mahars live in peace.

"The great ones even come to our islands. It is there, far from the prying eyes of their own Sagoths, that they practice their religious rites in the temples they have builded there with our assistance. If you live among us you will doubtless see the manner of their worship, which is strange indeed, and most unpleasant for the poor slaves they bring to take part in it."

As Ja talked I had an excellent opportunity to inspect him more closely. He was a huge fellow, standing I should say six feet six or seven inches, well developed and of a coppery red not unlike that of our own North American Indian, nor were his features dissimilar to theirs. He had the aquiline nose found among many of the higher tribes, the prominent cheek bones, and black hair and eyes, but his mouth and lips were better molded. All in all, Ja was an impressive and handsome creature, and he talked well too, even in the miserable makeshift language we were compelled to use.

During our conversation Ja had taken the paddle and was propelling the skiff with vigorous strokes toward a large island that lay some half-mile from the mainland. The skill with which he handled his crude and awkward craft elicited my deepest admiration, since it had been so short a time before that I had made such pitiful work of it.

As we touched the pretty, level beach Ja leaped out and I followed him. Together we dragged the skiff far up into the bushes that grew beyond the sand.

"We must hide our canoes," explained Ja, "for the Mezops of Luana are always at war with us and would steal them if they found them," he nodded toward an island farther out at sea, and at so great a distance that it seemed but a blur hanging in the distant sky. The upward curve of the surface of Pellucidar was constantly revealing the impossible to the surprised eyes of the outer-earthly. To see land and water curving upward in the distance until it seemed to stand on edge where it melted into the distant sky, and to feel that seas and mountains hung suspended directly above one's head required such a complete reversal of the perceptive and reasoning faculties as almost to stupefy one.

No sooner had we hidden the canoe than Ja plunged into the jungle, presently emerging into a narrow but well-defined trail which wound hither and thither much after the manner of the highways of all primitive folk, but there was one peculiarity about this Mezop trail which I was later to find distinguished them from all other trails that I ever have seen within or without the earth.

It would run on, plain and clear and well defined to end suddenly in the midst of a tangle of matted jungle, then Ja would turn directly back in his tracks for a little distance, spring into a tree, climb through it to the other side, drop onto a fallen log, leap over a low bush and alight once more upon a distinct trail which he would follow back for a short distance only to turn directly about and retrace his steps until after a mile or less this new pathway ended as suddenly and mysteriously as the former section. Then he would pass again across some media which would reveal no spoor, to take up the broken thread of the trail beyond.

As the purpose of this remarkable avenue dawned upon me I could not but admire the native shrewdness of the ancient progenitor of the Mezops who hit upon this novel plan to throw his enemies from his track and delay or thwart them in their attempts to follow him to his deep-buried cities.

To you of the outer earth it might seem a slow and tortuous method of traveling through the jungle, but were you of Pellucidar you would realize that time is no factor where time does not exist. So labyrinthine are the windings of these trails, so varied the connecting links and the distances which one must retrace one's steps from the paths' ends to find them that a Mezop often reaches man's estate before he is familiar even with those which lead from his own city to the sea.

In fact three-fourths of the education of the young male Mezop consists in familiarizing himself with these jungle avenues, and the status of an adult is largely determined by the number of trails which he can follow upon his own island. The females never learn them, since from birth to death they never leave the clearing in which the village of their nativity is situated except they be taken to mate by a male from another village, or captured in war by the enemies of their tribe.

After proceeding through the jungle for what must have been upward of five miles we emerged suddenly into a large clearing in the exact center of which stood as strange an appearing village as one might well imagine.

Large trees had been chopped down fifteen or twenty feet above the ground, and upon the tops of them spherical habitations of woven twigs, mud covered, had been built. Each ball-like house was surmounted by some manner of carven image, which Ja told me indicated the identity of the owner.

Horizontal slits, six inches high and two or three feet wide, served to admit light and ventilation. The entrances to the house were through small apertures in the bases of the trees and thence upward by rude ladders through the hollow trunks to the rooms above. The houses varied in size from two to several rooms. The largest that I entered was divided into two floors and eight apartments.

All about the village, between it and the jungle, lay beautifully cultivated fields in which the Mezops raised such cereals, fruits, and vegetables as they required. Women and children were working in these gardens as we crossed toward the village. At sight of Ja they saluted deferentially, but to me they paid not the slightest attention. Among them and about the outer verge of the cultivated area were many warriors. These too saluted Ja, by touching the points of their spears to the ground directly before them.

Ja conducted me to a large house in the center of the village--the house with eight rooms--and taking me up into it gave me food and drink. There I met his mate, a comely girl with a nursing baby in her arms. Ja told her of how I had saved his life, and she was thereafter most kind and hospitable toward me, even permitting me to hold and amuse the tiny bundle of humanity whom Ja told me would one day rule the tribe, for Ja, it seemed, was the chief of the community.

We had eaten and rested, and I had slept, much to Ja's amusement, for it seemed that he seldom if ever did so, and then the red man proposed that I accompany him to the temple of the Mahars which lay not far from his village. "We are not supposed to visit it," he said; "but the great ones cannot hear and if we keep well out of sight they need never know that we have been there. For my part I hate them and always have, but the other chieftains of the island think it best that we continue to maintain the amicable relations which exist between the two races; otherwise I should like nothing better than to lead my warriors amongst the hideous creatures and exterminate them--Pellucidar would be a better place to live were there none of them."

I wholly concurred in Ja's belief, but it seemed that it might be a difficult matter to exterminate the dominant race of Pellucidar. Thus conversing we followed the intricate trail toward the temple, which we came upon in a small clearing surrounded by enormous trees similar to those which must have flourished upon the outer crust during the carboniferous age.

Here was a mighty temple of hewn rock built in the shape of a rough oval with rounded roof in which were several large openings. No doors or windows were visible in the sides of the structure, nor was there need of any, except one entrance for the slaves, since, as Ja explained, the Mahars flew to and from their place of ceremonial, entering and leaving the building by means of the apertures in the roof.

"But," added Ja, "there is an entrance near the base of which even the Mahars know nothing. Come," and he led me across the clearing and about the end to a pile of loose rock which lay against the foot of the wall. Here he removed a couple of large bowlders, revealing a small opening which led straight within the building, or so it seemed, though as I entered after Ja I discovered myself in a narrow place of extreme darkness.

"We are within the outer wall," said Ja. "It is hollow. Follow me closely."

The red man groped ahead a few paces and then began to ascend a primitive ladder similar to that which leads from the ground to the upper stories of his house. We ascended for some forty feet when the interior of the space between the walls commenced to grow lighter and presently we came opposite an opening in the inner wall which gave us an unobstructed view of the entire interior of the temple.

The lower floor was an enormous tank of clear water in which numerous hideous Mahars swam lazily up and down. Artificial islands of granite rock dotted this artificial sea, and upon several of them I saw men and women like myself.

"What are the human beings doing here?" I asked.

"Wait and you shall see," replied Ja. "They are to take a leading part in the ceremonies which will follow the advent of the queen. You may be thankful that you are not upon the same side of the wall as they."

Scarcely had he spoken than we heard a great fluttering of wings above and a moment later a long procession of the frightful reptiles of Pellucidar winged slowly and majestically through the large central opening in the roof and circled in stately manner about the temple.

There were several Mahars first, and then at least twenty awe-inspiring pterodactyls--thipdars, they are called within Pellucidar. Behind these came the queen, flanked by other thipdars as she had been when she entered the amphitheater at Phutra.

Three times they wheeled about the interior of the oval chamber, to settle finally upon the damp, cold bowlders that fringe the outer edge of the pool. In the center of one side the largest rock was reserved for the queen, and here she took her place surrounded by her terrible guard.

All lay quiet for several minutes after settling to their places. One might have imagined them in silent prayer. The poor slaves upon the diminutive islands watched the horrid creatures with wide eyes. The men, for the most part, stood erect and stately with folded arms, awaiting their doom; but the women and children clung to one another, hiding behind the males. They are a noble-looking race, these cave men of Pellucidar, and if our progenitors were as they, the human race of the outer crust has deteriorated rather than improved with the march of the ages. All they lack is opportunity. We have opportunity, and little else.

Now the queen moved. She raised her ugly head, looking about; then very slowly she crawled to the edge of her throne and slid noiselessly into the water. Up and down the long tank she swam, turning at the ends as you have seen captive seals turn in their tiny tanks, turning upon their backs and diving below the surface.

Nearer and nearer to the island she came until at last she remained at rest before the largest, which was directly opposite her throne. Raising her hideous head from the water she fixed her great, round eyes upon the slaves. They were fat and sleek, for they had been brought from a distant Mahar city where human beings are kept in droves, and bred and fattened, as we breed and fatten beef cattle.

The queen fixed her gaze upon a plump young maiden. Her victim tried to turn away, hiding her face in her hands and kneeling behind a woman; but the reptile, with unblinking eyes, stared on with such fixity that I could have sworn her vision penetrated the woman, and the girl's arms to reach at last the very center of her brain.

Slowly the reptile's head commenced to move to and fro, but the eyes never ceased to bore toward the frightened girl, and then the victim responded. She turned wide, fear-haunted eyes toward the Mahar queen, slowly she rose to her feet, and then as though dragged by some unseen power she moved as one in a trance straight toward the reptile, her glassy eyes fixed upon those of her captor. To the water's edge she came, nor did she even pause, but stepped into the shallows beside the little island. On she moved toward the Mahar, who now slowly retreated as though leading her victim on. The water rose to the girl's knees, and still she advanced, chained by that clammy eye. Now the water was at her waist; now her armpits. Her fellows upon the island looked on in horror, helpless to avert her doom in which they saw a forecast of their own.

The Mahar sank now till only the long upper bill and eyes were exposed above the surface of the water, and the girl had advanced until the end of that repulsive beak was but an inch or two from her face, her horror-filled eyes riveted upon those of the reptile.

Now the water passed above the girl's mouth and nose--her eyes and forehead all that showed--yet still she walked on after the retreating Mahar. The queen's head slowly disappeared beneath the surface and after it went the eyes of her victim--only a slow ripple widened toward the shores to mark where the two vanished.

For a time all was silence within the temple. The slaves were motionless in terror. The Mahars watched the surface of the water for the reappearance of their queen, and presently at one end of the tank her head rose slowly into view. She was backing toward the surface, her eyes fixed before her as they had been when she dragged the helpless girl to her doom.

And then to my utter amazement I saw the forehead and eyes of the maiden come slowly out of the depths, following the gaze of the reptile just as when she had disappeared beneath the surface. On and on came the girl until she stood in water that reached barely to her knees, and though she had been beneath the surface sufficient time to have drowned her thrice over there was no indication, other than her dripping hair and glistening body, that she had been submerged at all.

Again and again the queen led the girl into the depths and out again, until the uncanny weirdness of the thing got on my nerves so that I could have leaped into the tank to the child's rescue had I not taken a firm hold of myself.

Once they were below much longer than usual, and when they came to the surface I was horrified to see that one of the girl's arms was gone--gnawed completely off at the shoulder--but the poor thing gave no indication of realizing pain, only the horror in her set eyes seemed intensified.

The next time they appeared the other arm was gone, and then the breasts, and then a part of the face--it was awful. The poor creatures on the islands awaiting their fate tried to cover their eyes with their hands to hide the fearful sight, but now I saw that they too were under the hypnotic spell of the reptiles, so that they could only crouch in terror with their eyes fixed upon the terrible thing that was transpiring before them.

Finally the queen was under much longer than ever before, and when she rose she came alone and swam sleepily toward her bowlder. The moment she mounted it seemed to be the signal for the other Mahars to enter the tank, and then commenced, upon a larger scale, a repetition of the uncanny performance through which the queen had led her victim.

Only the women and children fell prey to the Mahars--they being the weakest and most tender--and when they had satisfied their appetite for human flesh, some of them devouring two and three of the slaves, there were only a score of full-grown men left, and I thought that for some reason these were to be spared, but such was far from the case, for as the last Mahar crawled to her rock the queen's thipdars darted into the air, circled the temple once and then, hissing like steam engines, swooped down upon the remaining slaves.

There was no hypnotism here--just the plain, brutal ferocity of the beast of prey, tearing, rending, and gulping its meat, but at that it was less horrible than the uncanny method of the Mahars. By the time the thipdars had disposed of the last of the slaves the Mahars were all asleep upon their rocks, and a moment later the great pterodactyls swung back to their posts beside the queen, and themselves dropped into slumber.

"I thought the Mahars seldom, if ever, slept," I said to Ja.

"They do many things in this temple which they do not do elsewhere," he replied. "The Mahars of Phutra are not supposed to eat human flesh, yet slaves are brought here by thousands and almost always you will find Mahars on hand to consume them. I imagine that they do not bring their Sagoths here, because they are ashamed of the practice, which is supposed to obtain only among the least advanced of their race; but I would wager my canoe against a broken paddle that there is no Mahar but eats human flesh whenever she can get it."

"Why should they object to eating human flesh," I asked, "if it is true that they look upon us as lower animals?"

"It is not because they consider us their equals that they are supposed to look with abhorrence upon those who eat our flesh," replied Ja; "it is merely that we are warm-blooded animals. They would not think of eating the meat of a thag, which we consider such a delicacy, any more than I would think of eating a snake. As a matter of fact it is difficult to explain just why this sentiment should exist among them."

"I wonder if they left a single victim," I remarked, leaning far out of the opening in the rocky wall to inspect the temple better. Directly below me the water lapped the very side of the wall, there being a break in the bowlders at this point as there was at several other places about the side of the temple.

My hands were resting upon a small piece of granite which formed a part of the wall, and all my weight upon it proved too much for it. It slipped and I lunged forward. There was nothing to save myself and I plunged headforemost into the water below.

Fortunately the tank was deep at this point, and I suffered no injury from the fall, but as I was rising to the surface my mind filled with the horrors of my position as I thought of the terrible doom which awaited me the moment the eyes of the reptiles fell upon the creature that had disturbed their slumber.

As long as I could I remained beneath the surface, swimming rapidly in the direction of the islands that I might prolong my life to the utmost. At last I was forced to rise for air, and as I cast a terrified glance in the direction of the Mahars and the thipdars I was almost stunned to see that not a single one remained upon the rocks where I had last seen them, nor as I searched the temple with my eyes could I discern any within it.

For a moment I was puzzled to account for the thing, until I realized that the reptiles, being deaf, could not have been disturbed by the noise my body made when it hit the water, and that as there is no such thing as time within Pellucidar there was no telling how long I had been beneath the surface. It was a difficult thing to attempt to figure out by earthly standards--this matter of elapsed time--but when I set myself to it I began to realize that I might have been submerged a second or a month or not at all. You have no conception of the strange contradictions and impossibilities which arise when all methods of measuring time, as we know them upon earth, are non-existent.

I was about to congratulate myself upon the miracle which had saved me for the moment, when the memory of the hypnotic powers of the Mahars filled me with apprehension lest they be practicing their uncanny art upon me to the end that I merely imagined that I was alone in the temple. At the thought cold sweat broke out upon me from every pore, and as I crawled from the water onto one of the tiny islands I was trembling like a leaf--you cannot imagine the awful horror which even the simple thought of the repulsive Mahars of Pellucidar induces in the human mind, and to feel that you are in their power--that they are crawling, slimy, and abhorrent, to drag you down beneath the waters and devour you! It is frightful.

But they did not come, and at last I came to the conclusion that I was indeed alone within the temple. How long I should be alone was the next question to assail me as I swam frantically about once more in search of a means to escape.

Several times I called to Ja, but he must have left after I tumbled into the tank, for I received no response to my cries. Doubtless he had felt as certain of my doom when he saw me topple from our hiding place as I had, and lest he too should be discovered, had hastened from the temple and back to his village.

I knew that there must be some entrance to the building beside the doorways in the roof, for it did not seem reasonable to believe that the thousands of slaves which were brought here to feed the Mahars the human flesh they craved would all be carried through the air, and so I continued my search until at last it was rewarded by the discovery of several loose granite blocks in the masonry at one end of the temple.

A little effort proved sufficient to dislodge enough of these stones to permit me to crawl through into the clearing, and a moment later I had scurried across the intervening space to the dense jungle beyond.

Here I sank panting and trembling upon the matted grasses beneath the giant trees, for I felt that I had escaped from the grinning fangs of death out of the depths of my own grave. Whatever dangers lay hidden in this island jungle, there could be none so fearsome as those which I had just escaped. I knew that I could meet death bravely enough if it but came in the form of some familiar beast or man--anything other than the hideous and uncanny Mahars.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

  

THE FACE OF DEATH

I must have fallen asleep from exhaustion. When I awoke I was very hungry, and after busying myself searching for fruit for a while, I set off through the jungle to find the beach. I knew that the island was not so large but that I could easily find the sea if I did but move in a straight line, but there came the difficulty as there was no way in which I could direct my course and hold it, the sun, of course, being always directly above my head, and the trees so thickly set that I could see no distant object which might serve to guide me in a straight line.

As it was I must have walked for a great distance since I ate four times and slept twice before I reached the sea, but at last I did so, and my pleasure at the sight of it was greatly enhanced by the chance discovery of a hidden canoe among the bushes through which I had stumbled just prior to coming upon the beach.

I can tell you that it did not take me long to pull that awkward craft down to the water and shove it far out from shore. My experience with Ja had taught me that if I were to steal another canoe I must be quick about it and get far beyond the owner's reach as soon as possible.

I must have come out upon the opposite side of the island from that at which Ja and I had entered it, for the mainland was nowhere in sight. For a long time I paddled around the shore, though well out, before I saw the mainland in the distance. At the sight of it I lost no time in directing my course toward it, for I had long since made up my mind to return to Phutra and give myself up that I might be once more with Perry and Ghak the Hairy One.

I felt that I was a fool ever to have attempted to escape alone, especially in view of the fact that our plans were already well formulated to make a break for freedom together. Of course I realized that the chances of the success of our proposed venture were slim indeed, but I knew that I never could enjoy freedom without Perry so long as the old man lived, and I had learned that the probability that I might find him was less than slight.

Had Perry been dead, I should gladly have pitted my strength and wit against the savage and primordial world in which I found myself. I could have lived in seclusion within some rocky cave until I had found the means to outfit myself with the crude weapons of the Stone Age, and then set out in search of her whose image had now become the constant companion of my waking hours, and the central and beloved figure of my dreams.

But, to the best of my knowledge, Perry still lived and it was my duty and wish to be again with him, that we might share the dangers and vicissitudes of the strange world we had discovered. And Ghak, too; the great, shaggy man had found a place in the hearts of us both, for he was indeed every inch a man and king. Uncouth, perhaps, and brutal, too, if judged too harshly by the standards of effete twentieth-century civilization, but withal noble, dignified, chivalrous, and loveable.

Chance carried me to the very beach upon which I had discovered Ja's canoe, and a short time later I was scrambling up the steep bank to retrace my steps from the plain of Phutra. But my troubles came when I entered the canyon beyond the summit, for here I found that several of them centered at the point where I crossed the divide, and which one I had traversed to reach the pass I could not for the life of me remember.

It was all a matter of chance and so I set off down that which seemed the easiest going, and in this I made the same mistake that many of us do in selecting the path along which we shall follow out the course of our lives, and again learned that it is not always best to follow the line of least resistance.

By the time I had eaten eight meals and slept twice I was convinced that I was upon the wrong trail, for between Phutra and the inland sea I had not slept at all, and had eaten but once. To retrace my steps to the summit of the divide and explore another canyon seemed the only solution of my problem, but a sudden widening and levelness of the canyon just before me seemed to suggest that it was about to open into a level country, and with the lure of discovery strong upon me I decided to proceed but a short distance farther before I turned back.

The next turn of the canyon brought me to its mouth, and before me I saw a narrow plain leading down to an ocean. At my right the side of the canyon continued to the water's edge, the valley lying to my left, and the foot of it running gradually into the sea, where it formed a broad level beach.

Clumps of strange trees dotted the landscape here and there almost to the water, and rank grass and ferns grew between. From the nature of the vegetation I was convinced that the land between the ocean and the foothills was swampy, though directly before me it seemed dry enough all the way to the sandy strip along which the restless waters advanced and retreated.

Curiosity prompted me to walk down to the beach, for the scene was very beautiful. As I passed along beside the deep and tangled vegetation of the swamp I thought that I saw a movement of the ferns at my left, but though I stopped a moment to look it was not repeated, and if anything lay hid there my eyes could not penetrate the dense foliage to discern it.

Presently I stood upon the beach looking out over the wide and lonely sea across whose forbidding bosom no human being had yet ventured, to discover what strange and mysterious lands lay beyond, or what its invisible islands held of riches, wonders, or adventure. What savage faces, what fierce and formidable beasts were this very instant watching the lapping of the waves upon its farther shore! How far did it extend? Perry had told me that the seas of Pellucidar were small in comparison with those of the outer crust, but even so this great ocean might stretch its broad expanse for thousands of miles. For countless ages it had rolled up and down its countless miles of shore, and yet today it remained all unknown beyond the tiny strip that was visible from its beaches.

The fascination of speculation was strong upon me. It was as though I had been carried back to the birth time of our own outer world to look upon its lands and seas ages before man had traversed either. Here was a new world, all untouched. It called to me to explore it. I was dreaming of the excitement and adventure which lay before us could Perry and I but escape the Mahars, when something, a slight noise I imagine, drew my attention behind me.

As I turned, romance, adventure, and discovery in the abstract took wing before the terrible embodiment of all three in concrete form that I beheld advancing upon me.

A huge, slimy amphibian it was, with toad-like body and the mighty jaws of an alligator. Its immense carcass must have weighed tons, and yet it moved swiftly and silently toward me. Upon one hand was the bluff that ran from the canyon to the sea, on the other the fearsome swamp from which the creature had sneaked upon me, behind lay the mighty untracked sea, and before me in the center of the narrow way that led to safety stood this huge mountain of terrible and menacing flesh.

A single glance at the thing was sufficient to assure me that I was facing one of those long-extinct, prehistoric creatures whose fossilized remains are found within the outer crust as far back as the Triassic formation, a gigantic labyrinthodon. And there I was, unarmed, and, with the exception of a loin cloth, as naked as I had come into the world. I could imagine how my first ancestor felt that distant, prehistoric morn that he encountered for the first time the terrifying progenitor of the thing that had me cornered now beside the restless, mysterious sea.

Unquestionably he had escaped, or I should not have been within Pellucidar or elsewhere, and I wished at that moment that he had handed down to me with the various attributes that I presumed I have inherited from him, the specific application of the instinct of self-preservation which saved him from the fate which loomed so close before me today.

To seek escape in the swamp or in the ocean would have been similar to jumping into a den of lions to escape one upon the outside. The sea and swamp both were doubtless alive with these mighty, carnivorous amphibians, and if not, the individual that menaced me would pursue me into either the sea or the swamp with equal facility.

There seemed nothing to do but stand supinely and await my end. I thought of Perry--how he would wonder what had become of me. I thought of my friends of the outer world, and of how they all would go on living their lives in total ignorance of the strange and terrible fate that had overtaken me, or unguessing the weird surroundings which had witnessed the last frightful agony of my extinction. And with these thoughts came a realization of how unimportant to the life and happiness of the world is the existence of any one of us. We may be snuffed out without an instant's warning, and for a brief day our friends speak of us with subdued voices. The following morning, while the first worm is busily engaged in testing the construction of our coffin, they are teeing up for the first hole to suffer more acute sorrow over a sliced ball than they did over our, to us, untimely demise. The labyrinthodon was coming more slowly now. He seemed to realize that escape for me was impossible, and I could have sworn that his huge, fanged jaws grinned in pleasurable appreciation of my predicament, or was it in anticipation of the juicy morsel which would so soon be pulp between those formidable teeth?

He was about fifty feet from me when I heard a voice calling to me from the direction of the bluff at my left. I looked and could have shouted in delight at the sight that met my eyes, for there stood Ja, waving frantically to me, and urging me to run for it to the cliff's base.

I had no idea that I should escape the monster that had marked me for his breakfast, but at least I should not die alone. Human eyes would watch me end. It was cold comfort I presume, but yet I derived some slight peace of mind from the contemplation of it.

To run seemed ridiculous, especially toward that steep and unscalable cliff, and yet I did so, and as I ran I saw Ja, agile as a monkey, crawl down the precipitous face of the rocks, clinging to small projections, and the tough creepers that had found root-hold here and there.

The labyrinthodon evidently thought that Ja was coming to double his portion of human flesh, so he was in no haste to pursue me to the cliff and frighten away this other tidbit. Instead he merely trotted along behind me.

As I approached the foot of the cliff I saw what Ja intended doing, but I doubted if the thing would prove successful. He had come down to within twenty feet of the bottom, and there, clinging with one hand to a small ledge, and with his feet resting, precariously upon tiny bushes that grew from the solid face of the rock, he lowered the point of his long spear until it hung some six feet above the ground.

To clamber up that slim shaft without dragging Ja down and precipitating both to the same doom from which the copper-colored one was attempting to save me seemed utterly impossible, and as I came near the spear I told Ja so, and that I could not risk him to try to save myself.

But he insisted that he knew what he was doing and was in no danger himself.

"The danger is still yours," he called, "for unless you move much more rapidly than you are now, the sithic will be upon you and drag you back before ever you are halfway up the spear--he can rear up and reach you with ease anywhere below where I stand."

Well, Ja should know his own business, I thought, and so I grasped the spear and clambered up toward the red man as rapidly as I could--being so far removed from my simian ancestors as I am. I imagine the slow-witted sithic, as Ja called him, suddenly realized our intentions and that he was quite likely to lose all his meal instead of having it doubled as he had hoped.

When he saw me clambering up that spear he let out a hiss that fairly shook the ground, and came charging after me at a terrific rate. I had reached the top of the spear by this time, or almost; another six inches would give me a hold on Ja's hand, when I felt a sudden wrench from below and glancing fearfully downward saw the mighty jaws of the monster close on the sharp point of the weapon.

I made a frantic effort to reach Ja's hand, the sithic gave a tremendous tug that came near to jerking Ja from his frail hold on the surface of the rock, the spear slipped from his fingers, and still clinging to it I plunged feet foremost toward my executioner.

At the instant that he felt the spear come away from Ja's hand the creature must have opened his huge jaws to catch me, for when I came down, still clinging to the butt end of the weapon, the point yet rested in his mouth and the result was that the sharpened end transfixed his lower jaw.

With the pain he snapped his mouth closed. I fell upon his snout, lost my hold upon the spear, rolled the length of his face and head, across his short neck onto his broad back and from there to the ground.

Scarce had I touched the earth than I was upon my feet, dashing madly for the path by which I had entered this horrible valley. A glance over my shoulder showed me the sithic engaged in pawing at the spear stuck through his lower jaw, and so busily engaged did he remain in this occupation that I had gained the safety of the cliff top before he was ready to take up the pursuit. When he did not discover me in sight within the valley he dashed, hissing into the rank vegetation of the swamp and that was the last I saw of him.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

  

PHUTRA AGAIN

I hastened to the cliff edge above Ja and helped him to a secure footing. He would not listen to any thanks for his attempt to save me, which had come so near miscarrying.

"I had given you up for lost when you tumbled into the Mahar temple," he said, "for not even I could save you from their clutches, and you may imagine my surprise when on seeing a canoe dragged up upon the beach of the mainland I discovered your own footprints in the sand beside it.

"I immediately set out in search of you, knowing as I did that you must be entirely unarmed and defenseless against the many dangers which lurk upon the mainland both in the form of savage beasts and reptiles, and men as well. I had no difficulty in tracking you to this point. It is well that I arrived when I did."

"But why did you do it?" I asked, puzzled at this show of friendship on the part of a man of another world and a different race and color.

"You saved my life," he replied; "from that moment it became my duty to protect and befriend you. I would have been no true Mezop had I evaded my plain duty; but it was a pleasure in this instance for I like you. I wish that you would come and live with me. You shall become a member of my tribe. Among us there is the best of hunting and fishing, and you shall have, to choose a mate from, the most beautiful girls of Pellucidar. Will you come?"

I told him about Perry then, and Dian the Beautiful, and how my duty was to them first. Afterward I should return and visit him--if I could ever find his island.

"Oh, that is easy, my friend," he said. "You need merely to come to the foot of the highest peak of the Mountains of the Clouds. There you will find a river which flows into the Lural Az. Directly opposite the mouth of the river you will see three large islands far out, so far that they are barely discernible, the one to the extreme left as you face them from the mouth of the river is Anoroc, where I rule the tribe of Anoroc."

"But how am I to find the Mountains of the Clouds?" I asked. "Men say that they are visible from half Pellucidar," he replied.

"How large is Pellucidar?" I asked, wondering what sort of theory these primitive men had concerning the form and substance of their world.

"The Mahars say it is round, like the inside of a tola shell," he answered, "but that is ridiculous, since, were it true, we should fall back were we to travel far in any direction, and all the waters of Pellucidar would run to one spot and drown us. No, Pellucidar is quite flat and extends no man knows how far in all directions. At the edges, so my ancestors have reported and handed down to me, is a great wall that prevents the earth and waters from escaping over into the burning sea whereon Pellucidar floats; but I never have been so far from Anoroc as to have seen this wall with my own eyes. However, it is quite reasonable to believe that this is true, whereas there is no reason at all in the foolish belief of the Mahars. According to them Pellucidarians who live upon the opposite side walk always with their heads pointed downward!" and Ja laughed uproariously at the very thought.

It was plain to see that the human folk of this inner world had not advanced far in learning, and the thought that the ugly Mahars had so outstripped them was a very pathetic one indeed. I wondered how many ages it would take to lift these people out of their ignorance even were it given to Perry and me to attempt it. Possibly we would be killed for our pains as were those men of the outer world who dared challenge the dense ignorance and superstitions of the earth's younger days. But it was worth the effort if the opportunity ever presented itself.

And then it occurred to me that here was an opportunity--that I might make a small beginning upon Ja, who was my friend, and thus note the effect of my teaching upon a Pellucidarian.

"Ja," I said, "what would you say were I to tell you that in so far as the Mahars' theory of the shape of Pellucidar is concerned it is correct?"

"I would say," he replied, "that either you are a fool, or took me for one."

"But, Ja," I insisted, "if their theory is incorrect how do you account for the fact that I was able to pass through the earth from the outer crust to Pellucidar. If your theory is correct all is a sea of flame beneath us, where in no peoples could exist, and yet I come from a great world that is covered with human beings, and beasts, and birds, and fishes in mighty oceans."

"You live upon the under side of Pellucidar, and walk always with your head pointed downward?" he scoffed. "And were I to believe that, my friend, I should indeed be mad."

I attempted to explain the force of gravity to him, and by the means of the dropped fruit to illustrate how impossible it would be for a body to fall off the earth under any circumstances. He listened so intently that I thought I had made an impression, and started the train of thought that would lead him to a partial understanding of the truth. But I was mistaken.

"Your own illustration," he said finally, "proves the falsity of your theory." He dropped a fruit from his hand to the ground. "See," he said, "without support even this tiny fruit falls until it strikes something that stops it. If Pellucidar were not supported upon the flaming sea it too would fall as the fruit falls--you have proven it yourself!" He had me, that time--you could see it in his eye.

It seemed a hopeless job and I gave it up, temporarily at least, for when I contemplated the necessity explanation of our solar system and the universe I realized how futile it would be to attempt to picture to Ja or any other Pellucidarian the sun, the moon, the planets, and the countless stars. Those born within the inner world could no more conceive of such things than can we of the outer crust reduce to factors appreciable to our finite minds such terms as space and eternity.

"Well, Ja," I laughed, "whether we be walking with our feet up or down, here we are, and the question of greatest importance is not so much where we came from as where we are going now. For my part I wish that you could guide me to Phutra where I may give myself up to the Mahars once more that my friends and I may work out the plan of escape which the Sagoths interrupted when they gathered us together and drove us to the arena to witness the punishment of the slaves who killed the guardsman. I wish now that I had not left the arena for by this time my friends and I might have made good our escape, whereas this delay may mean the wrecking of all our plans, which depended for their consummation upon the continued sleep of the three Mahars who lay in the pit beneath the building in which we were confined."

"You would return to captivity?" cried Ja.

"My friends are there," I replied, "the only friends I have in Pellucidar, except yourself. What else may I do under the circumstances?"

He thought for a moment in silence. Then he shook his head sorrowfully.

"It is what a brave man and a good friend should do," he said; "yet it seems most foolish, for the Mahars will most certainly condemn you to death for running away, and so you will be accomplishing nothing for your friends by returning. Never in all my life have I heard of a prisoner returning to the Mahars of his own free will. There are but few who escape them, though some do, and these would rather die than be recaptured."

"I see no other way, Ja," I said, "though I can assure you that I would rather go to Sheol after Perry than to Phutra. However, Perry is much too pious to make the probability at all great that I should ever be called upon to rescue him from the former locality."

Ja asked me what Sheol was, and when I explained, as best I could, he said, "You are speaking of Molop Az, the flaming sea upon which Pellucidar floats. All the dead who are buried in the ground go there. Piece by piece they are carried down to Molop Az by the little demons who dwell there. We know this because when graves are opened we find that the bodies have been partially or entirely borne off. That is why we of Anoroc place our dead in high trees where the birds may find them and bear them bit by bit to the Dead World above the Land of Awful Shadow. If we kill an enemy we place his body in the ground that it may go to Molop Az."

As we talked we had been walking up the canyon down which I had come to the great ocean and the sithic. Ja did his best to dissuade me from returning to Phutra, but when he saw that I was determined to do so, he consented to guide me to a point from which I could see the plain where lay the city. To my surprise the distance was but short from the beach where I had again met Ja. It was evident that I had spent much time following the windings of a tortuous canon, while just beyond the ridge lay the city of Phutra near to which I must have come several times.

As we topped the ridge and saw the granite gate towers dotting the flowered plain at our feet Ja made a final effort to persuade me to abandon my mad purpose and return with him to Anoroc, but I was firm in my resolve, and at last he bid me good-bye, assured in his own mind that he was looking upon me for the last time.

I was sorry to part with Ja, for I had come to like him very much indeed. With his hidden city upon the island of Anoroc as a base, and his savage warriors as escort Perry and I could have accomplished much in the line of exploration, and I hoped that were we successful in our effort to escape we might return to Anoroc later.

There was, however, one great thing to be accomplished first--at least it was the great thing to me--the finding of Dian the Beautiful. I wanted to make amends for the affront I had put upon her in my ignorance, and I wanted to--well, I wanted to see her again, and to be with her.

Down the hillside I made my way into the gorgeous field of flowers, and then across the rolling land toward the shadowless columns that guard the ways to buried Phutra. At a quarter-mile from the nearest entrance I was discovered by the Sagoth guard, and in an instant four of the gorilla-men were dashing toward me.

Though they brandished their long spears and yelled like wild Comanches I paid not the slightest attention to them, walking quietly toward them as though unaware of their existence. My manner had the effect upon them that I had hoped, and as we came quite near together they ceased their savage shouting. It was evident that they had expected me to turn and flee at sight of them, thus presenting that which they most enjoyed, a moving human target at which to cast their spears.

"What do you here?" shouted one, and then as he recognized me, "Ho! It is the slave who claims to be from another world--he who escaped when the thag ran amuck within the amphitheater. But why do you return, having once made good your escape?"

"I did not 'escape'," I replied. "I but ran away to avoid the thag, as did others, and coming into a long passage I became confused and lost my way in the foothills beyond Phutra. Only now have I found my way back."

"And you come of your free will back to Phutra!" exclaimed one of the guardsmen.

"Where else might I go?" I asked. "I am a stranger within Pellucidar and know no other where than Phutra. Why should I not desire to be in Phutra? Am I not well fed and well treated? Am I not happy? What better lot could man desire?"

The Sagoths scratched their heads. This was a new one on them, and so being stupid brutes they took me to their masters whom they felt would be better fitted to solve the riddle of my return, for riddle they still considered it.

I had spoken to the Sagoths as I had for the purpose of throwing them off the scent of my purposed attempt at escape. If they thought that I was so satisfied with my lot within Phutra that I would voluntarily return when I had once had so excellent an opportunity to escape, they would never for an instant imagine that I could be occupied in arranging another escape immediately upon my return to the city.

So they led me before a slimy Mahar who clung to a slimy rock within the large room that was the thing's office. With cold, reptilian eyes the creature seemed to bore through the thin veneer of my deceit and read my inmost thoughts. It heeded the story which the Sagoths told of my return to Phutra, watching the gorilla-men's lips and fingers during the recital. Then it questioned me through one of the Sagoths.

"You say that you returned to Phutra of your own free will, because you think yourself better off here than elsewhere--do you not know that you may be the next chosen to give up your life in the interests of the wonderful scientific investigations that our learned ones are continually occupied with?"

I hadn't heard of anything of that nature, but I thought best not to admit it.

"I could be in no more danger here," I said, "than naked and unarmed in the savage jungles or upon the lonely plains of Pellucidar. I was fortunate, I think, to return to Phutra at all. As it was I barely escaped death within the jaws of a huge sithic. No, I am sure that I am safer in the hands of intelligent creatures such as rule Phutra. At least such would be the case in my own world, where human beings like myself rule supreme. There the higher races of man extend protection and hospitality to the stranger within their gates, and being a stranger here I naturally assumed that a like courtesy would be accorded me."

The Mahar looked at me in silence for some time after I ceased speaking and the Sagoth had translated my words to his master. The creature seemed deep in thought. Presently he communicated some message to the Sagoth. The latter turned, and motioning me to follow him, left the presence of the reptile. Behind and on either side of me marched the balance of the guard.

"What are they going to do with me?" I asked the fellow at my right.

"You are to appear before the learned ones who will question you regarding this strange world from which you say you come."

After a moment's silence he turned to me again.

"Do you happen to know," he asked, "what the Mahars do to slaves who lie to them?"

"No," I replied, "nor does it interest me, as I have no intention of lying to the Mahars."

"Then be careful that you don't repeat the impossible tale you told Sol-to-to just now--another world, indeed, where human beings rule!" he concluded in fine scorn.

"But it is the truth," I insisted. "From where else then did I come? I am not of Pellucidar. Anyone with half an eye could see that."

"It is your misfortune then," he remarked dryly, "that you may not be judged by one with but half an eye."

"What will they do with me," I asked, "if they do not have a mind to believe me?"

"You may be sentenced to the arena, or go to the pits to be used in research work by the learned ones," he replied.

"And what will they do with me there?" I persisted.

"No one knows except the Mahars and those who go to the pits with them, but as the latter never return, their knowledge does them but little good. It is said that the learned ones cut up their subjects while they are yet alive, thus learning many useful things. However I should not imagine that it would prove very useful to him who was being cut up; but of course this is all but conjecture. The chances are that ere long you will know much more about it than I," and he grinned as he spoke. The Sagoths have a well-developed sense of humor.

"And suppose it is the arena," I continued; "what then?"

"You saw the two who met the tarag and the thag the time that you escaped?" he said.

"Yes."

"Your end in the arena would be similar to what was intended for them," he explained, "though of course the same kinds of animals might not be employed."

"It is sure death in either event?" I asked.

"What becomes of those who go below with the learned ones I do not know, nor does any other," he replied; "but those who go to the arena may come out alive and thus regain their liberty, as did the two whom you saw."

"They gained their liberty? And how?"

"It is the custom of the Mahars to liberate those who remain alive within the arena after the beasts depart or are killed. Thus it has happened that several mighty warriors from far distant lands, whom we have captured on our slave raids, have battled the brutes turned in upon them and slain them, thereby winning their freedom. In the instance which you witnessed the beasts killed each other, but the result was the same--the man and woman were liberated, furnished with weapons, and started on their homeward journey. Upon the left shoulder of each a mark was burned--the mark of the Mahars--which will forever protect these two from slaving parties."

"There is a slender chance for me then if I be sent to the arena, and none at all if the learned ones drag me to the pits?"

"You are quite right," he replied; "but do not felicitate yourself too quickly should you be sent to the arena, for there is scarce one in a thousand who comes out alive."

To my surprise they returned me to the same building in which I had been confined with Perry and Ghak before my escape. At the doorway I was turned over to the guards there.

"He will doubtless be called before the investigators shortly," said he who had brought me back, "so have him in readiness."

The guards in whose hands I now found myself, upon hearing that I had returned of my own volition to Phutra evidently felt that it would be safe to give me liberty within the building as had been the custom before I had escaped, and so I was told to return to whatever duty had been mine formerly.

My first act was to hunt up Perry; whom I found poring as usual over the great tomes that he was supposed to be merely dusting and rearranging upon new shelves.

As I entered the room he glanced up and nodded pleasantly to me, only to resume his work as though I had never been away at all. I was both astonished and hurt at his indifference. And to think that I was risking death to return to him purely from a sense of duty and affection!

"Why, Perry!" I exclaimed, "haven't you a word for me after my long absence?"

"Long absence!" he repeated in evident astonishment. "What do you mean?"

"Are you crazy, Perry? Do you mean to say that you have not missed me since that time we were separated by the charging thag within the arena?"

"'That time'," he repeated. "Why man, I have but just returned from the arena! You reached here almost as soon as I. Had you been much later I should indeed have been worried, and as it is I had intended asking you about how you escaped the beast as soon as I had completed the translation of this most interesting passage."

"Perry, you are mad," I exclaimed. "Why, the Lord only knows how long I have been away. I have been to other lands, discovered a new race of humans within Pellucidar, seen the Mahars at their worship in their hidden temple, and barely escaped with my life from them and from a great labyrinthodon that I met afterward, following my long and tedious wanderings across an unknown world. I must have been away for months, Perry, and now you barely look up from your work when I return and insist that we have been separated but a moment. Is that any way to treat a friend? I'm surprised at you, Perry, and if I'd thought for a moment that you cared no more for me than this I should not have returned to chance death at the hands of the Mahars for your sake."

The old man looked at me for a long time before he spoke. There was a puzzled expression upon his wrinkled face, and a look of hurt sorrow in his eyes.

"David, my boy," he said, "how could you for a moment doubt my love for you? There is something strange here that I cannot understand. I know that I am not mad, and I am equally sure that you are not; but how in the world are we to account for the strange hallucinations that each of us seems to harbor relative to the passage of time since last we saw each other. You are positive that months have gone by, while to me it seems equally certain that not more than an hour ago I sat beside you in the amphitheater. Can it be that both of us are right and at the same time both are wrong? First tell me what time is, and then maybe I can solve our problem. Do you catch my meaning?"

I didn't and said so.

"Yes," continued the old man, "we are both right. To me, bent over my book here, there has been no lapse of time. I have done little or nothing to waste my energies and so have required neither food nor sleep, but you, on the contrary, have walked and fought and wasted strength and tissue which must needs be rebuilt by nutriment and food, and so, having eaten and slept many times since last you saw me you naturally measure the lapse of time largely by these acts. As a matter of fact, David, I am rapidly coming to the conviction that there is no such thing as time--surely there can be no time here within Pellucidar, where there are no means for measuring or recording time. Why, the Mahars themselves take no account of such a thing as time. I find here in all their literary works but a single tense, the present. There seems to be neither past nor future with them. Of course it is impossible for our outer-earthly minds to grasp such a condition, but our recent experiences seem to demonstrate its existence."

It was too big a subject for me, and I said so, but Perry seemed to enjoy nothing better than speculating upon it, and after listening with interest to my account of the adventures through which I had passed he returned once more to the subject, which he was enlarging upon with considerable fluency when he was interrupted by the entrance of a Sagoth.

"Come!" commanded the intruder, beckoning to me. "The investigators would speak with you."

"Good-bye, Perry!" I said, clasping the old man's hand. "There may be nothing but the present and no such thing as time, but I feel that I am about to take a trip into the hereafter from which I shall never return. If you and Ghak should manage to escape I want you to promise me that you will find Dian the Beautiful and tell her that with my last words I asked her forgiveness for the unintentional affront I put upon her, and that my one wish was to be spared long enough to right the wrong that I had done her."

Tears came to Perry's eyes.

"I cannot believe but that you will return, David," he said. "It would be awful to think of living out the balance of my life without you among these hateful and repulsive creatures. If you are taken away I shall never escape, for I feel that I am as well off here as I should be anywhere within this buried world. Good-bye, my boy, good-bye!" and then his old voice faltered and broke, and as he hid his face in his hands the Sagoth guardsman grasped me roughly by the shoulder and hustled me from the chamber.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

  

FOUR DEAD MAHARS

A moment later I was standing before a dozen Mahars--the social investigators of Phutra. They asked me many questions, through a Sagoth interpreter. I answered them all truthfully. They seemed particularly interested in my account of the outer earth and the strange vehicle which had brought Perry and me to Pellucidar. I thought that I had convinced them, and after they had sat in silence for a long time following my examination, I expected to be ordered returned to my quarters.

During this apparent silence they were debating through the medium of strange, unspoken language the merits of my tale. At last the head of the tribunal communicated the result of their conference to the officer in charge of the Sagoth guard.

"Come," he said to me, "you are sentenced to the experimental pits for having dared to insult the intelligence of the mighty ones with the ridiculous tale you have had the temerity to unfold to them."

"Do you mean that they do not believe me?" I asked, totally astonished.

"Believe you!" he laughed. "Do you mean to say that you expected any one to believe so impossible a lie?"

It was hopeless, and so I walked in silence beside my guard down through the dark corridors and runways toward my awful doom. At a low level we came upon a number of lighted chambers in which we saw many Mahars engaged in various occupations. To one of these chambers my guard escorted me, and before leaving they chained me to a side wall. There were other humans similarly chained. Upon a long table lay a victim even as I was ushered into the room. Several Mahars stood about the poor creature holding him down so that he could not move. Another, grasping a sharp knife with her three-toed fore foot, was laying open the victim's chest and abdomen. No anesthetic had been administered and the shrieks and groans of the tortured man were terrible to hear. This, indeed, was vivisection with a vengeance. Cold sweat broke out upon me as I realized that soon my turn would come. And to think that where there was no such thing as time I might easily imagine that my suffering was enduring for months before death finally released me!

The Mahars had paid not the slightest attention to me as I had been brought into the room. So deeply immersed were they in their work that I am sure they did not even know that the Sagoths had entered with me. The door was close by. Would that I could reach it! But those heavy chains precluded any such possibility. I looked about for some means of escape from my bonds. Upon the floor between me and the Mahars lay a tiny surgical instrument which one of them must have dropped. It looked not unlike a button-hook, but was much smaller, and its point was sharpened. A hundred times in my boyhood days had I picked locks with a button-hook. Could I but reach that little bit of polished steel I might yet effect at least a temporary escape.

Crawling to the limit of my chain, I found that by reaching one hand as far out as I could my fingers still fell an inch short of the coveted instrument. It was tantalizing! Stretch every fiber of my being as I would, I could not quite make it.

At last I turned about and extended one foot toward the object. My heart came to my throat! I could just touch the thing! But suppose that in my effort to drag it toward me I should accidentally shove it still farther away and thus entirely out of reach! Cold sweat broke out upon me from every pore. Slowly and cautiously I made the effort. My toes dropped upon the cold metal. Gradually I worked it toward me until I felt that it was within reach of my hand and a moment later I had turned about and the precious thing was in my grasp.

Assiduously I fell to work upon the Mahar lock that held my chain. It was pitifully simple. A child might have picked it, and a moment later I was free. The Mahars were now evidently completing their work at the table. One already turned away and was examining other victims, evidently with the intention of selecting the next subject.

Those at the table had their backs toward me. But for the creature walking toward us I might have escaped that moment. Slowly the thing approached me, when its attention was attracted by a huge slave chained a few yards to my right. Here the reptile stopped and commenced to go over the poor devil carefully, and as it did so its back turned toward me for an instant, and in that instant I gave two mighty leaps that carried me out of the chamber into the corridor beyond, down which I raced with all the speed I could command.

Where I was, or whither I was going, I knew not. My only thought was to place as much distance as possible between me and that frightful chamber of torture.

Presently I reduced my speed to a brisk walk, and later realizing the danger of running into some new predicament, were I not careful, I moved still more slowly and cautiously. After a time I came to a passage that seemed in some mysterious way familiar to me, and presently, chancing to glance within a chamber which led from the corridor I saw three Mahars curled up in slumber upon a bed of skins. I could have shouted aloud in joy and relief. It was the same corridor and the same Mahars that I had intended to have lead so important a role in our escape from Phutra. Providence had indeed been kind to me, for the reptiles still slept.

My one great danger now lay in returning to the upper levels in search of Perry and Ghak, but there was nothing else to be done, and so I hastened upward. When I came to the frequented portions of the building, I found a large burden of skins in a corner and these I lifted to my head, carrying them in such a way that ends and corners fell down about my shoulders completely hiding my face. Thus disguised I found Perry and Ghak together in the chamber where we had been wont to eat and sleep.

Both were glad to see me, it was needless to say, though of course they had known nothing of the fate that had been meted out to me by my judges. It was decided that no time should now be lost before attempting to put our plan of escape to the test, as I could not hope to remain hidden from the Sagoths long, nor could I forever carry that bale of skins about upon my head without arousing suspicion. However it seemed likely that it would carry me once more safely through the crowded passages and chambers of the upper levels, and so I set out with Perry and Ghak--the stench of the illy cured pelts fairly choking me.

Together we repaired to the first tier of corridors beneath the main floor of the buildings, and here Perry and Ghak halted to await me. The buildings are cut out of the solid limestone formation. There is nothing at all remarkable about their architecture. The rooms are sometimes rectangular, sometimes circular, and again oval in shape. The corridors which connect them are narrow and not always straight. The chambers are lighted by diffused sunlight reflected through tubes similar to those by which the avenues are lighted. The lower the tiers of chambers, the darker. Most of the corridors are entirely unlighted. The Mahars can see quite well in semidarkness.

Down to the main floor we encountered many Mahars, Sagoths, and slaves; but no attention was paid to us as we had become a part of the domestic life of the building. There was but a single entrance leading from the place into the avenue and this was well guarded by Sagoths--this doorway alone were we forbidden to pass. It is true that we were not supposed to enter the deeper corridors and apartments except on special occasions when we were instructed to do so; but as we were considered a lower order without intelligence there was little reason to fear that we could accomplish any harm by so doing, and so we were not hindered as we entered the corridor which led below.

Wrapped in a skin I carried three swords, and the two bows, and the arrows which Perry and I had fashioned. As many slaves bore skin-wrapped burdens to and fro my load attracted no comment. Where I left Ghak and Perry there were no other creatures in sight, and so I withdrew one sword from the package, and leaving the balance of the weapons with Perry, started on alone toward the lower levels.

Having come to the apartment in which the three Mahars slept I entered silently on tiptoe, forgetting that the creatures were without the sense of hearing. With a quick thrust through the heart I disposed of the first but my second thrust was not so fortunate, so that before I could kill the next of my victims it had hurled itself against the third, who sprang quickly up, facing me with wide-distended jaws. But fighting is not the occupation which the race of Mahars loves, and when the thing saw that I already had dispatched two of its companions, and that my sword was red with their blood, it made a dash to escape me. But I was too quick for it, and so, half hopping, half flying, it scurried down another corridor with me close upon its heels.

Its escape meant the utter ruin of our plan, and in all probability my instant death. This thought lent wings to my feet; but even at my best I could do no more than hold my own with the leaping thing before me.

Of a sudden it turned into an apartment on the right of the corridor, and an instant later as I rushed in I found myself facing two of the Mahars. The one who had been there when we entered had been occupied with a number of metal vessels, into which had been put powders and liquids as I judged from the array of flasks standing about upon the bench where it had been working. In an instant I realized what I had stumbled upon. It was the very room for the finding of which Perry had given me minute directions. It was the buried chamber in which was hidden the Great Secret of the race of Mahars. And on the bench beside the flasks lay the skin-bound book which held the only copy of the thing I was to have sought, after dispatching the three Mahars in their sleep.

There was no exit from the room other than the doorway in which I now stood facing the two frightful reptiles. Cornered, I knew that they would fight like demons, and they were well equipped to fight if fight they must. Together they launched themselves upon me, and though I ran one of them through the heart on the instant, the other fastened its gleaming fangs about my sword arm above the elbow, and then with her sharp talons commenced to rake me about the body, evidently intent upon disemboweling me. I saw that it was useless to hope that I might release my arm from that powerful, viselike grip which seemed to be severing my arm from my body. The pain I suffered was intense, but it only served to spur me to greater efforts to overcome my antagonist.

Back and forth across the floor we struggled--the Mahar dealing me terrific, cutting blows with her fore feet, while I attempted to protect my body with my left hand, at the same time watching for an opportunity to transfer my blade from my now useless sword hand to its rapidly weakening mate. At last I was successful, and with what seemed to me my last ounce of strength I ran the blade through the ugly body of my foe.

Soundless, as it had fought, it died, and though weak from pain and loss of blood, it was with an emotion of triumphant pride that I stepped across its convulsively stiffening corpse to snatch up the most potent secret of a world. A single glance assured me it was the very thing that Perry had described to me.

And as I grasped it did I think of what it meant to the human race of Pellucidar--did there flash through my mind the thought that countless generations of my own kind yet unborn would have reason to worship me for the thing that I had accomplished for them? I did not. I thought of a beautiful oval face, gazing out of limpid eyes, through a waving mass of jet-black hair. I thought of red, red lips, God-made for kissing. And of a sudden, apropos of nothing, standing there alone in the secret chamber of the Mahars of Pellucidar, I realized that I loved Dian the Beautiful.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII

  

PURSUIT

For an instant I stood there thinking of her, and then, with a sigh, I tucked the book in the thong that supported my loin cloth, and turned to leave the apartment. At the bottom of the corridor which leads aloft from the lower chambers I whistled in accordance with the prearranged signal which was to announce to Perry and Ghak that I had been successful. A moment later they stood beside me, and to my surprise I saw that Hooja the Sly One accompanied them.

"He joined us," explained Perry, "and would not be denied. The fellow is a fox. He scents escape, and rather than be thwarted of our chance now I told him that I would bring him to you, and let you decide whether he might accompany us."

I had no love for Hooja, and no confidence in him. I was sure that if he thought it would profit him he would betray us; but I saw no way out of it now, and the fact that I had killed four Mahars instead of only the three I had expected to, made it possible to include the fellow in our scheme of escape.

"Very well," I said, "you may come with us, Hooja; but at the first intimation of treachery I shall run my sword through you. Do you understand?"

He said that he did.

Some time later we had removed the skins from the four Mahars, and so succeeded in crawling inside of them ourselves that there seemed an excellent chance for us to pass unnoticed from Phutra. It was not an easy thing to fasten the hides together where we had split them along the belly to remove them from their carcasses, but by remaining out until the others had all been sewed in with my help, and then leaving an aperture in the breast of Perry's skin through which he could pass his hands to sew me up, we were enabled to accomplish our design to really much better purpose than I had hoped. We managed to keep the heads erect by passing our swords up through the necks, and by the same means were enabled to move them about in a life-like manner. We had our greatest difficulty with the webbed feet, but even that problem was finally solved, so that when we moved about we did so quite naturally. Tiny holes punctured in the baggy throats into which our heads were thrust permitted us to see well enough to guide our progress.

Thus we started up toward the main floor of the building. Ghak headed the strange procession, then came Perry, followed by Hooja, while I brought up the rear, after admonishing Hooja that I had so arranged my sword that I could thrust it through the head of my disguise into his vitals were he to show any indication of faltering.

As the noise of hurrying feet warned me that we were entering the busy corridors of the main level, my heart came up into my mouth. It is with no sense of shame that I admit that I was frightened--never before in my life, nor since, did I experience any such agony of soulsearing fear and suspense as enveloped me. If it be possible to sweat blood, I sweat it then.

Slowly, after the manner of locomotion habitual to the Mahars, when they are not using their wings, we crept through throngs of busy slaves, Sagoths, and Mahars. After what seemed an eternity we reached the outer door which leads into the main avenue of Phutra. Many Sagoths loitered near the opening. They glanced at Ghak as he padded between them. Then Perry passed, and then Hooja. Now it was my turn, and then in a sudden fit of freezing terror I realized that the warm blood from my wounded arm was trickling down through the dead foot of the Mahar skin I wore and leaving its tell-tale mark upon the pavement, for I saw a Sagoth call a companion's attention to it.

The guard stepped before me and pointing to my bleeding foot spoke to me in the sign language which these two races employ as a means of communication. Even had I known what he was saying I could not have replied with the dead thing that covered me. I once had seen a great Mahar freeze a presumptuous Sagoth with a look. It seemed my only hope, and so I tried it. Stopping in my tracks I moved my sword so that it made the dead head appear to turn inquiring eyes upon the gorilla-man. For a long moment I stood perfectly still, eyeing the fellow with those dead eyes. Then I lowered the head and started slowly on. For a moment all hung in the balance, but before I touched him the guard stepped to one side, and I passed on out into the avenue.

On we went up the broad street, but now we were safe for the very numbers of our enemies that surrounded us on all sides. Fortunately, there was a great concourse of Mahars repairing to the shallow lake which lies a mile or more from the city. They go there to indulge their amphibian proclivities in diving for small fish, and enjoying the cool depths of the water. It is a fresh-water lake, shallow, and free from the larger reptiles which make the use of the great seas of Pellucidar impossible for any but their own kind.

In the thick of the crowd we passed up the steps and out onto the plain. For some distance Ghak remained with the stream that was traveling toward the lake, but finally, at the bottom of a little gully he halted, and there we remained until all had passed and we were alone. Then, still in our disguises, we set off directly away from Phutra.

The heat of the vertical rays of the sun was fast making our horrible prisons unbearable, so that after passing a low divide, and entering a sheltering forest, we finally discarded the Mahar skins that had brought us thus far in safety.

I shall not weary you with the details of that bitter and galling flight. How we traveled at a dogged run until we dropped in our tracks. How we were beset by strange and terrible beasts. How we barely escaped the cruel fangs of lions and tigers the size of which would dwarf into pitiful insignificance the greatest felines of the outer world.

On and on we raced, our one thought to put as much distance between ourselves and Phutra as possible. Ghak was leading us to his own land--the land of Sari. No sign of pursuit had developed, and yet we were sure that somewhere behind us relentless Sagoths were dogging our tracks. Ghak said they never failed to hunt down their quarry until they had captured it or themselves been turned back by a superior force.

Our only hope, he said, lay in reaching his tribe which was quite strong enough in their mountain fastness to beat off any number of Sagoths.

At last, after what seemed months, and may, I now realize, have been years, we came in sight of the dun escarpment which buttressed the foothills of Sari. At almost the same instant, Hooja, who looked ever quite as much behind as before, announced that he could see a body of men far behind us topping a low ridge in our wake. It was the long-expected pursuit.

I asked Ghak if we could make Sari in time to escape them.

"We may," he replied; "but you will find that the Sagoths can move with incredible swiftness, and as they are almost tireless they are doubtless much fresher than we. Then--" he paused, glancing at Perry.

I knew what he meant. The old man was exhausted. For much of the period of our flight either Ghak or I had half supported him on the march. With such a handicap, less fleet pursuers than the Sagoths might easily overtake us before we could scale the rugged heights which confronted us.

"You and Hooja go on ahead," I said. "Perry and I will make it if we are able. We cannot travel as rapidly as you two, and there is no reason why all should be lost because of that. It can't be helped--we have simply to face it."

"I will not desert a companion," was Ghak's simple reply. I hadn't known that this great, hairy, primeval man had any such nobility of character stowed away inside him. I had always liked him, but now to my liking was added honor and respect. Yes, and love.

But still I urged him to go on ahead, insisting that if he could reach his people he might be able to bring out a sufficient force to drive off the Sagoths and rescue Perry and myself.

No, he wouldn't leave us, and that was all there was to it, but he suggested that Hooja might hurry on and warn the Sarians of the king's danger. It didn't require much urging to start Hooja--the naked idea was enough to send him leaping on ahead of us into the foothills which we now had reached.

Perry realized that he was jeopardizing Ghak's life and mine and the old fellow fairly begged us to go on without him, although I knew that he was suffering a perfect anguish of terror at the thought of falling into the hands of the Sagoths. Ghak finally solved the problem, in part, by lifting Perry in his powerful arms and carrying him. While the act cut down Ghak's speed he still could travel faster thus than when half supporting the stumbling old man.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII

  

THE SLY ONE

The Sagoths were gaining on us rapidly, for once they had sighted us they had greatly increased their speed. On and on we stumbled up the narrow canyon that Ghak had chosen to approach the heights of Sari. On either side rose precipitous cliffs of gorgeous, parti-colored rock, while beneath our feet a thick mountain grass formed a soft and noiseless carpet. Since we had entered the canyon we had had no glimpse of our pursuers, and I was commencing to hope that they had lost our trail and that we would reach the now rapidly nearing cliffs in time to scale them before we should be overtaken.

Ahead we neither saw nor heard any sign which might betoken the success of Hooja's mission. By now he should have reached the outposts of the Sarians, and we should at least hear the savage cries of the tribesmen as they swarmed to arms in answer to their king's appeal for succor. In another moment the frowning cliffs ahead should be black with primeval warriors. But nothing of the kind happened--as a matter of fact the Sly One had betrayed us. At the moment that we expected to see Sarian spearmen charging to our relief at Hooja's back, the craven traitor was sneaking around the outskirts of the nearest Sarian village, that he might come up from the other side when it was too late to save us, claiming that he had become lost among the mountains.

Hooja still harbored ill will against me because of the blow I had struck in Dian's protection, and his malevolent spirit was equal to sacrificing us all that he might be revenged upon me.

As we drew nearer the barrier cliffs and no sign of rescuing Sarians appeared Ghak became both angry and alarmed, and presently as the sound of rapidly approaching pursuit fell upon our ears, he called to me over his shoulder that we were lost.

A backward glance gave me a glimpse of the first of the Sagoths at the far end of a considerable stretch of canyon through which we had just passed, and then a sudden turning shut the ugly creature from my view; but the loud howl of triumphant rage which rose behind us was evidence that the gorilla-man had sighted us.

Again the canyon veered sharply to the left, but to the right another branch ran on at a lesser deviation from the general direction, so that appeared more like the main canyon than the left-hand branch. The Sagoths were now not over two hundred and fifty yards behind us, and I saw that it was hopeless for us to expect to escape other than by a ruse. There was a bare chance of saving Ghak and Perry, and as I reached the branching of the canyon I took the chance.

Pausing there I waited until the foremost Sagoth hove into sight. Ghak and Perry had disappeared around a bend in the left-hand canyon, and as the Sagoth's savage yell announced that he had seen me I turned and fled up the right-hand branch. My ruse was successful, and the entire party of man-hunters raced headlong after me up one canyon while Ghak bore Perry to safety up the other.

Running has never been my particular athletic forte, and now when my very life depended upon fleetness of foot I cannot say that I ran any better than on the occasions when my pitiful base running had called down upon my head the rooter's raucous and reproachful cries of "Ice Wagon," and "Call a cab."

The Sagoths were gaining on me rapidly. There was one in particular, fleeter than his fellows, who was perilously close. The canyon had become a rocky slit, rising roughly at a steep angle toward what seemed a pass between two abutting peaks. What lay beyond I could not even guess--possibly a sheer drop of hundreds of feet into the corresponding valley upon the other side. Could it be that I had plunged into a cul-de-sac?

Realizing that I could not hope to outdistance the Sagoths to the top of the canyon I had determined to risk all in an attempt to check them temporarily, and to this end had unslung my rudely made bow and plucked an arrow from the skin quiver which hung behind my shoulder. As I fitted the shaft with my right hand I stopped and wheeled toward the gorilla-man.

In the world of my birth I never had drawn a shaft, but since our escape from Phutra I had kept the party supplied with small game by means of my arrows, and so, through necessity, had developed a fair degree of accuracy. During our flight from Phutra I had restrung my bow with a piece of heavy gut taken from a huge tiger which Ghak and I had worried and finally dispatched with arrows, spear, and sword. The hard wood of the bow was extremely tough and this, with the strength and elasticity of my new string, gave me unwonted confidence in my weapon.

Never had I greater need of steady nerves than then--never were my nerves and muscles under better control. I sighted as carefully and deliberately as though at a straw target. The Sagoth had never before seen a bow and arrow, but of a sudden it must have swept over his dull intellect that the thing I held toward him was some sort of engine of destruction, for he too came to a halt, simultaneously swinging his hatchet for a throw. It is one of the many methods in which they employ this weapon, and the accuracy of aim which they achieve, even under the most unfavorable circumstances, is little short of miraculous.

My shaft was drawn back its full length--my eye had centered its sharp point upon the left breast of my adversary; and then he launched his hatchet and I released my arrow. At the instant that our missiles flew I leaped to one side, but the Sagoth sprang forward to follow up his attack with a spear thrust. I felt the swish of the hatchet at it grazed my head, and at the same instant my shaft pierced the Sagoth's savage heart, and with a single groan he lunged almost at my feet--stone dead. Close behind him were two more--fifty yards perhaps--but the distance gave me time to snatch up the dead guardsman's shield, for the close call his hatchet had just given me had borne in upon me the urgent need I had for one. Those which I had purloined at Phutra we had not been able to bring along because their size precluded our concealing them within the skins of the Mahars which had brought us safely from the city.

With the shield slipped well up on my left arm I let fly with another arrow, which brought down a second Sagoth, and then as his fellow's hatchet sped toward me I caught it upon the shield, and fitted another shaft for him; but he did not wait to receive it. Instead, he turned and retreated toward the main body of gorilla-men. Evidently he had seen enough of me for the moment.

Once more I took up my flight, nor were the Sagoths apparently overanxious to press their pursuit so closely as before. Unmolested I reached the top of the canyon where I found a sheer drop of two or three hundred feet to the bottom of a rocky chasm; but on the left a narrow ledge rounded the shoulder of the overhanging cliff. Along this I advanced, and at a sudden turning, a few yards beyond the canyon's end, the path widened, and at my left I saw the opening to a large cave. Before, the ledge continued until it passed from sight about another projecting buttress of the mountain.

Here, I felt, I could defy an army, for but a single foeman could advance upon me at a time, nor could he know that I was awaiting him until he came full upon me around the corner of the turn. About me lay scattered stones crumbled from the cliff above. They were of various sizes and shapes, but enough were of handy dimensions for use as ammunition in lieu of my precious arrows. Gathering a number of stones into a little pile beside the mouth of the cave I waited the advance of the Sagoths.

As I stood there, tense and silent, listening for the first faint sound that should announce the approach of my enemies, a slight noise from within the cave's black depths attracted my attention. It might have been produced by the moving of the great body of some huge beast rising from the rock floor of its lair. At almost the same instant I thought that I caught the scraping of hide sandals upon the ledge beyond the turn. For the next few seconds my attention was considerably divided.

And then from the inky blackness at my right I saw two flaming eyes glaring into mine. They were on a level that was over two feet above my head. It is true that the beast who owned them might be standing upon a ledge within the cave, or that it might be rearing up upon its hind legs; but I had seen enough of the monsters of Pellucidar to know that I might be facing some new and frightful Titan whose dimensions and ferocity eclipsed those of any I had seen before.

Whatever it was, it was coming slowly toward the entrance of the cave, and now, deep and forbidding, it uttered a low and ominous growl. I waited no longer to dispute possession of the ledge with the thing which owned that voice. The noise had not been loud--I doubt if the Sagoths heard it at all--but the suggestion of latent possibilities behind it was such that I knew it would only emanate from a gigantic and ferocious beast.

As I backed along the ledge I soon was past the mouth of the cave, where I no longer could see those fearful flaming eyes, but an instant later I caught sight of the fiendish face of a Sagoth as it warily advanced beyond the cliff's turn on the far side of the cave's mouth. As the fellow saw me he leaped along the ledge in pursuit, and after him came as many of his companions as could crowd upon each other's heels. At the same time the beast emerged from the cave, so that he and the Sagoths came face to face upon that narrow ledge.

The thing was an enormous cave bear, rearing its colossal bulk fully eight feet at the shoulder, while from the tip of its nose to the end of its stubby tail it was fully twelve feet in length. As it sighted the Sagoths it emitted a most frightful roar, and with open mouth charged full upon them. With a cry of terror the foremost gorilla-man turned to escape, but behind him he ran full upon his on-rushing companions.

The horror of the following seconds is indescribable. The Sagoth nearest the cave bear, finding his escape blocked, turned and leaped deliberately to an awful death upon the jagged rocks three hundred feet below. Then those giant jaws reached out and gathered in the next--there was a sickening sound of crushing bones, and the mangled corpse was dropped over the cliff's edge. Nor did the mighty beast even pause in his steady advance along the ledge.

Shrieking Sagoths were now leaping madly over the precipice to escape him, and the last I saw he rounded the turn still pursuing the demoralized remnant of the man hunters. For a long time I could hear the horrid roaring of the brute intermingled with the screams and shrieks of his victims, until finally the awful sounds dwindled and disappeared in the distance.

Later I learned from Ghak, who had finally come to his tribesmen and returned with a party to rescue me, that the ryth, as it is called, pursued the Sagoths until it had exterminated the entire band. Ghak was, of course, positive that I had fallen prey to the terrible creature, which, within Pellucidar, is truly the king of beasts.

Not caring to venture back into the canyon, where I might fall prey either to the cave bear or the Sagoths I continued on along the ledge, believing that by following around the mountain I could reach the land of Sari from another direction. But I evidently became confused by the twisting and turning of the canyons and gullies, for I did not come to the land of Sari then, nor for a long time thereafter.

     
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIV

  

THE GARDEN OF EDEN

With no heavenly guide, it is little wonder that I became confused and lost in the labyrinthine maze of those mighty hills. What, in reality, I did was to pass entirely through them and come out above the valley upon the farther side. I know that I wandered for a long time, until tired and hungry I came upon a small cave in the face of the limestone formation which had taken the place of the granite farther back.

The cave which took my fancy lay halfway up the precipitous side of a lofty cliff. The way to it was such that I knew no extremely formidable beast could frequent it, nor was it large enough to make a comfortable habitat for any but the smaller mammals or reptiles. Yet it was with the utmost caution that I crawled within its dark interior.

Here I found a rather large chamber, lighted by a narrow cleft in the rock above which let the sunlight filter in in sufficient quantities partially to dispel the utter darkness which I had expected. The cave was entirely empty, nor were there any signs of its having been recently occupied. The opening was comparatively small, so that after considerable effort I was able to lug up a bowlder from the valley below which entirely blocked it.

Then I returned again to the valley for an armful of grasses and on this trip was fortunate enough to knock over an orthopi, the diminutive horse of Pellucidar, a little animal about the size of a fox terrier, which abounds in all parts of the inner world. Thus, with food and bedding I returned to my lair, where after a meal of raw meat, to which I had now become quite accustomed, I dragged the bowlder before the entrance and curled myself upon a bed of grasses--a naked, primeval, cave man, as savagely primitive as my prehistoric progenitors.

I awoke rested but hungry, and pushing the bowlder aside crawled out upon the little rocky shelf which was my front porch. Before me spread a small but beautiful valley, through the center of which a clear and sparkling river wound its way down to an inland sea, the blue waters of which were just visible between the two mountain ranges which embraced this little paradise. The sides of the opposite hills were green with verdure, for a great forest clothed them to the foot of the red and yellow and copper green of the towering crags which formed their summit. The valley itself was carpeted with a luxuriant grass, while here and there patches of wild flowers made great splashes of vivid color against the prevailing green.

Dotted over the face of the valley were little clusters of palmlike trees--three or four together as a rule. Beneath these stood antelope, while others grazed in the open, or wandered gracefully to a nearby ford to drink. There were several species of this beautiful animal, the most magnificent somewhat resembling the giant eland of Africa, except that their spiral horns form a complete curve backward over their ears and then forward again beneath them, ending in sharp and formidable points some two feet before the face and above the eyes. In size they remind one of a pure bred Hereford bull, yet they are very agile and fast. The broad yellow bands that stripe the dark roan of their coats made me take them for zebra when I first saw them. All in all they are handsome animals, and added the finishing touch to the strange and lovely landscape that spread before my new home.

I had determined to make the cave my headquarters, and with it as a base make a systematic exploration of the surrounding country in search of the land of Sari. First I devoured the remainder of the carcass of the orthopi I had killed before my last sleep. Then I hid the Great Secret in a deep niche at the back of my cave, rolled the bowlder before my front door, and with bow, arrows, sword, and shield scrambled down into the peaceful valley.

The grazing herds moved to one side as I passed through them, the little orthopi evincing the greatest wariness and galloping to safest distances. All the animals stopped feeding as I approached, and after moving to what they considered a safe distance stood contemplating me with serious eyes and up-cocked ears. Once one of the old bull antelopes of the striped species lowered his head and bellowed angrily--even taking a few steps in my direction, so that I thought he meant to charge; but after I had passed, he resumed feeding as though nothing had disturbed him.

Near the lower end of the valley I passed a number of tapirs, and across the river saw a great sadok, the enormous double-horned progenitor of the modern rhinoceros. At the valley's end the cliffs upon the left ran out into the sea, so that to pass around them as I desired to do it was necessary to scale them in search of a ledge along which I might continue my journey. Some fifty feet from the base I came upon a projection which formed a natural path along the face of the cliff, and this I followed out over the sea toward the cliff's end.

Here the ledge inclined rapidly upward toward the top of the cliffs--the stratum which formed it evidently having been forced up at this steep angle when the mountains behind it were born. As I climbed carefully up the ascent my attention suddenly was attracted aloft by the sound of strange hissing, and what resembled the flapping of wings.

And at the first glance there broke upon my horrified vision the most frightful thing I had seen even within Pellucidar. It was a giant dragon such as is pictured in the legends and fairy tales of earth folk. Its huge body must have measured forty feet in length, while the bat-like wings that supported it in midair had a spread of fully thirty. Its gaping jaws were armed with long, sharp teeth, and its claw equipped with horrible talons.

The hissing noise which had first attracted my attention was issuing from its throat, and seemed to be directed at something beyond and below me which I could not see. The ledge upon which I stood terminated abruptly a few paces farther on, and as I reached the end I saw the cause of the reptile's agitation.

Some time in past ages an earthquake had produced a fault at this point, so that beyond the spot where I stood the strata had slipped down a matter of twenty feet. The result was that the continuation of my ledge lay twenty feet below me, where it ended as abruptly as did the end upon which I stood.

And here, evidently halted in flight by this insurmountable break in the ledge, stood the object of the creature's attack--a girl cowering upon the narrow platform, her face buried in her arms, as though to shut out the sight of the frightful death which hovered just above her.

The dragon was circling lower, and seemed about to dart in upon its prey. There was no time to be lost, scarce an instant in which to weigh the possible chances that I had against the awfully armed creature; but the sight of that frightened girl below me called out to all that was best in me, and the instinct for protection of the other sex, which nearly must have equaled the instinct of self-preservation in primeval man, drew me to the girl's side like an irresistible magnet.

Almost thoughtless of the consequences, I leaped from the end of the ledge upon which I stood, for the tiny shelf twenty feet below. At the same instant the dragon darted in toward the girl, but my sudden advent upon the scene must have startled him for he veered to one side, and then rose above us once more.

The noise I made as I landed beside her convinced the girl that the end had come, for she thought I was the dragon; but finally when no cruel fangs closed upon her she raised her eyes in astonishment. As they fell upon me the expression that came into them would be difficult to describe; but her feelings could scarcely have been one whit more complicated than my own--for the wide eyes that looked into mine were those of Dian the Beautiful.

"Dian!" I cried. "Dian! Thank God that I came in time."

"You?" she whispered, and then she hid her face again; nor could I tell whether she were glad or angry that I had come.

Once more the dragon was sweeping toward us, and so rapidly that I had no time to unsling my bow. All that I could do was to snatch up a rock, and hurl it at the thing's hideous face. Again my aim was true, and with a hiss of pain and rage the reptile wheeled once more and soared away.

Quickly I fitted an arrow now that I might be ready at the next attack, and as I did so I looked down at the girl, so that I surprised her in a surreptitious glance which she was stealing at me; but immediately, she again covered her face with her hands.

"Look at me, Dian," I pleaded. "Are you not glad to see me?"

She looked straight into my eyes.

"I hate you," she said, and then, as I was about to beg for a fair hearing she pointed over my shoulder. "The thipdar comes," she said, and I turned again to meet the reptile.

So this was a thipdar. I might have known it. The cruel bloodhound of the Mahars. The long-extinct pterodactyl of the outer world. But this time I met it with a weapon it never had faced before. I had selected my longest arrow, and with all my strength had bent the bow until the very tip of the shaft rested upon the thumb of my left hand, and then as the great creature darted toward us I let drive straight for that tough breast.

Hissing like the escape valve of a steam engine, the mighty creature fell turning and twisting into the sea below, my arrow buried completely in its carcass. I turned toward the girl. She was looking past me. It was evident that she had seen the thipdar die.

"Dian," I said, "won't you tell me that you are not sorry that I have found you?"

"I hate you," was her only reply; but I imagined that there was less vehemence in it than before--yet it might have been but my imagination.

"Why do you hate me, Dian?" I asked, but she did not answer me.

"What are you doing here?" I asked, "and what has happened to you since Hooja freed you from the Sagoths?"

At first I thought that she was going to ignore me entirely, but finally she thought better of it.

"I was again running away from Jubal the Ugly One," she said. "After I escaped from the Sagoths I made my way alone back to my own land; but on account of Jubal I did not dare enter the villages or let any of my friends know that I had returned for fear that Jubal might find out. By watching for a long time I found that my brother had not yet returned, and so I continued to live in a cave beside a valley which my race seldom frequents, awaiting the time that he should come back and free me from Jubal.

"But at last one of Jubal's hunters saw me as I was creeping toward my father's cave to see if my brother had yet returned and he gave the alarm and Jubal set out after me. He has been pursuing me across many lands. He cannot be far behind me now. When he comes he will kill you and carry me back to his cave. He is a terrible man. I have gone as far as I can go, and there is no escape," and she looked hopelessly up at the continuation of the ledge twenty feet above us.

"But he shall not have me," she suddenly cried, with great vehemence. "The sea is there"--she pointed over the edge of the cliff--"and the sea shall have me rather than Jubal."

"But I have you now Dian," I cried; "nor shall Jubal, nor any other have you, for you are mine," and I seized her hand, nor did I lift it above her head and let it fall in token of release.

She had risen to her feet, and was looking straight into my eyes with level gaze.

"I do not believe you," she said, "for if you meant it you would have done this when the others were present to witness it--then I should truly have been your mate; now there is no one to see you do it, for you know that without witnesses your act does not bind you to me," and she withdrew her hand from mine and turned away.

I tried to convince her that I was sincere, but she simply couldn't forget the humiliation that I had put upon her on that other occasion.

"If you mean all that you say you will have ample chance to prove it," she said, "if Jubal does not catch and kill you. I am in your power, and the treatment you accord me will be the best proof of your intentions toward me. I am not your mate, and again I tell you that I hate you, and that I should be glad if I never saw you again."

Dian certainly was candid. There was no gainsaying that. In fact I found candor and directness to be quite a marked characteristic of the cave men of Pellucidar. Finally I suggested that we make some attempt to gain my cave, where we might escape the searching Jubal, for I am free to admit that I had no considerable desire to meet the formidable and ferocious creature, of whose mighty prowess Dian had told me when I first met her. He it was who, armed with a puny knife, had met and killed a cave bear in a hand-to-hand struggle. It was Jubal who could cast his spear entirely through the armored carcass of the sadok at fifty paces. It was he who had crushed the skull of a charging dyryth with a single blow of his war club. No, I was not pining to meet the Ugly One-and it was quite certain that I should not go out and hunt for him; but the matter was taken out of my hands very quickly, as is often the way, and I did meet Jubal the Ugly One face to face.

This is how it happened. I had led Dian back along the ledge the way she had come, searching for a path that would lead us to the top of the cliff, for I knew that we could then cross over to the edge of my own little valley, where I felt certain we should find a means of ingress from the cliff top. As we proceeded along the ledge I gave Dian minute directions for finding my cave against the chance of something happening to me. I knew that she would be quite safely hidden away from pursuit once she gained the shelter of my lair, and the valley would afford her ample means of sustenance.

Also, I was very much piqued by her treatment of me. My heart was sad and heavy, and I wanted to make her feel badly by suggesting that something terrible might happen to me--that I might, in fact, be killed. But it didn't work worth a cent, at least as far as I could perceive. Dian simply shrugged those magnificent shoulders of hers, and murmured something to the effect that one was not rid of trouble so easily as that.

For a while I kept still. I was utterly squelched. And to think that I had twice protected her from attack--the last time risking my life to save hers. It was incredible that even a daughter of the Stone Age could be so ungrateful--so heartless; but maybe her heart partook of the qualities of her epoch.

Presently we found a rift in the cliff which had been widened and extended by the action of the water draining through it from the plateau above. It gave us a rather rough climb to the summit, but finally we stood upon the level mesa which stretched back for several miles to the mountain range. Behind us lay the broad inland sea, curving upward in the horizonless distance to merge into the blue of the sky, so that for all the world it looked as though the sea lapped back to arch completely over us and disappear beyond the distant mountains at our backs--the weird and uncanny aspect of the seascapes of Pellucidar balk description.

At our right lay a dense forest, but to the left the country was open and clear to the plateau's farther verge. It was in this direction that our way led, and we had turned to resume our journey when Dian touched my arm. I turned to her, thinking that she was about to make peace overtures; but I was mistaken.

"Jubal," she said, and nodded toward the forest.

I looked, and there, emerging from the dense wood, came a perfect whale of a man. He must have been seven feet tall, and proportioned accordingly. He still was too far off to distinguish his features.

"Run," I said to Dian. "I can engage him until you get a good start. Maybe I can hold him until you have gotten entirely away," and then, without a backward glance, I advanced to meet the Ugly One. I had hoped that Dian would have a kind word to say to me before she went, for she must have known that I was going to my death for her sake; but she never even so much as bid me good-bye, and it was with a heavy heart that I strode through the flower-bespangled grass to my doom.

When I had come close enough to Jubal to distinguish his features I understood how it was that he had earned the sobriquet of Ugly One. Apparently some fearful beast had ripped away one entire side of his face. The eye was gone, the nose, and all the flesh, so that his jaws and all his teeth were exposed and grinning through the horrible scar.

Formerly he may have been as good to look upon as the others of his handsome race, and it may be that the terrible result of this encounter had tended to sour an already strong and brutal character. However this may be it is quite certain that he was not a pretty sight, and now that his features, or what remained of them, were distorted in rage at the sight of Dian with another male, he was indeed most terrible to see--and much more terrible to meet.

He had broken into a run now, and as he advanced he raised his mighty spear, while I halted and fitting an arrow to my bow took as steady aim as I could. I was somewhat longer than usual, for I must confess that the sight of this awful man had wrought upon my nerves to such an extent that my knees were anything but steady. What chance had I against this mighty warrior for whom even the fiercest cave bear had no terrors! Could I hope to best one who slaughtered the sadok and dyryth single-handed! I shuddered; but, in fairness to myself, my fear was more for Dian than for my own fate.

And then the great brute launched his massive stone-tipped spear, and I raised my shield to break the force of its terrific velocity. The impact hurled me to my knees, but the shield had deflected the missile and I was unscathed. Jubal was rushing upon me now with the only remaining weapon that he carried--a murderous-looking knife. He was too close for a careful bowshot, but I let drive at him as he came, without taking aim. My arrow pierced the fleshy part of his thigh, inflicting a painful but not disabling wound. And then he was upon me.

My agility saved me for the instant. I ducked beneath his raised arm, and when he wheeled to come at me again he found a sword's point in his face. And a moment later he felt an inch or two of it in the muscles of his knife arm, so that thereafter he went more warily.

It was a duel of strategy now--the great, hairy man maneuvering to get inside my guard where he could bring those giant thews to play, while my wits were directed to the task of keeping him at arm's length. Thrice he rushed me, and thrice I caught his knife blow upon my shield. Each time my sword found his body--once penetrating to his lung. He was covered with blood by this time, and the internal hemorrhage induced paroxysms of coughing that brought the red stream through the hideous mouth and nose, covering his face and breast with bloody froth. He was a most unlovely spectacle, but he was far from dead.

As the duel continued I began to gain confidence, for, to be perfectly candid, I had not expected to survive the first rush of that monstrous engine of ungoverned rage and hatred. And I think that Jubal, from utter contempt of me, began to change to a feeling of respect, and then in his primitive mind there evidently loomed the thought that perhaps at last he had met his master, and was facing his end.

At any rate it is only upon this hypothesis that I can account for his next act, which was in the nature of a last resort--a sort of forlorn hope, which could only have been born of the belief that if he did not kill me quickly I should kill him. It happened on the occasion of his fourth charge, when, instead of striking at me with his knife, he dropped that weapon, and seizing my sword blade in both his hands wrenched the weapon from my grasp as easily as from a babe.

Flinging it far to one side he stood motionless for just an instant glaring into my face with such a horrid leer of malignant triumph as to almost unnerve me--then he sprang for me with his bare hands. But it was Jubal's day to learn new methods of warfare. For the first time he had seen a bow and arrows, never before that duel had he beheld a sword, and now he learned what a man who knows may do with his bare fists.

As he came for me, like a great bear, I ducked again beneath his outstretched arm, and as I came up planted as clean a blow upon his jaw as ever you have seen. Down went that great mountain of flesh sprawling upon the ground. He was so surprised and dazed that he lay there for several seconds before he made any attempt to rise, and I stood over him with another dose ready when he should gain his knees.

Up he came at last, almost roaring in his rage and mortification; but he didn't stay up--I let him have a left fair on the point of the jaw that sent him tumbling over on his back. By this time I think Jubal had gone mad with hate, for no sane man would have come back for more as many times as he did. Time after time I bowled him over as fast as he could stagger up, until toward the last he lay longer on the ground between blows, and each time came up weaker than before.

He was bleeding very profusely now from the wound in his lungs, and presently a terrific blow over the heart sent him reeling heavily to the ground, where he lay very still, and somehow I knew at once that Jubal the Ugly One would never get up again. But even as I looked upon that massive body lying there so grim and terrible in death, I could not believe that I, single-handed, had bested this slayer of fearful beasts--this gigantic ogre of the Stone Age.

Picking up my sword I leaned upon it, looking down on the dead body of my foeman, and as I thought of the battle I had just fought and won a great idea was born in my brain--the outcome of this and the suggestion that Perry had made within the city of Phutra. If skill and science could render a comparative pygmy the master of this mighty brute, what could not the brute's fellows accomplish with the same skill and science. Why all Pellucidar would be at their feet--and I would be their king and Dian their queen.

Dian! A little wave of doubt swept over me. It was quite within the possibilities of Dian to look down upon me even were I king. She was quite the most superior person I ever had met--with the most convincing way of letting you know that she was superior. Well, I could go to the cave, and tell her that I had killed Jubal, and then she might feel more kindly toward me, since I had freed her of her tormentor. I hoped that she had found the cave easily--it would be terrible had I lost her again, and I turned to gather up my shield and bow to hurry after her, when to my astonishment I found her standing not ten paces behind me.

"Girl!" I cried, "what are you doing here? I thought that you had gone to the cave, as I told you to do."

Up went her head, and the look that she gave me took all the majesty out of me, and left me feeling more like the palace janitor--if palaces have janitors.

"As you told me to do!" she cried, stamping her little foot. "I do as I please. I am the daughter of a king, and furthermore, I hate you."

I was dumbfounded--this was my thanks for saving her from Jubal! I turned and looked at the corpse. "May be that I saved you from a worse fate, old man," I said, but I guess it was lost on Dian, for she never seemed to notice it at all.

"Let us go to my cave," I said, "I am tired and hungry."

She followed along a pace behind me, neither of us speaking. I was too angry, and she evidently didn't care to converse with the lower orders. I was mad all the way through, as I had certainly felt that at least a word of thanks should have rewarded me, for I knew that even by her own standards, I must have done a very wonderful thing to have killed the redoubtable Jubal in a hand-to-hand encounter.

We had no difficulty in finding my lair, and then I went down into the valley and bowled over a small antelope, which I dragged up the steep ascent to the ledge before the door. Here we ate in silence. Occasionally I glanced at her, thinking that the sight of her tearing at raw flesh with her hands and teeth like some wild animal would cause a revulsion of my sentiments toward her; but to my surprise I found that she ate quite as daintily as the most civilized woman of my acquaintance, and finally I found myself gazing in foolish rapture at the beauties of her strong, white teeth. Such is love.

After our repast we went down to the river together and bathed our hands and faces, and then after drinking our fill went back to the cave. Without a word I crawled into the farthest corner and, curling up, was soon asleep.

When I awoke I found Dian sitting in the doorway looking out across the valley. As I came out she moved to one side to let me pass, but she had no word for me. I wanted to hate her, but I couldn't. Every time I looked at her something came up in my throat, so that I nearly choked. I had never been in love before, but I did not need any aid in diagnosing my case--I certainly had it and had it bad. God, how I loved that beautiful, disdainful, tantalizing, prehistoric girl!

After we had eaten again I asked Dian if she intended returning to her tribe now that Jubal was dead, but she shook her head sadly, and said that she did not dare, for there was still Jubal's brother to be considered--his oldest brother.

"What has he to do with it?" I asked. "Does he too want you, or has the option on you become a family heirloom, to be passed on down from generation to generation?"

She was not quite sure as to what I meant.

"It is probable," she said, "that they all will want revenge for the death of Jubal--there are seven of them--seven terrible men. Someone may have to kill them all, if I am to return to my people."

It began to look as though I had assumed a contract much too large for me--about seven sizes, in fact.

"Had Jubal any cousins?" I asked. It was just as well to know the worst at once.

"Yes," replied Dian, "but they don't count--they all have mates. Jubal's brothers have no mates because Jubal could get none for himself. He was so ugly that women ran away from him--some have even thrown themselves from the cliffs of Amoz into the Darel Az rather than mate with the Ugly One."

"But what had that to do with his brothers?" I asked.

"I forget that you are not of Pellucidar," said Dian, with a look of pity mixed with contempt, and the contempt seemed to be laid on a little thicker than the circumstance warranted--as though to make quite certain that I shouldn't overlook it. "You see," she continued, "a younger brother may not take a mate until all his older brothers have done so, unless the older brother waives his prerogative, which Jubal would not do, knowing that as long as he kept them single they would be all the keener in aiding him to secure a mate."

Noticing that Dian was becoming more communicative I began to entertain hopes that she might be warming up toward me a bit, although upon what slender thread I hung my hopes I soon discovered.

"As you dare not return to Amoz," I ventured, "what is to become of you since you cannot be happy here with me, hating me as you do?"

"I shall have to put up with you," she replied coldly, "until you see fit to go elsewhere and leave me in peace, then I shall get along very well alone."

I looked at her in utter amazement. It seemed incredible that even a prehistoric woman could be so cold and heartless and ungrateful. Then I arose.

"I shall leave you now," I said haughtily, "I have had quite enough of your ingratitude and your insults," and then I turned and strode majestically down toward the valley. I had taken a hundred steps in absolute silence, and then Dian spoke.

"I hate you!" she shouted, and her voice broke--in rage, I thought.

I was absolutely miserable, but I hadn't gone too far when I began to realize that I couldn't leave her alone there without protection, to hunt her own food amid the dangers of that savage world. She might hate me, and revile me, and heap indignity after indignity upon me, as she already had, until I should have hated her; but the pitiful fact remained that I loved her, and I couldn't leave her there alone.

The more I thought about it the madder I got, so that by the time I reached the valley I was furious, and the result of it was that I turned right around and went up that cliff again as fast as I had come down. I saw that Dian had left the ledge and gone within the cave, but I bolted right in after her. She was lying upon her face on the pile of grasses I had gathered for her bed. When she heard me enter she sprang to her feet like a tigress.

"I hate you!" she cried.

Coming from the brilliant light of the noonday sun into the semidarkness of the cave I could not see her features, and I was rather glad, for I disliked to think of the hate that I should have read there.

I never said a word to her at first. I just strode across the cave and grasped her by the wrists, and when she struggled, I put my arm around her so as to pinion her hands to her sides. She fought like a tigress, but I took my free hand and pushed her head back--I imagine that I had suddenly turned brute, that I had gone back a thousand million years, and was again a veritable cave man taking my mate by force--and then I kissed that beautiful mouth again and again.

"Dian," I cried, shaking her roughly, "I love you. Can't you understand that I love you? That I love you better than all else in this world or my own? That I am going to have you? That love like mine cannot be denied?"

I noticed that she lay very still in my arms now, and as my eyes became accustomed to the light I saw that she was smiling--a very contented, happy smile. I was thunderstruck. Then I realized that, very gently, she was trying to disengage her arms, and I loosened my grip upon them so that she could do so. Slowly they came up and stole about my neck, and then she drew my lips down to hers once more and held them there for a long time. At last she spoke.

"Why didn't you do this at first, David? I have been waiting so long."

"What!" I cried. "You said that you hated me!"

"Did you expect me to run into your arms, and say that I loved you before I knew that you loved me?" she asked.

"But I have told you right along that I love you," I said. "Love speaks in acts," she replied. "You could have made your mouth say what you wished it to say, but just now when you came and took me in your arms your heart spoke to mine in the language that a woman's heart understands. What a silly man you are, David?"

"Then you haven't hated me at all, Dian?" I asked.

"I have loved you always," she whispered, "from the first moment that I saw you, although I did not know it until that time you struck down Hooja the Sly One, and then spurned me."

"But I didn't spurn you, dear," I cried. "I didn't know your ways--I doubt if I do now. It seems incredible that you could have reviled me so, and yet have cared for me all the time."

"You might have known," she said, "when I did not run away from you that it was not hate which chained me to you. While you were battling with Jubal, I could have run to the edge of the forest, and when I learned the outcome of the combat it would have been a simple thing to have eluded you and returned to my own people."

"But Jubal's brothers--and cousins--" I reminded her, "how about them?"

She smiled, and hid her face on my shoulder.

"I had to tell you something, David," she whispered. "I must needs have some excuse for remaining near you."

"You little sinner!" I exclaimed. "And you have caused me all this anguish for nothing!"

"I have suffered even more," she answered simply, "for I thought that you did not love me, and I was helpless. I couldn't come to you and demand that my love be returned, as you have just come to me. Just now when you went away hope went with you. I was wretched, terrified, miserable, and my heart was breaking. I wept, and I have not done that before since my mother died," and now I saw that there was the moisture of tears about her eyes. It was near to making me cry myself when I thought of all that poor child had been through. Motherless and unprotected; hunted across a savage, primeval world by that hideous brute of a man; exposed to the attacks of the countless fearsome denizens of its mountains, its plains, and its jungles--it was a miracle that she had survived it all.

To me it was a revelation of the things my early forebears must have endured that the human race of the outer crust might survive. It made me very proud to think that I had won the love of such a woman. Of course she couldn't read or write; there was nothing cultured or refined about her as you judge culture and refinement; but she was the essence of all that is best in woman, for she was good, and brave, and noble, and virtuous. And she was all these things in spite of the fact that their observance entailed suffering and danger and possible death.

How much easier it would have been to have gone to Jubal in the first place! She would have been his lawful mate. She would have been queen in her own land--and it meant just as much to the cave woman to be a queen in the Stone Age as it does to the woman of today to be a queen now; it's all comparative glory any way you look at it, and if there were only half-naked savages on the outer crust today, you'd find that it would be considerable glory to be the wife a Dahomey chief.

I couldn't help but compare Dian's action with that of a splendid young woman I had known in New York--I mean splendid to look at and to talk to. She had been head over heels in love with a chum of mine--a clean, manly chap--but she had married a broken-down, disreputable old debauchee because he was a count in some dinky little European principality that was not even accorded a distinctive color by Rand McNally.

Yes, I was mighty proud of Dian.

After a time we decided to set out for Sari, as I was anxious to see Perry, and to know that all was right with him. I had told Dian about our plan of emancipating the human race of Pellucidar, and she was fairly wild over it. She said that if Dacor, her brother, would only return he could easily be king of Amoz, and that then he and Ghak could form an alliance. That would give us a flying start, for the Sarians and the Amozites were both very powerful tribes. Once they had been armed with swords, and bows and arrows, and trained in their use we were confident that they could overcome any tribe that seemed disinclined to join the great army of federated states with which we were planning to march upon the Mahars.

I explained the various destructive engines of war which Perry and I could construct after a little experimentation--gunpowder, rifles, cannon, and the like, and Dian would clap her hands, and throw her arms about my neck, and tell me what a wonderful thing I was. She was beginning to think that I was omnipotent although I really hadn't done anything but talk--but that is the way with women when they love. Perry used to say that if a fellow was one-tenth as remarkable as his wife or mother thought him, he would have the world by the tail with a down-hill drag.

The first time we started for Sari I stepped into a nest of poisonous vipers before we reached the valley. A little fellow stung me on the ankle, and Dian made me come back to the cave. She said that I mustn't exercise, or it might prove fatal--if it had been a full-grown snake that struck me she said, I wouldn't have moved a single pace from the nest--I'd have died in my tracks, so virulent is the poison. As it was I must have been laid up for quite a while, though Dian's poultices of herbs and leaves finally reduced the swelling and drew out the poison.

The episode proved most fortunate, however, as it gave me an idea which added a thousand-fold to the value of my arrows as missiles of offense and defense. As soon as I was able to be about again, I sought out some adult vipers of the species which had stung me, and having killed them, I extracted their virus, smearing it upon the tips of several arrows. Later I shot a hyaenodon with one of these, and though my arrow inflicted but a superficial flesh wound the beast crumpled in death almost immediately after he was hit.

We now set out once more for the land of the Sarians, and it was with feelings of sincere regret that we bade good-bye to our beautiful Garden of Eden, in the comparative peace and harmony of which we had lived the happiest moments of our lives. How long we had been there I did not know, for as I have told you, time had ceased to exist for me beneath that eternal noonday sun--it may have been an hour, or a month of earthly time; I do not know.

    
At the Earth's Core, by Edgar Rice Burroughs, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

XV

  

BACK TO EARTH

We crossed the river and passed through the mountains beyond, and finally we came out upon a great level plain which stretched away as far as the eye could reach. I cannot tell you in what direction it stretched even if you would care to know, for all the while that I was within Pellucidar I never discovered any but local methods of indicating direction--there is no north, no south, no east, no west. Up is about the only direction which is well defined, and that, of course, is down to you of the outer crust. Since the sun neither rises nor sets there is no method of indicating direction beyond visible objects such as high mountains, forests, lakes, and seas.

The plain which lies beyond the white cliffs which flank the Darel Az upon the shore nearest the Mountains of the Clouds is about as near to any direction as any Pellucidarian can come. If you happen not to have heard of the Darel Az, or the white cliffs, or the Mountains of the Clouds you feel that there is something lacking, and long for the good old understandable northeast and southwest of the outer world.

We had barely entered the great plain when we discovered two enormous animals approaching us from a great distance. So far were they that we could not distinguish what manner of beasts they might be, but as they came closer, I saw that they were enormous quadrupeds, eighty or a hundred feet long, with tiny heads perched at the top of very long necks. Their heads must have been quite forty feet from the ground. The beasts moved very slowly--that is their action was slow--but their strides covered such a great distance that in reality they traveled considerably faster than a man walks.

As they drew still nearer we discovered that upon the back of each sat a human being. Then Dian knew what they were, though she never before had seen one.

"They are lidis from the land of the Thorians," she cried. "Thoria lies at the outer verge of the Land of Awful Shadow. The Thorians alone of all the races of Pellucidar ride the lidi, for nowhere else than beside the dark country are they found."

"What is the Land of Awful Shadow?" I asked.

"It is the land which lies beneath the Dead World," replied Dian; "the Dead World which hangs forever between the sun and Pellucidar above the Land of Awful Shadow. It is the Dead World which makes the great shadow upon this portion of Pellucidar."

I did not fully understand what she meant, nor am I sure that I do yet, for I have never been to that part of Pellucidar from which the Dead World is visible; but Perry says that it is the moon of Pellucidar--a tiny planet within a planet--and that it revolves around the earth's axis coincidently with the earth, and thus is always above the same spot within Pellucidar.

I remember that Perry was very much excited when I told him about this Dead World, for he seemed to think that it explained the hitherto inexplicable phenomena of nutation and the precession of the equinoxes.

When the two upon the lidis had come quite close to us we saw that one was a man and the other a woman. The former had held up his two hands, palms toward us, in sign of peace, and I had answered him in kind, when he suddenly gave a cry of astonishment and pleasure, and slipping from his enormous mount ran forward toward Dian, throwing his arms about her.

In an instant I was white with jealousy, but only for an instant; since Dian quickly drew the man toward me, telling him that I was David, her mate.

"And this is my brother, Dacor the Strong One, David," she said to me.

It appeared that the woman was Dacor's mate. He had found none to his liking among the Sari, nor farther on until he had come to the land of the Thoria, and there he had found and fought for this very lovely Thorian maiden whom he was bringing back to his own people.

When they had heard our story and our plans they decided to accompany us to Sari, that Dacor and Ghak might come to an agreement relative to an alliance, as Dacor was quite as enthusiastic about the proposed annihilation of the Mahars and Sagoths as either Dian or I.

After a journey which was, for Pellucidar, quite uneventful, we came to the first of the Sarian villages which consists of between one and two hundred artificial caves cut into the face of a great cliff. Here to our immense delight, we found both Perry and Ghak. The old man was quite overcome at sight of me for he had long since given me up as dead.

When I introduced Dian as my wife, he didn't quite know what to say, but he afterward remarked that with the pick of two worlds I could not have done better.

Ghak and Dacor reached a very amicable arrangement, and it was at a council of the head men of the various tribes of the Sari that the eventual form of government was tentatively agreed upon. Roughly, the various kingdoms were to remain virtually independent, but there was to be one great overlord, or emperor. It was decided that I should be the first of the dynasty of the emperors of Pellucidar.

We set about teaching the women how to make bows and arrows, and poison pouches. The young men hunted the vipers which provided the virus, and it was they who mined the iron ore, and fashioned the swords under Perry's direction. Rapidly the fever spread from one tribe to another until representatives from nations so far distant that the Sarians had never even heard of them came in to take the oath of allegiance which we required, and to learn the art of making the new weapons and using them.

We sent our young men out as instructors to every nation of the federation, and the movement had reached colossal proportions before the Mahars discovered it. The first intimation they had was when three of their great slave caravans were annihilated in rapid succession. They could not comprehend that the lower orders had suddenly developed a power which rendered them really formidable.

In one of the skirmishes with slave caravans some of our Sarians took a number of Sagoth prisoners, and among them were two who had been members of the guards within the building where we had been confined at Phutra. They told us that the Mahars were frantic with rage when they discovered what had taken place in the cellars of the buildings. The Sagoths knew that something very terrible had befallen their masters, but the Mahars had been most careful to see that no inkling of the true nature of their vital affliction reached beyond their own race. How long it would take for the race to become extinct it was impossible even to guess; but that this must eventually happen seemed inevitable.

The Mahars had offered fabulous rewards for the capture of any one of us alive, and at the same time had threatened to inflict the direst punishment upon whomever should harm us. The Sagoths could not understand these seemingly paradoxical instructions, though their purpose was quite evident to me. The Mahars wanted the Great Secret, and they knew that we alone could deliver it to them.

Perry's experiments in the manufacture of gunpowder and the fashioning of rifles had not progressed as rapidly as we had hoped--there was a whole lot about these two arts which Perry didn't know. We were both assured that the solution of these problems would advance the cause of civilization within Pellucidar thousands of years at a single stroke. Then there were various other arts and sciences which we wished to introduce, but our combined knowledge of them did not embrace the mechanical details which alone could render them of commercial, or practical value.

"David," said Perry, immediately after his latest failure to produce gunpowder that would even burn, "one of us must return to the outer world and bring back the information we lack. Here we have all the labor and materials for reproducing anything that ever has been produced above--what we lack is knowledge. Let us go back and get that knowledge in the shape of books--then this world will indeed be at our feet."

And so it was decided that I should return in the prospector, which still lay upon the edge of the forest at the point where we had first penetrated to the surface of the inner world. Dian would not listen to any arrangement for my going which did not include her, and I was not sorry that she wished to accompany me, for I wanted her to see my world, and I wanted my world to see her.

With a large force of men we marched to the great iron mole, which Perry soon had hoisted into position with its nose pointed back toward the outer crust. He went over all the machinery carefully. He replenished the air tanks, and manufactured oil for the engine. At last everything was ready, and we were about to set out when our pickets, a long, thin line of which had surrounded our camp at all times, reported that a great body of what appeared to be Sagoths and Mahars were approaching from the direction of Phutra.

Dian and I were ready to embark, but I was anxious to witness the first clash between two fair-sized armies of the opposing races of Pellucidar. I realized that this was to mark the historic beginning of a mighty struggle for possession of a world, and as the first emperor of Pellucidar I felt that it was not alone my duty, but my right, to be in the thick of that momentous struggle.

As the opposing army approached we saw that there were many Mahars with the Sagoth troops--an indication of the vast importance which the dominant race placed upon the outcome of this campaign, for it was not customary with them to take active part in the sorties which their creatures made for slaves--the only form of warfare which they waged upon the lower orders.

Ghak and Dacor were both with us, having come primarily to view the prospector. I placed Ghak with some of his Sarians on the right of our battle line. Dacor took the left, while I commanded the center. Behind us I stationed a sufficient reserve under one of Ghak's head men. The Sagoths advanced steadily with menacing spears, and I let them come until they were within easy bowshot before I gave the word to fire.

At the first volley of poison-tipped arrows the front ranks of the gorilla-men crumpled to the ground; but those behind charged over the prostrate forms of their comrades in a wild, mad rush to be upon us with their spears. A second volley stopped them for an instant, and then my reserve sprang through the openings in the firing line to engage them with sword and shield. The clumsy spears of the Sagoths were no match for the swords of the Sarian and Amozite, who turned the spear thrusts aside with their shields and leaped to close quarters with their lighter, handier weapons.

Ghak took his archers along the enemy's flank, and while the swordsmen engaged them in front, he poured volley after volley into their unprotected left. The Mahars did little real fighting, and were more in the way than otherwise, though occasionally one of them would fasten its powerful jaw upon the arm or leg of a Sarian.

The battle did not last a great while, for when Dacor and I led our men in upon the Sagoth's right with naked swords they were already so demoralized that they turned and fled before us. We pursued them for some time, taking many prisoners and recovering nearly a hundred slaves, among whom was Hooja the Sly One.

He told me that he had been captured while on his way to his own land; but that his life had been spared in hope that through him the Mahars would learn the whereabouts of their Great Secret. Ghak and I were inclined to think that the Sly One had been guiding this expedition to the land of Sari, where he thought that the book might be found in Perry's possession; but we had no proof of this and so we took him in and treated him as one of us, although none liked him. And how he rewarded my generosity you will presently learn.

There were a number of Mahars among our prisoners, and so fearful were our own people of them that they would not approach them unless completely covered from the sight of the reptiles by a piece of skin. Even Dian shared the popular superstition regarding the evil effects of exposure to the eyes of angry Mahars, and though I laughed at her fears I was willing enough to humor them if it would relieve her apprehension in any degree, and so she sat apart from the prospector, near which the Mahars had been chained, while Perry and I again inspected every portion of the mechanism.

At last I took my place in the driving seat, and called to one of the men without to fetch Dian. It happened that Hooja stood quite close to the doorway of the prospector, so that it was he who, without my knowledge, went to bring her; but how he succeeded in accomplishing the fiendish thing he did, I cannot guess, unless there were others in the plot to aid him. Nor can I believe that, since all my people were loyal to me and would have made short work of Hooja had he suggested the heartless scheme, even had he had time to acquaint another with it. It was all done so quickly that I may only believe that it was the result of sudden impulse, aided by a number of, to Hooja, fortuitous circumstances occurring at precisely the right moment.

All I know is that it was Hooja who brought Dian to the prospector, still wrapped from head to toe in the skin of an enormous cave lion which covered her since the Mahar prisoners had been brought into camp. He deposited his burden in the seat beside me. I was all ready to get under way. The good-byes had been said. Perry had grasped my hand in the last, long farewell. I closed and barred the outer and inner doors, took my seat again at the driving mechanism, and pulled the starting lever.

As before on that far-gone night that had witnessed our first trial of the iron monster, there was a frightful roaring beneath us--the giant frame trembled and vibrated--there was a rush of sound as the loose earth passed up through the hollow space between the inner and outer jackets to be deposited in our wake. Once more the thing was off.

But on the instant of departure I was nearly thrown from my seat by the sudden lurching of the prospector. At first I did not realize what had happened, but presently it dawned upon me that just before entering the crust the towering body had fallen through its supporting scaffolding, and that instead of entering the ground vertically we were plunging into it at a different angle. Where it would bring us out upon the upper crust I could not even conjecture. And then I turned to note the effect of this strange experience upon Dian. She still sat shrouded in the great skin.

"Come, come," I cried, laughing, "come out of your shell. No Mahar eyes can reach you here," and I leaned over and snatched the lion skin from her. And then I shrank back upon my seat in utter horror.

The thing beneath the skin was not Dian--it was a hideous Mahar. Instantly I realized the trick that Hooja had played upon me, and the purpose of it. Rid of me, forever as he doubtless thought, Dian would be at his mercy. Frantically I tore at the steering wheel in an effort to turn the prospector back toward Pellucidar; but, as on that other occasion, I could not budge the thing a hair.

It is needless to recount the horrors or the monotony of that journey. It varied but little from the former one which had brought us from the outer to the inner world. Because of the angle at which we had entered the ground the trip required nearly a day longer, and brought me out here upon the sand of the Sahara instead of in the United States as I had hoped.

For months I have been waiting here for a white man to come. I dared not leave the prospector for fear I should never be able to find it again--the shifting sands of the desert would soon cover it, and then my only hope of returning to my Dian and her Pellucidar would be gone forever.

That I ever shall see her again seems but remotely possible, for how may I know upon what part of Pellucidar my return journey may terminate--and how, without a north or south or an east or a west may I hope ever to find my way across that vast world to the tiny spot where my lost love lies grieving for me?

That is the story as David Innes told it to me in the goat-skin tent upon the rim of the great Sahara Desert. The next day he took me out to see the prospector--it was precisely as he had described it. So huge was it that it could have been brought to this inaccessible part of the world by no means of transportation that existed there--it could only have come in the way that David Innes said it came--up through the crust of the earth from the inner world of Pellucidar.

I spent a week with him, and then, abandoned my lion hunt, returned directly to the coast and hurried to London where I purchased a great quantity of stuff which he wished to take back to Pellucidar with him. There were books, rifles, revolvers, ammunition, cameras, chemicals, telephones, telegraph instruments, wire, tool and more books--books upon every subject under the sun. He said he wanted a library with which they could reproduce the wonders of the twentieth century in the Stone Age and if quantity counts for anything I got it for him.

I took the things back to Algeria myself, and accompanied them to the end of the railroad; but from here I was recalled to America upon important business. However, I was able to employ a very trustworthy man to take charge of the caravan--the same guide, in fact, who had accompanied me on the previous trip into the Sahara--and after writing a long letter to Innes in which I gave him my American address, I saw the expedition head south.

Among the other things which I sent to Innes was over five hundred miles of double, insulated wire of a very fine gauge. I had it packed on a special reel at his suggestion, as it was his idea that he could fasten one end here before he left and by paying it out through the end of the prospector lay a telegraph line between the outer and inner worlds. In my letter I told him to be sure to mark the terminus of the line very plainly with a high cairn, in case I was not able to reach him before he set out, so that I might easily find and communicate with him should he be so fortunate as to reach Pellucidar.

I received several letters from him after I returned to America--in fact he took advantage of every northward-passing caravan to drop me word of some sort. His last letter was written the day before he intended to depart. Here it is.

  My Dear Friend:

Tomorrow I shall set out in quest of Pellucidar and Dian. That is if the Arabs don't get me. They have been very nasty of late. I don't know the cause, but on two occasions they have threatened my life. One, more friendly than the rest, told me today that they intended attacking me tonight. It would be unfortunate should anything of that sort happen now that I am so nearly ready to depart.

However, maybe I will be as well off, for the nearer the hour approaches, the slenderer my chances for success appear.

Here is the friendly Arab who is to take this letter north for me, so good-bye, and God bless you for your kindness to me.

The Arab tells me to hurry, for he sees a cloud of sand to the south--he thinks it is the party coming to murder me, and he doesn't want to be found with me. So good-bye again.

Yours,

David Innes.

  A year later found me at the end of the railroad once more, headed for the spot where I had left Innes. My first disappointment was when I discovered that my old guide had died within a few weeks of my return, nor could I find any member of my former party who could lead me to the same spot.

For months I searched that scorching land, interviewing countless desert sheiks in the hope that at last I might find one who had heard of Innes and his wonderful iron mole. Constantly my eyes scanned the blinding waste of sand for the ricky cairn beneath which I was to find the wires leading to Pellucidar--but always was I unsuccessful.

And always do these awful questions harass me when I think of David Innes and his strange adventures.

Did the Arabs murder him, after all, just on the eve of his departure? Or, did he again turn the nose of his iron monster toward the inner world? Did he reach it, or lies he somewhere buried in the heart of the great crust? And if he did come again to Pellucidar was it to break through into the bottom of one of her great island seas, or among some savage race far, far from the land of his heart's desire?

Does the answer lie somewhere upon the bosom of the broad Sahara, at the end of two tiny wires, hidden beneath a lost cairn? I wonder.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: atfj.txt =====



Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

  

ANCIENT TALES AND FOLK-LORE OF JAPAN

  

by Richard Gordon Smith

  

London, A. & C. Black

  

[1918]

Click to enlarge
Front Cover

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, February 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

TO

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE

SIR ERNEST MASON SATOW, K.C.M.G.

IN REMEMBRANCE

OF HIS KINDNESS IN JAPAN

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

Preface

THE stories in this volume are transcribed from voluminous illustrated diaries which have been kept by me for some twenty years spent in travel and in sport in many lands--the last nine of them almost entirely in Japan, while collecting subjects of natural history for the British Museum; trawling and dredging in the Inland Sea, sometimes with success, sometimes without, but in the end contributing to the treasury some fifty things new to Science, and, according to Sir Edwin Ray Lankester, 'adding greatly to the knowledge of Japanese Ethnology.' As may be supposed, such a life has brought me into close contact with the people--the fisher, the farmer, the priest, the doctor, the children, and all others from whom there is a possibility of extracting information. Many and weird are the tales I have been told. In this volume the Publishers prefer to have a mixture--stories of Mountains, of Trees, of Flowers, of Places in History, and Legends. For the general results obtained in my diaries I have to thank our late Minister in Tokio, Sir Ernest Satow; the

[p. viii]

[paragraph continues] Ministers and Vice-Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of Agriculture, who gave me many letters of introduction; my dear friend Mr. Hattori, Governor of Hiogo Prefecture; the translators of the original notes and manuscripts (often roughly written in Japanese), among whom are Mr. Ando, Mr. Matsuzaki, and Mr. Watanabe; and Mr. Mo-No-Yuki, who drew and painted the illustrations from sketches of my own, which must often have grated on his artistic ideas, keeping him awake in reflection on the crudeness of the European sense of art.

To my faithful interpreter Yuki Egawa also are due my thanks for continual efforts to find what I wanted; and to many Japanese peasants and fishermen, whose good-nature, kindness, and hospitality have endeared them to me for ever. Well is it that they, so worthy a people, have so worthy a Sovereign.

R. GORDON SMITH.

June 1908.

 

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

Contents

           

        

       PAGE

     
      1.

       THE GOLDEN   HAIRPIN

       <page 1>

     
      2.

       THE SPIRIT OF   THE WILLOW TREE

       <page 12>

     
      3.

       GHOST OF THE   VIOLET WELL

       <page 19>

     
      4.

       GHOST STORY OF   THE FLUTE'S TOMB

       <page 27>

     
      5.

       A HAUNTED   TEMPLE IN INABA PROVINCE

       <page 36>

     
      6.

       A CARP GIVES A   LESSON IN PERSEVERANCE

       <page 44>

     
      7.

       LEGENDS TOLD BY   A FISHERMAN ON LAKE BIWA, AT ZEZE

       <page 47>

     
      8.

       A MIRACULOUS   SWORD

       <page 56>

     
      9.

       'THE PROCESSION   OF GHOSTS'

       <page 61>

     
      10.

       A FAITHFUL   SERVANT

       <page 65>

     
      11.

       PRINCE   HOSOKAWA'S MOST VALUABLE TITLE-DEEDS

       <page 71>

     
      12.

       THE STORY OF   KATO SAYEMON

       <page 75>

     
      13.

       GREAT FIRE   CAUSED BY A LADY'S DRESS

       <page 82>

     
      14.

       HISTORY OF   AWOTO FUJITSUNA

       <page 88>

     
      15.

       A LIFE SAVED BY   A SPIDER AND TWO DOVES

       <page 91>

     
      16.

       MURAKAMI   YOSHITERU'S FAITHFULNESS

       <page 96>

     
      17.

       A STORY OF OKI   ISLANDS

       <page 101>

     
      18.

       CAPE OF THE   WOMAN'S SWORD

       <page 110>

     
       

       [p. x]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
      19.

       HOW YOGODAYU   WON A BATTLE

       <page 116>

     
      20.

       THE ISOLATED OR   DESOLATED ISLAND.

       <page 120>

     
      21.

       CHIKUBU ISLAND,   LAKE BIWA

       <page 126>

     
      22.

       REINCARNATION

       <page 132>

     
      23.

       THE   DIVING-WOMAN OF OISO BAY

       <page 136>

     
      24.

       THEFT AND   RECOVERY OF A GOLDEN KWANNON

       <page 144>

     
      25.

       SAIGYO HOSHI'S   ROCK

       <page 150>

     
      26.

       HOW MASAKUNI   REGAINED HIS SIGHT

       <page 157>

     
      27.

       SAGAMI BAY

       <page 162>

     
      28.

       THE KING OF   TORIJIMA

       <page 168>

     
      29.

       THE PERPETUAL   LIFE-GIVING WINE

       <page 178>

     
      30.

       THE HERMIT'S   CAVE

       <page 183>

     
      31.

       YOSOJI'S   CAMELLIA TREE

       <page 189>

     
      32.

       WHALES

       <page 196>

     
      33.

       THE HOLY CHERRY   TREE OF MUSUBI-NO-KAMI TEMPLE

       <page 202>

     
      34.

       A STORY OF   MOUNT KANZANREI

       <page 208>

     
      35.

       WHITE BONE   MOUNTAIN

       <page 215>

     
      36.

       A STORMY   NIGHT'S TRAGEDY

       <page 223>

     
      37.

       THE KAKEMONO   GHOST OF AKI PROVINCE

       <page 231>

     
      38.

       WHITE   SAKE

       <page 239>

     
      39.

       THE BLIND   BEAUTY

       <page 245>

     
      40.

       THE SECRET OF   IIDAMACHI POND

       <page 253>

     
      41.

       THE SPIRIT OF   YENOKI

       <page 259>

     
      42.

       THE SPIRIT OF   THE LOTUS LILY

       <page 267>

     
      43.

       THE TEMPLE OF THE   AWABI

       <page 274>

     
      44.

       HUMAN FIREFLIES

       <page 282>

     
       

       [p. xi]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
      45.

       THE   CHRYSANTHEMUM HERMIT

       <page 287>

     
      46.

       THE PRINCESS   PEONY

       <page 291>

     
      47.

       THE MEMORIAL   CHERRY TREE

       <page 297>

     
      48.

       THE 'JIROHEI' CHERRY   TREE, KYOTO

       <page 302>

     
      49.

       THE SNOW GHOST

       <page 307>

     
      50.

       THE SNOW TOMB

       <page 312>

     
      51.

       THE   DRAGON-SHAPED PLUM TREE

       <page 319>

     
      52.

       THE CHESSBOARD   CHERRY TREE

       <page 326>

     
      53.

       THE PRECIOUS   SWORD 'NATORI NO HOTO'.

       <page 331>

     
      54.

       THE WHITE   SERPENT GOD

       <page 336>

     
      55.

       A FESTIVAL OF   THE AWABI FISH

       <page 341>

     
      56.

       THE SPIRIT OF A   WILLOW TREE SAVES FAMILY HONOUR

       <page 346>

     
      57.

       THE CAMPHOR   TREE TOMB

       <page 352>

     
    

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

Click to enlarge
2. The Spirit of O Ko appears to Konojo as O Kei San

  

ANCIENT TALES AND FOLKLORE OF JAPAN

  

I

  

THE GOLDEN HAIRPIN [*1]

UP in the northern city of Sendai, whence come the best of Japanese soldiers, there lived a samurai named Hasunuma.

Hasunuma was rich and hospitable, and consequently much thought of and well liked. Some thirty-five years ago his wife presented him with a beautiful daughter, their first child, whom they called 'Ko,' which means 'Small' when applied to a child, much as we say 'Little Mary or Little Jane.' Her full name was really 'Hasu-ko,' which means 'Little Lily'; but here we will call her 'Ko' for short.

Exactly on the same date, 'Saito,' one of Hasunuma's friends and also a samurai, had the good fortune to have a son. The fathers decided that, being such old friends, they would wed their children to each other when old enough to marry; they were very happy over the idea, and so were their wives. To make the engagement of the

[p. 2]

babies more binding, Saito handed to Hasunuma a golden hairpin which had long been in his family, and said:

'Here, my old friend, take this pin. It shall be a token of betrothal from my son, whose name shall be Konojo, to your little daughter Ko, both of whom are now aged two weeks only. May they live long and happy lives together.'

Hasunuma took the pin, and handed it to his wife to keep; then they drank sake to the health of each other, and to the bride and bridegroom of some twenty years thence.

A few months after this Saito, in some way, caused displeasure to his feudal lord, and, being dismissed from service, left Sendai with his family--whither no one knew.

Seventeen years later O Ko San was, with one exception, the most beautiful girl in all Sendai; the exception was her sister, O Kei, just a year younger, and as beautiful as herself.

Many were the suitors for O Ko's hand; but she would have none of them, being faithful to the engagement made for her by her father when she was a baby. True, she had never seen her betrothed, and (which seemed more curious) neither she nor her family had ever once heard of the Saito family since they had left Sendai, over sixteen years before; but that was no reason why she, a Japanese girl, should break the word of her father, and therefore O Ko San remained faithful to her unknown lover, though she sorrowed greatly at his non-appearance; in fact, she secretly suffered so much thereby that she sickened, and three months later died, to the grief of all who knew her and to her family's serious distress.

[p. 3]

On the day of O Ko San's funeral her mother was seeing to the last attentions paid to corpses, and smoothing her hair with the golden pin given to Ko San or O Ko [*1] by Saito in behalf of his son Konojo. When the body had been placed in its coffin, the mother thrust the pin into the girl's hair, saying:

'Dearest daughter, this is the pin given as a memento to you by your betrothed, Konojo. Let it be a pledge to bind your spirits in death, as it would have been in life; and may you enjoy endless happiness, I pray.'

In thus praying, no doubt, O Ko's mother thought that Konojo also must be dead, and that their spirits would meet; but it was not so, for two months after these events Konojo himself, now eighteen years of age, turned up at Sendai, calling first on his father's old friend Hasunuma.

'Oh, the bitterness and misfortune of it all!' said the latter. 'Only two months ago my daughter Ko died. Had you but come before then she would have been alive now. But you never even sent a message; we never heard a word of your father or of your mother. Where did you all go when you left here? Tell me the whole story.'

'Sir,' answered the grief-stricken Konojo, 'what you tell me of the death of your daughter, whom I had hoped to marry, sickens my heart, for I, like herself, had been faithful, and I hoped to marry her, and thought daily of her. When my father took my family away from Sendai, he took us to Yedo; and afterwards we went north to

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] Yezo Island, where my father lost his money and became poor. He died in poverty. My poor mother did not long survive him. I have been working hard to try and earn enough to marry your daughter Ko; but I have not made more than enough to pay my journey down to Sendai. I felt it my duty to come and tell you of my family's misfortune and my own.'

The old samurai was much touched by this story. He saw that the most unfortunate of all had been Konojo.

'Konojo,' he said, 'often have I thought and wondered to myself, Were you honest or were you not? Now I find that you have been truly faithful, and honest to your father's pledge. But you should have written--you should have written! Because you did not do so, sometimes we thought, my wife and I, that you must be dead; but we kept this thought to ourselves, and never told Ko San. Go to our Butsudan; [*1] open the doors of it, and burn a joss stick to Ko San's mortuary tablet. It will please her spirit. She longed and longed for your return, and died of that sane longing--for love of you. Her spirit will rejoice to know that you have come back for her.'

Konojo did as he was bid.

Bowing reverently three times before the mortuary tablet of O Ko San, he muttered a few words of prayer in her behalf, and then lit the incense-stick and placed it before the tablet.

After this exhibition of sincerity Hasunuma told the young fellow that he should consider him as an adopted son, and that he must live with them. He could have

[p. 5]

the small house in the garden. In any case, whatever his plans for the future might be, he must remain with them for the present.

This was a generous offer, worthy of a samurai. Konojo gratefully accepted it, and became one of the family. About a fortnight afterwards he settled himself in the little house at the end of the garden. Hasunuma, his wife, and their second daughter, O Kei, had gone, by command of the Daimio, to the Higan, a religious ceremony held in March; Hasunuma also always worshipped at his ancestral tombs at this time. Towards the dusk of evening they were returning in their palanquins. Konojo stood at the gate to see them pass, as was proper and respectful. The old samurai passed first, and was followed by his wife's palanquin, and then by that of O Kei. As this last passed the gate Konojo thought he heard something fall, causing a metallic sound. After the palanquin had passed he picked it up without any particular attention.

It was the golden hairpin; but of course, though Konojo's father had told him of the pin, Konojo had no idea that this was it, and therefore he thought nothing more than that it must be O Kei San's. He went back to his little house, closed it for the night, and was about to retire when he heard a knock at the door. 'Who is there?' he shouted. 'What do you want?' There came no answer, and Konojo lay down on his bed, thinking himself to have been mistaken. But there came another knock, louder than the first; and Konojo jumped out of bed, and lit the ando. [*1] 'If not a fox or a badger,'

[p. 6]

thought he, 'it must be some evil spirit come to disturb me.'

On opening the door, with the ando in one hand, and a stick in the other, Konojo looked out into the dark, and there, to his astonishment, he beheld a vision of female beauty the like of which he had never seen before. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' quoth he.

'I am O Kei San, O Ko's younger sister,' answered the vision. 'Though you have not seen me, I have several times seen you, and I have fallen so madly in love with you that I can think of nothing else but you. When you picked up my golden pin to-night on our return, I had dropped it to serve as an excuse to come to you and knock. You must love me in return; for otherwise I must die!'

This heated and outrageous declaration scandalised poor Konojo. Moreover, he felt that it would be doing his kind host Hasunuma a great injustice to be receiving his younger daughter at this hour of the night and make love to her. He expressed himself forcibly in these terms.

'If you will not love me as I love you, then I shall take my revenge,' said O Kei, 'by telling my father that you got me to come here by making love to me, and that you then insulted me.'

Poor Konojo! He was in a nice mess. What he feared most of all was that the girl would do as she said, that the samurai would believe her, and that he would be a disgraced and villainous person. He gave way, therefore, to the girl's request. Night after night she visited him, until nearly a month had passed. During

[p. 7]

this time Konojo had learned to love dearly the beautiful O Kei. Talking to her one evening, he said:

'My dearest O Kei, I do not like this secret love of ours. Is it not better that we go away? If I asked your father to give you to me in marriage he would refuse, because I was betrothed to your sister.'

'Yes,' answered O Kei: 'that is what, I also have been wishing. Let us leave this very night, and go to Ishinomaki, the place where (you have told me) lives a faithful servant of your late father's, called Kinzo.'

'Yes: Kinzo is his name, and Ishinomaki is the place. Let us start as soon as possible.'

Having thrust a few clothes into a bag, they started secretly and late that night, and duly arrived at their destination. Kinzo was delighted to receive them, and pleased to show how hospitable he could be to his late master's son and the beautiful lady.

They lived very happily for a year. Then one day O Kei said:

'I think we ought to return, to my parents now. If they were angry with us at first they will have got over the worst of it. We have never written. They must be getting anxious as to my fate as they grow older. Yes: we ought to go.'

Konojo agreed. Long had he felt the injustice he was doing Hasunuma.

Next day they found themselves back in Sendai, and Konojo could not help feeling a little nervous as he approached the samurai's house. They stopped at the outer gate, and O Kei said to Konojo, 'I think it will be better for you to go in and see my father and mother

[p. 8]

first. If they get very angry show them this golden pin.

Konojo stepped boldly up to the door, and asked for an interview with the samurai.

Before the servant had time to return, Konojo heard the old man shout, 'Konojo San! Why, of course! Bring the boy in at once,' and he himself came out to welcome him.

'My dear boy,' said the samurai, 'right glad am I to see you back again. I am sorry you did not find your life with us good enough. You might have said you were going. But there--I suppose you take after your father in these matters, and prefer to disappear mysteriously. You are welcome back, at all events.'

Konojo was astonished at this speech, and answered:

'But, sir, I have come to beg pardon for my sin.'

'What sin have you committed?' queried the samurai in great surprise, and drawing himself up, in a dignified manner.

Konojo then gave a full account of his love-affair with O Kei. From beginning to end he told it all, and as he proceeded the samurai showed signs of impatience.

'Do not joke, sir! My daughter O Kei San is not a subject for jokes and untruths. She has been as one dead for over a year--so ill that we have with difficulty forced gruel into her mouth. Moreover, she has spoken no word and shown no sign of life.'

'I am neither stating what is untrue nor joking,' said Konojo. 'If you but send outside, you will find O Kei in the palanquin, in which I left her.'

A servant was immediately sent to see, and returned,

[p. 9]

stating that there was neither palanquin nor any one at the gate.

Konojo, seeing that the samurai was now beginning to look perplexed and angry, drew the golden pin from his clothes, saying:

'See! if you doubt me and think I am lying, here is the pin which O Kei told me to give you!'

'Bik-ku-ri-shi-ta-!' [*1] exclaimed O Kei's mother. 'How came this pin into your hands? I myself put it into Ko San's coffin just before it was closed.'

The samurai and Konojo stared at each other, and the mother at both. Neither knew what to think, or what to say or do. Imagine the general surprise when the sick O Kei walked into the room, having risen from her bed as if she had never been ill for a moment. She was the picture of health and beauty.

'How is this?' asked the samurai, almost shouting. 'How is it, O Kei, that you have come from your sickbed dressed and with your hair done and looking as if you had never known a moment of illness?'

'I am not O Kei, but the spirit of O Ko,' was the answer. 'I was most unfortunate in dying before the return of Konojo San, for had I lived until then I should have become quite well and been married to him. As it was, my spirit was unhappy. It took the form of my dear sister O Kei, and for a year has lived happily in her body with Konojo. It is appeased now, and about to take its real rest.'

'There is one condition, however, Konojo, which I must make,' said the girl, turning to him. 'You must

[p. 10]

marry my sister O Kei. If you do this my spirit will rest truly in peace, and then O Kei will become well and strong. Will you promise to marry O Kei?'

The old samurai, his wife, and Konojo were all amazed at this. The appearance of the girl was that of O Kei; but the voice and manners were those of O Ko. Then, there was the golden hairpin as further proof. The mother knew it well. She had placed it in Ko's hair just before the tub coffin was closed. Nobody could undeceive her on that point.

'But,' said the samurai at last, 'O Ko has been dead and buried for more than a year now. That you should appear to us puzzles us all. Why should you trouble us so?'

'I have explained already,' resumed the girl. 'My spirit could not rest until it had lived with Konojo, whom it knew to be faithful. It has done this now, and is prepared to rest. My only desire is to see Konojo marry my sister.'

Hasunuma, his wife, and Konojo held a consultation. They were quite prepared that O Kei should marry, and Konojo did not object.

All things being settled, the ghost-girl held out her hand to Konojo saying:

'This is the last time you will touch the hand of O Ko. Farewell, my dear parents! Farewell to you all! I am about to pass away.'

Then she fainted away, and seemed dead, and remained thus for half an hour; while the others, overcome with the strange and weird things which they had seen and heard, sat round her, hardly uttering a word.

[p. 11]

At the end of half an hour the body came to life, and standing up, said:

'Dear parents, have no more fear for me. I am perfectly well again; but I have no idea how I got down from my sick-room in this costume, or how it is that I feel so well.'

Several questions were put to her; but it was quite evident that O Kei knew nothing of what had happened--nothing of the spirit of O Ko San, or of the golden hairpin!

A week later she and Konojo were married, and the golden hairpin was given to a shrine at Shiogama, to which, until quite recently, crowds used to go and worship.

Footnotes

^1:1 This story savours of 'Botan Doro,' or Peony Lantern story, told both by Mitford and by Lafcadio Hearn. In this instance, however, the spirit of the dead sister passes into the body of the living one, assumes her form, leaves her sick and ill for over a year, and then allows her to reappear as if she had never been ill at all. It is the first story of its kind I have heard.

^3:1 'O' means Honourable Miss; 'San' means Miss. Either will do; but Ko is the name.

^4:1 Family shrine.

^5:1 Lamp.

^9:1 An exclamation, such as 'Great Scot!'

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

Click to enlarge
3. Heitaro meets Higo Under the Willow Tree

  

II

  

THE SPIRIT OF THE WILLOW TREE

ABOUT one thousand years ago (but according to the dates of the story 744 years ago) the temple of 'San-ju-san-gen Do' was founded. That was in 1132. 'San-ju-san-gen Do' means hall of thirty-three spaces; and there are said to be over 33,333 figures of the Goddess Kwannon, the Goddess of Mercy, in the temple to-day. Before the temple was built, in a village near by stood a willow tree of great size. It marked the playing-ground of all the village children, who swung on its branches, and climbed on its limbs. It afforded shade to the aged in the heat of summer, and in the evenings, when work was done, many were the village lads and lasses who vowed eternal love under its branches. The tree seemed an influence for good to all. Even the weary traveller could sleep peacefully and almost dry under its branches. Alas, even in those times men were often ruthless with regard to trees. One day the villagers announced an intention to cut it down and use it to build a bridge across the river.

There lived in the village a young farmer named

[p. 13]

Heitaro, a great favourite, who had lived near the old tree all his days, as his forefathers had done; and he was greatly against cutting it down.

Such a tree should be respected, thought he. Had it not braved the storms of hundreds of years? In the heat of summer what pleasure it afforded the children! Did it not give to the weary shelter, and to the love-smitten a sense of romance? All these thoughts Heitaro impressed upon the villagers. 'Sooner than approve your cutting it down,' he said, 'I will give you as many of my own trees as you require to build the bridge. You must leave this dear old willow alone for ever.'

The villagers readily agreed. They also had a secret veneration for the old tree.

Heitaro was delighted, and readily found wood with which to build the bridge.

Some days later Heitaro, returning from his work, found standing by the willow a beautiful girl.

Instinctively he bowed to her. She returned the bow. They spoke together of the tree, its age and beauty. They seemed, in fact, to be drawn towards each other by a common sympathy. Heitaro was sorry when she said that she must be going, and bade him good-day. That evening his mind was far from being fixed on the ordinary things of life. 'Who was the lady under the willow tree? How I wish I could see her again!' thought he. There was no sleep for Heitaro that night. He had caught the fever of love.

Next day he was at his work early; and he remained at it all day, working doubly hard, so as to try and forget the lady of the willow tree; but on his way home in the

[p. 14]

evening, behold, there was the lady again! This time she came forward to greet him in the most friendly way.

'Welcome, good friend!' she said. 'Come and rest under the branches of the willow you love so well, for you must be tired.'

Heitaro readily accepted this invitation, and not only did he rest, but also he declared his love.

Day by day after this the mysterious girl (whom no others had seen) used to meet Heitaro, and at last she promised to marry him if he asked no questions as to her parents or friends. 'I have none,' she said. 'I can only promise to be a good and faithful wife, and tell you that I love you with all my heart and soul. Call me, then, "Higo," [*1] and I will be your wife.'

Next day Heitaro took Higo to his house, and they were married. A son was born to them in a little less than a year, and became their absorbing joy. There was not a moment of their spare time in which either Heitaro or his wife was not playing with the child, whom they called Chiyodo. It is doubtful if a more happy home could have been found in all Japan than the house of Heitaro, with his good wife Higo and their beautiful child.

Alas, where in this world has complete happiness ever been known to last? Even did the gods permit this, the laws of man would not.

When Chiyodo had reached the age of five years--the most beautiful boy in the neighbourhood--the ex-Emperor Toba decided to build in Kyoto an immense temple to Kwannon. He would contribute 1001 images of the Goddess of Mercy. (Now, in 1907, as we said at

[p. 15]

the beginning, this temple is known as 'San-ju-san-gen Do,' and contains 33,333 images.)

The ex-Emperor Toba's wish having become known, orders were given by the authorities to collect timber for the building of the vast temple; and so it came to pass that the days of the big willow tree were numbered, for it would be wanted, with many others, to form the roof.

Heitaro tried to save the tree again by offering every other he had on his land for nothing; but that was in vain. Even the villagers became anxious to see their willow tree built into the temple. It would bring them good luck, they thought, and in any case be a handsome gift of theirs towards the great temple.

The fatal time arrived. One night, when Heitaro and his wife and child had retired to rest and were sleeping, Heitaro was awakened by the sound of axes chopping. To his astonishment, he found his beloved wife sitting up in her bed, gazing earnestly at him, while tears rolled down her cheeks and she was sobbing bitterly.

'My dearest husband,' she said with choking voice, pray listen to what I tell you now, and do not doubt me. This is, unhappily, not a dream. When we married I begged you not to ask me my history, and you have never done so; but I said I would tell you some day if there should be a real occasion to do so. Unhappily, that occasion has now arrived, my dear husband. I am no less a thing than the spirit of the willow tree you loved, and so generously saved six years ago. It was to repay you for this great kindness that I appeared to you in human form under the tree, hoping that I could

[p. 16]

live with you and make you happy for your whole life. Alas, it cannot be! They are cutting down the willow. How I feel every stroke of their axes! I must return to die, for I am part of it. My heart breaks to think also of leaving my darling child Chiyodo and of his great sorrow when he knows that his mother is no longer in the world. Comfort him, dearest husband! He is old enough and strong enough to be with you now without a mother and yet not suffer. I wish you both long lives of prosperity. Farewell, my dearest! I must be off to the willow, for I hear them striking with their axes harder and harder, and it weakens me each blow they give.'

Heitaro awoke his child just as Higo disappeared, wondering to himself if it were not a dream. No: it was no dream. Chiyodo, awaking, stretched his arms in the direction his mother had gone, crying bitterly and imploring her to come back.

My darling child,' said Heitaro, 'she has gone. She cannot come back. Come: let us dress, and go and see her funeral. Your mother was the spirit of the Great Willow.'

A little later, at the break of day, Heitaro took Chiyodo by the hand and led him to the tree. On reaching it they found it down, and already lopped of its branches. The feelings of Heitaro may be well imagined.

Strange! In spite of united efforts, the men were unable to move the stem a single inch towards the river, in which it was to be floated to Kyoto.

On seeing this, Heitaro addressed the men.

[p. 17]

'My friends,' said he, 'the dead trunk of the tree which you are trying to move contains the spirit of my wife. Perhaps, if you will allow my little son Chiyodo to help you, it will be more easy for you; and he would like to help in showing his last respects to his mother.'

The woodcutters were fully agreeable, and, much to their astonishment, as Chiyodo came to the back end of the log and pushed it with his little hand, the timber glided easily towards the river, his father singing the while an 'Uta.' [*1] There is a well-known song or ballad in the 'Uta' style said to have sprung from this event; it is sung to the present day by men drawing heavy weights or doing hard labour:--

Muzan naru kana
 Motowa kumanono yanagino tsuyu de
 Sodate-agetaru kono midorigo wa
 ###374###oi, ###374###oi, ###374###oito na! [*2]

In Wakanoura the labourers sing a working or hauling song, which also is said to have sprung from this story of the 'Yanagi no Se':--

Wakano urani wa meishoga gozaru
 Ichini Gongen
 Nini Tamatsushima [p. 18]
 Sanni Sagari Matsu
 Shini Shiogama
 ###374###oi, ###374###oi, ###375###oi to na. [*1]

A third 'Uta' sprang from this story, and is often applied to small children helping.

The waggon could not be drawn when it came to the front of Heitaro's house, so his little five-year-old boy Chiyodo was obliged to help, and they sang:--

Muzan naru kana
 Motowa Kumanono yanagino tsuyu de
 Sodate-agetaru kono midorigo wa
 ###374###oi, ###375###oi, ###375###oito na. [*2]

 

Footnotes

^14:1 Meaning goithe or willow.

^17:1 Poetical song.

^17:2

Is it not sad to see the little fellow,
 Who sprang from the dew of the Kumano Willow,
 And is thus far budding well?
 Heave ho, heave ho, pull hard, my lads.

^18:1

There are famous places in Wakanoura
 First Gongen
 Second Tamatsushima
 Third, the pine tree with its hanging branches
 Fourth comes Shiogama
 Is it not good, good, good?

^18:2

Is it not sad to see the little fellow,
 Who sprang from the dew of the Kumano Willow, 
 And is thus far budding well?
 Heave ho, heave ho, pull hard, my lads.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

Click to enlarge
4. Shimizutani. The Servants find their Mistress Lying Insensible

  

III

  

GHOST OF THE VIOLET WELL [*1]

IN the wild province of Yamato, or very near to its borders, is a beautiful mountain known as Yoshino yama. It is not only known for its abundance of cherry blossom in the spring, but it is also celebrated in relation to more than one bloody battle. In fact, Yoshino might be called the staging-place of historical battles. Many say, when in Yoshino, 'We are walking on history, because Yoshino itself is history.' Near Yoshino mountain lay another, known as Tsubosaka; and between them is the Valley of Shimizutani, in which is the Violet Well.

At the approach of spring in this tani [*2] the grass assumes a perfect emerald green, while moss grows luxuriantly over rocks and boulders. Towards the end of April great patches of deep-purple wild violets show up in the lower parts of the valley, while up the sides pink and scarlet azaleas grow in a manner which beggars description.

Some thirty years ago a beautiful girl of the age of seventeen, named Shinge, was wending her way up

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] Shimizutani, accompanied by four servants. All were out for a picnic, and all, of course, were in search of wildflowers. O Shinge San was the daughter of a Daimio who lived in the neighbourhood. Every year she was in the habit of having this picnic, and coming to Shimizutani at the end of April to hunt for her favourite flower, the purple violet (sumire).

The five girls, carrying bamboo baskets, were eagerly collecting flowers, enjoying the occupation as only Japanese girls can. They raced in their rivalry to have the prettiest basketful. There not being so many purple violets as were wanted, O Shinge San said, 'Let us go to the northern end of the valley, where the Violet Well is.'

Naturally the girls assented, and off they all ran, each eager to be there first, laughing as they went.

O Shinge outran the rest, and arrived before any of them; and, espying a huge bunch of her favourite flowers, of the deepest purple and very sweet in smell, she flung herself down, anxious to pick them before the others came. As she stretched out her delicate hand to grasp them--oh, horror!--a great mountain snake raised his head from beneath his shady retreat. So frightened was O Shinge San, she fainted away on the spot.

In the meanwhile the other girls had given up the race, thinking it would please their mistress to arrive first. They picked what they most fancied, chased butterflies, and arrived fully fifteen minutes after O Shinge San had fainted.

On seeing her thus laid out on the grass, a great fear

[p. 21]

filled them that she was dead, and their alarm increased when they saw a large green snake coiled near her head.

They screamed, as do most girls amid such circumstances; but one of them, Matsu, who did not lose her head so much as the others, threw her basket of flowers at the snake, which, not liking the bombardment, uncoiled himself and slid away, hoping to find a quieter place. Then all four girls bent over their mistress. They rubbed her hands and threw water on her face, but without effect. O Shines beautiful complexion became paler and paler, while her red lips assumed the purplish hue that is a sign of approaching death. The girls were heartbroken. Tears coursed down their faces. They did not know what to do, for they could not carry her. What a terrible state of affairs!

Just at that moment they heard a man's voice close behind them:

'Do not be so sad! I can restore the young lady to consciousness if you will allow me.'

They turned, and saw a remarkably handsome youth standing on the grass not ten feet away. He appeared as an angel from Heaven.

Without saying more, the young man approached the prostrate figure of O Shinge, and, taking her hand in his, felt her pulse. None of the servants liked to interfere in this breach of etiquette. He had not asked permission; but his manner was so gentle and sympathetic that they could say nothing.

The stranger examined O Shinge carefully, keeping silence. Having finished, he took out of his pocket a

[p. 22]

little case of medicine, and, putting some white powder from this into a paper, said:

'I am a doctor from a neighbouring village, and I have just been to see a patient at the end of the valley. By good fortune I returned this way, and am able to help you and save your mistress's life. Give her this medicine, while I hunt for and kill the snake.'

O Matsu San forced the medicine, along with a little water, into her mistress's mouth, and in a few minutes she began to recover.

Shortly after this the doctor returned, carrying the dead snake on a stick.

'Is this the snake you saw lying by your young mistress?' he asked.

'Yes, yes,' they cried: 'that is the horrible thing.'

'Then,' said the doctor, 'it is lucky I came, for it is very poisonous, and I fear your mistress would soon have died had I not arrived and been able to give her the medicine. Ah! I see that it is already doing the beautiful young lady good.'

On hearing the young man's voice O Shinge San sat up.

'Pray, sir, may I ask to whom I am indebted for bringing me thus back to life?' she asked.

The doctor did not answer, but in a proud and manly way contented himself by smiling, and bowing low and respectfully after the Japanese fashion; and departed as quietly and unassumingly as he had arrived, disappearing in the sleepy mist which always appears in the afternoons of spring time in the Shimizu Valley.

The four girls helped their mistress home; but indeed she wanted little assistance, for the medicine had

[p. 23]

done her much good, and she felt quite recovered. O Shinge's father and mother were very grateful for their daughter's recovery; but the name of the handsome young doctor remained a secret to all except the servant girl Matsu.

For four days O Shinge remained quite well; but on the fifth day, for some cause or another, she took to her bed, saying she was sick. She did not sleep, and did not wish to talk, but only to think, and think, and think. Neither father nor mother could make out what her illness was. There was no fever.

Doctors were sent for, one after another; but none of them could say what was the matter. All they saw was that she daily became weaker. Asano Zembei, Shinge's father, was heartbroken, and so was his wife. They had tried everything and failed to do the slightest good to poor O Shinge.

One day O Matsu San craved an interview with Asano Zembei--who, by the by, was the head of all his family, a Daimio and great grandee. Zembei was not accustomed to listen to servants' opinions; but, knowing that O Matsu was faithful to his daughter and loved her very nearly as much as he did himself, he consented to hear her, and O Matsu was .ushered into his presence.

'Oh, master,' said the servant, 'if you will let me find a doctor for my young mistress, I can promise to find one who will cure her.'

'Where on earth will you find such a doctor? Have we not had all the best doctors in the province and some even from the capital? Where do you propose to look for one?'

[p. 24]

O Matsu answered:

'Ah, master, my mistress is not suffering from an illness which can be cured by medicines--not even if they be given by the quart. Nor are doctors of much use. There is, however, one that I know of who could cure her. My mistress's illness is of the heart. The doctor I know of can cure her. It is for love of him that her heart suffers; it has suffered so from the day when he saved her life from the snake-bite.'

Then O Matsu told particulars of the adventure at the picnic which had not been told before,--for O Shinge had asked her servants to say as little as possible, fearing they would not be allowed to go to the Valley of the Violet Well again.

'What is the name of this doctor?' asked Asano Zembei, 'and who is he?'

'Sir,' answered O Matsu, 'he is Doctor Yoshisawa, a very handsome young man, of most courtly manners; but he is of low birth, being only of the eta. [*1] Please think, master, of my young mistress's burning heart, full of love for the man who saved her life--and no wonder, for he is very handsome and has the manners of a proud samurai. The only cure for your daughter, sir, is to be allowed to marry her lover.'

O Shinge's mother felt very sad when she heard this. She knew well (perhaps by experience) of the illnesses caused by love. She wept, and said to Zembei:

'I am quite with you in sorrow, my lord, at the terrible trouble that has come to us; but I cannot see my daughter die thus. Let us tell her we will make

[p. 25]

inquiries about the man she loves, and see if we can make him our son-in-law. In any case, it is the custom to make full inquiries, which will extend over some days; and in this time our daughter may recover somewhat and get strong enough to hear the news that we cannot accept her lover as our son-in-law.'

Zembei agreed to this, and O Matsu promised to say nothing to her mistress of the interview.

O Shinge San was told by her mother that her father, though he had not consented to the engagement, had promised to make inquiries about Yoshisawa.

O Shinge took food and regained much strength on this news; and when she was strong enough, some ten days later, she was called into her father's presence, accompanied by her mother.

'My sweet daughter,' said Zembei, 'I have made careful inquiries about Dr. Yoshisawa, your lover. Deeply as it grieves me to say so, it is impossible that I, your father, the head of our whole family, can consent to your marriage with one of so low a family as Yoshisawa, who, in spite of his own goodness, has sprung from the eta. I must hear no more of it. Such a contract would be impossible for the Asano family.'

No one ventured to say a word to this. In Japan the head of a family's decision is final.

Poor O Shinge bowed to her father, and went to her own room, where she wept bitterly; O Matsu, the faithful servant, doing her best to console her.

Next morning, to the astonishment of the household, O Shinge San could nowhere be found. Search was made everywhere; even Dr. Yoshisawa joined in the search.

[p. 26]

On the third day after the disappearance one of the searchers looked down the Violet Well, and saw poor O Shines floating body.

Two days later she was buried, and on that day Yoshisawa threw himself into the well.

The people say that even now, on wet, stormy nights, they see the ghost of O Shinge San floating over the well, while some declare that they hear the sound of a young man weeping in the Valley of Shimizutani.

Footnotes

^19:1 Told to me by Shofukutei Fukuga.

^19:2 Hollow.

^24:1 The eta are the lowest people or caste in Japan--skinners and killers of animals.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

Click to enlarge
5. The Ghost of Yoichi Appears to the Three as They Talk

  

IV

  

GHOST STORY OF THE FLUTE'S TOMB [*1]

LONG ago, at a small and out-of-the-way village called Kumedamura, about eight miles to the south-east of Sakai city, in Idsumo Province, there was made a tomb, the Fuezuka or Flute's Tomb, and to this day many people go thither to offer up prayer and to worship, bringing with them flowers and incense-sticks, which are deposited as offerings to the spirit of the man who was buried there. All the year round people flock to it. There is no season at which they pray more particularly than at another.

The Fuezuka tomb is situated on a large pond called Kumeda, some five miles in circumference, and all the places around this pond are known as of Kumeda Pond, from which the village of Kumeda took its name.

Whose tomb can it be that attracts such sympathy The tomb itself is a simple stone pillar, with nothing artistic to recommend it. Neither is the surrounding scenery interesting; it is flat and ugly until the mountains of Kiushu are reached. I must tell, as well as I can, the story of whose tomb it is.

[p. 28]

Between seventy and eighty years ago there lived near the pond in the village of Kumedamura a blind amma [*1] called Yoichi. Yoichi was extremely popular in the neighbourhood, being very honest and kind, besides being quite a professor in the art of massage--a treatment necessary to almost every Japanese. It would be difficult indeed to find a village that had not its amma.

Yoichi was blind, and, like all men of his calling, carried an iron wand or stick, also a flute or 'fuezuka'--the stick to feel his way about with, and the flute to let people know he was ready for employment. So good an amma was Yoichi, he was nearly always employed, and, consequently, fairly well off, having a little house of his own and one servant, who cooked his food.

A little way from Yoichi's house was a small teahouse, placed upon the banks of the pond. One evening (April 5; cherry-blossom season), just at dusk, Yoichi was on his way home, having been at work all day. His road led him by the pond. There he heard a girl crying piteously. He stopped and listened for a few moments, and gathered from what he heard that the girl was about to drown herself. Just as she entered the lake Yoichi caught her by the dress and dragged her out.

'Who are you, and why in such trouble as to wish to die?' he asked.

'I am Asayo, the teahouse girl,' she answered. 'You know me quite well. You must know, also, that it is not possible for me to support myself out of the small pittance which is paid by my master. I have eaten nothing for two days now, and am tired of my life.'

[p. 29]

'Come, come!' said the blind man. 'Dry your tears. I will take you to my house, and do what I can to help you. You are only twenty-five years of age, and I am told still a fair-looking girl. Perhaps you will marry! In any case, I will take care of you, and you must not think of killing yourself. Come with me now; and I will see that you are well fed, and that dry clothes are given you.'

So Yoichi led Asayo to his home.

A few months found them wedded to each other. Were they happy? Well, they should have been, for Yoichi treated his wife with the greatest kindness; but she was unlike her husband. She was selfish, bad-tempered, and unfaithful. In the eyes of Japanese infidelity is the worst of sins. How much more, then, is it against the country's spirit when advantage is taken of a husband who is blind?

Some three months after they had been married, and in the heat of August, there came to the village a company of actors. Among them was Sawamura Tamataro, of some repute in Asakusa.

Asayo, who was very fond of a play, spent much of her time and her husband's money in going to the theatre. In less than two days she had fallen violently in love with Tamataro. She sent him money, hardly earned by her blind husband. She wrote to him love-letters, begged him to allow her to come and visit him, and generally disgraced her sex.

Things went from bad to worse. The secret meetings of Asayo and the actor scandalised the neighbourhood. As in most such cases, the husband knew nothing about

[p. 30]

them. Frequently, when he went home, the actor was in his house, but kept quiet, and Asayo let him out secretly, even going with him sometimes.

Every one felt sorry for Yoichi; but none liked to tell him of his wife's infidelity.

One day Yoichi went to shampoo a customer, who told him of Asayo's conduct. Yoichi was incredulous.

'But yes: it is true,' said the son of his customer. 'Even now the actor Tamataro is with your wife. So soon as you left your house he slipped in. This he does every day, and many of us see it. We all feel sorry for you in your blindness, and should be glad to help you to punish her.'

Yoichi was deeply grieved, for he knew that his friends were in earnest; but, though blind, he would accept no assistance to convict his wife. He trudged home as fast as his blindness would permit, making as little noise as possible with his staff.

On reaching home Yoichi found the front door fastened from the inside. He went to the back, and found the same thing there. There was no way of getting in without breaking a door and making a noise. Yoichi was much excited now; for he knew that his guilty wife and her lover were inside, and he would have liked to kill them both. Great strength came to him, and he raised himself bit by hit until he reached the top of the roof. He intended to enter the house by letting himself down through the 'tem-mado.' [*1] Unfortunately, the straw rope he used in doing this was rotten, and gave way, precipitating him below, where he

[p. 31]

fell on the kinuta. [*1] He fractured his skull, and died instantly.

Asayo and the actor, hearing the noise, went to see what had happened, and were rather pleased to find poor Yoichi dead. They did not report the death until next day, when they said that Yoichi had fallen downstairs and thus killed himself.

They buried him with indecent haste, and hardly with proper respect.

Yoichi having no children, his property, according to the Japanese law, went to his bad wife, and only a few months passed before Asayo and the actor were married. Apparently they were happy, though none in the village of Kumeda had any sympathy for them, all being disgusted at their behaviour to the poor blind shampooer Yoichi.

Months passed by without event of any interest in the village. No one bothered about Asayo and her husband; and they bothered about no one else, being sufficiently interested in themselves. The scandal-mongers had become tired, and, like all nine-day wonders, the history of the blind amma, Asayo, and Tamataro had passed into silence.

However, it does not do to be assured while the spirit of the injured dead goes unavenged.

Up in one of the western provinces, at a small village called Minato, lived one of Yoichi's friends, who was closely connected with him. This was Okuda Ichibei. He and Yoichi had been to school together. They had promised when Ichibei went up to the north-west always

[p. 32]

to remember each other, and to help each other in time of need, and when Yoichi had become blind Ichibei came down to Kumeda and helped to start Yoichi in his business of amma, which he did by giving him a house to live in--a house which had been bequeathed to Ichibei. Again fate decreed that it should be in Ichibei's power to help his friend. At that time news travelled very slowly, and Ichibei had not immediately heard of Yoichi's death or even of his marriage. Judge, then, of his surprise, one night on awaking, to find, standing near his pillow, the figure of a man whom by and by he recognised as Yoichi!

'Why, Yoichi! I am glad to see you,' he said; 'but how late at night you have arrived! Why did you not let me know you were coming? I should have been up to receive you, and there would have been a hot meal ready. But never mind. I will call a servant, and everything shall be ready as soon as possible. In the meantime be seated, and tell me about yourself, and how you travelled so far. To have come through the mountains and other wild country from Kumeda is hard enough at best; but for one who is blind it is wonderful.'

'I am no longer a living man,' answered the ghost of Yoichi (for such it was). 'I am indeed your friend Yoichi's spirit, and I shall wander about until I can be avenged for a great ill which has been done me. I have come to beg of you to help me, that my spirit may go to rest. If you listen I will tell my story, and you can then do as you think best.'

Ichibei was very much astonished (not to say a little

[p. 33]

nervous) to know that he was in the presence of a ghost; but he was a brave man, and Yoichi had been his friend. He was deeply grieved to hear of Yoichi's death, and realised that the restlessness of his spirit showed him to have been injured. Ichibei decided not only to listen to the story but also to revenge Yoichi, and said so.

The ghost then told all that had happened since he had been set up in the house at Kumedamura. He told of his success as a masseur; of how he had saved the life of Asayo, how he had taken her to his house and subsequently married her; of the arrival of the accursed acting company which contained the man who had ruined his life; of his own death and hasty burial; and of the marriage of Asayo and the actor. 'I must be avenged. Will you help me to rest in peace?' he said in conclusion.

Ichibei promised. Then the spirit of Yoichi disappeared, and Ichibei slept again.

Next morning Ichibei thought he must have been dreaming; but he remembered the vision and the narrative so clearly that he perceived them to have been actual. Suddenly turning with the intention to get up, he caught sight of the shine of a metal flute close to his pillow. It was the flute of a blind amma. It was marked with Yoichi's name.

Ichibei resolved to start for  and ascertain locally all about Yoichi.

In those times, when there was no railway and a rickshaw only here and there, travel was slow. Ichibei took ten days to reach . He immediately went to the house of his friend Yoichi, and was there told

[p. 34]

the whole history again, but naturally in another way. Asayo said:

'Yes: he saved my life. We were married, and I helped my blind husband in everything. One day, alas, he mistook the staircase for a door, falling down and killing himself. Now I am married to his great friend, an actor called Tamataro, whom you see here.'

Ichibei knew that the ghost of Yoichi was not likely to tell him lies, and to ask for vengeance unjustly. Therefore he continued talking to Asayo and her husband, listening to their lies, and wondering what would be the fitting procedure.

Ten o'clock passed thus, and eleven. At twelve o'clock, when Asayo for the sixth or seventh time was assuring Ichibei that everything possible had been done for her blind husband, a wind storm suddenly arose, and in the midst of it was heard the sound of the amma's flute, just as Yoichi played it; it was so unmistakably his that Asayo screamed with fear.

At first distant, nearer and nearer approached the sound, until at last it seemed to be in the room itself. At that moment a cold puff of air came down the tem-mado, and the ghost of Yoichi was seen standing beneath it, a cold, white, glimmering and sad-faced wraith.

Tamataro and his wife tried to get up and run out of the house; but they found that their legs would not support them, so full were they of fear.

Tamataro seized a lamp and flung it at the ghost; but the ghost was not to be moved. The lamp passed through him, and broke, setting fire to the house, which burned instantly, the wind fanning the flames.

[p. 35]

Ichibei made his escape; but neither Asayo nor her husband could move, and the flames consumed them in the presence of Yoichi's ghost. Their cries were loud and piercing.

Ichibei had all the ashes swept up and placed in a tomb. He had buried in another grave the flute of the blind amma, and erected on the ground where the house had been a monument sacred to the memory of Yoichi.

It is known as FUEZUKA NO KWAIDAN. [*1]

Footnotes

^27:1 Told to me by Fukuga.

^28:1 Shampooer.

^30:1 Hole in the roof of a Japanese house, in place of a chimney.

^31:1 A hard block of wood used in stretching cotton cloth.

^35:1 The flute ghost tomb.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

Click to enlarge
6. Jogen Sights the Haunted Temple

  

V

  

A HAUNTED TEMPLE IN INABA PROVINCE [*1]

ABOUT the year 1680 there stood an old temple on a wild pine-clad mountain near the village of Kisaichi, in the Province of Inaba. The temple was far up in a rocky ravine. So high and thick were the trees, they kept out nearly all daylight, even when the sun was at its highest. As long as the old men of the village could remember the temple had been haunted by a shito dama and the skeleton ghost (they thought) of some former priestly occupant. Many priests had tried to live in the

[p. 37]

temple and make it their home but all had died. No one could spend a night there and live.

At last, in the winter of 1701, there arrived at the village of Kisaichi a priest who was on a pilgrimage. His name was Jogen, and he was a native of the Province of Kai.

Jogen had come to see the haunted temple. He was fond of studying such things. Though he believed in the shito dama form of spiritual return to earth, he did not believe in ghosts. As a matter of fact, he was anxious to see a shito dama, and, moreover, wished to have a temple of his own. In this wild mountain temple, with a history which fear and death prevented people from visiting or priests inhabiting, he thought that he had (to put it in vulgar English) 'a real good thing.' Thus he had found his way to the village on the evening of a cold December night, and had gone to the inn to eat his rice and to hear all he could about the temple.

Jogen was no coward; on the contrary, he was a brave man, and made all inquiries in the calmest manner.

'Sir,' said the landlord, 'your holiness must not think of going to this temple, for it means death. Many good priests have tried to stay the night there, and every one has been found next morning dead, or has died shortly after daybreak without coming to his senses. It is no use, sir, trying to defy such an evil spirit as comes to this temple. I beg you, sir, to give up the idea. Badly as we want a temple here, we wish for no more deaths, and often think of burning down this old haunted one and building a new.'

[p. 38]

Jogen, however, was firm in his resolve to find and see the ghost.

'Kind sir,' he answered, 'your wishes are for my preservation; but it is my ambition to see a shito dama, and, if prayers can quiet it, to reopen the temple, to read its legends from the old books that must lie hidden therein, and to be the head priest of it generally.'

The innkeeper, seeing that the priest was not to be dissuaded, gave up the attempt, and promised that his son should accompany him as guide in the morning, and carry sufficient provisions for a day.

Next morning was one of brilliant sunshine, and Jogen was out of bed early, making preparations. Kosa, the innkeeper's twenty-year-old son, was tying up the priest's bedding and enough boiled rice to last him nearly two full days. It was decided that Kosa, after leaving the priest at the temple, should return to the village, for he as well as every other villager refused to spend a night at the weird place; but he and his father agreed to go and see Jogen on the morrow, or (as some one grimly put it) 'to carry him down and give him an honourable funeral and decent burial.'

Jogen entered fully into this joke, and shortly after left the village, with Kosa carrying his things and guiding the way.

The gorge in which the temple was situated was very steep and wild. Great moss-clad rocks lay strewn everywhere. When Jogen and his companion had got half-way up they sat down to rest and eat. Soon they heard voices of persons ascending, and ere long the innkeeper and some eight or nine of the village elders presented themselves.

[p. 39]

'We have followed you,' said the innkeeper, 'to try once more to dissuade you from running to a sure death. True, we want the temple opened and the ghosts appeased; but we do not wish it at the cost of another life. Please consider!'

'I cannot change my mind,' answered the priest. 'Besides, this is the one chance of my life. Your village elders have promised me that if I am able to appease the spirit and reopen the temple I shall be the head priest of the temple, which must hereafter become celebrated.'

Again Jogen refused to listen to advice, and laughed at the villagers' fears. Shouldering the packages that had been carried by Kosa, he said:

'Go back with the rest. I can find my own way now easily enough. I shall be glad if you return to-morrow with carpenters, for no doubt the temple is in sad want of repairs, both inside and out. Now, my friends, until to-morrow, farewell. Have no fear for me: I have none for myself.'

The villagers made deep bows. They were greatly impressed by the bravery of Jogen, and hoped that he might be spared to become their priest. Jogen in his turn bowed, and then began to continue his ascent. The others watched him as long as he remained in view, and then retraced their steps to the village; Kosa thanking the good fortune that had not necessitated his having to go to the temple with the priest and return in the evening alone. With two or three people he felt brave enough; but to be here in the gloom of this wild forest and near the haunted temple alone--no: that was not in his line.

As Jogen climbed he came suddenly in sight of the

[p. 40]

temple, which seemed to be almost over his head, so precipitous were the sides of the mountain and the path. Filled with curiosity, the priest pressed on in spite of his heavy load, and some fifteen minutes later arrived panting on the temple platform, or terrace, which, like the temple itself, had been built on driven piles and scaffolding.

At first glance Jogen recognised that the temple was large; but lack of attention had caused it to fall into great dilapidation. Rank grasses grew high about its sides; fungi and creepers abounded upon the damp, sodden posts and supports; so rotten, in fact, did these appear, the priest mentioned in his written notes that evening that he feared the spirits less than the state of the posts which supported the building.

Cautiously Jogen entered the temple, and saw that there was a remarkably large and fine gilded figure of Buddha, besides figures of many saints. There were also fine bronzes and vases, drums from which the parchment had rotted off, incense-burners, or koros, and other valuable or holy things.

Behind the temple were the priests' living quarters; evidently, before the ghost's time, the temple must have had some five or six priests ever present to attend to it and to the people who came to pray.

The gloom was oppressive, and as the evening was already approaching Jogen bethought himself of light. Unpacking his bundle, he filled a lamp with oil, and found temple-sticks for the candles which he had brought with him. Having placed one of these on either side of the figure of Buddha, he prayed earnestly for two hours, by which time it was quite dark. Then he took his

[p. 41]

simple meal of rice, and settled himself to watch and listen. In order that he might see inside and outside the temple at the same time, he had chosen the gallery. Concealed behind an old column, he waited, in his heart disbelieving in ghosts, but anxious, as his notes said, to see a shito dama.

For some two hours he heard nothing. The wind--such little as there was--sighed round the temple and through the stems of the tall trees. An owl hooted from time to time. Bats flew in and out. A fungusy smell pervaded the air.

Suddenly, near midnight, Jogen heard a rustling in the bushes below him, as if somebody were pushing through. He thought it was a deer, or perhaps one of the large red-faced apes so fond of the neighbourhood of high and deserted temples; perhaps, even, it might be a fox or a badger.

The priest was soon undeceived. At the place whence the sound of the rustling leaves had come, he saw the clear and distinct shape of the well-known shito dama. It moved first one way and then another, in a hovering and jerky manner, and from it a voice as of distant buzzing proceeded; but--horror of horrors!--what was that standing among the bushes?

The priest's blood ran cold. There stood the luminous skeleton of a man in loose priest's clothes, with glaring eyes and a parchment skin! At first it remained still; but as the shito dama rose higher and higher the ghost moved after it--sometimes visible, sometimes not.

Higher and higher came the shito dama, until finally

[p. 42]

the ghost stood at the base of the great figure of Buddha, and was facing Jogen.

Cold beads of sweat stood out on the priest's forehead; the marrow seemed to have frozen in his bones; he shook so that he could hardly stand. Biting his tongue to prevent screaming, he dashed for the small room in which he had left his bedding, and, having bolted himself in, proceeded to look through a crack between the boards. Yes! there was the figure of the ghost, still seated near the Buddha; but the shito dama had disappeared.

None of Jogen's senses left him; but fear was paralysing his body, and he felt himself no longer capable of moving--no matter what should happen. He continued, in a lying position, to look through the hole.

The ghost sat on, turning only its head, sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left, and sometimes looking upwards.

For full an hour this went on. Then the buzzing sound began again, and the shito dama reappeared, circling and circling round the ghost's body, until the ghost vanished, apparently having turned into the shito dama; and after circling round the holy figures three or four times it suddenly shot out of sight.

Next morning Kosa and five men came up to the temple. They found the priest alive but paralysed. He could neither move nor speak. He was carried to the village, dying before he got there.

Much use was made of the priest's notes. No one else ever volunteered to live at the temple, which, two years later, was struck by lightning and burned to the

[p. 43]

ground. In digging among the remains, searching for bronzes and metal Buddhas, villagers came upon a skeleton buried, only a foot deep, near the bushes whence Jogen had first heard the sounds of rustling.

Undoubtedly the ghost and shito dama were those of a priest who had suffered a violent death and could not rest.

The bones were properly buried and masses said, and nothing has since been seen of the ghost.

All that remains of the temple are the moss-grown pedestals which formed the foundations.

Footnotes

^36:1 In many stories in MS. volumes I have told of shito dama or astral spirits. So much evidence have I got from personal acquaintances as to their existence, and even frequent occurrence, that I almost believe in them myself. Some say that there are two shapes--the roundish oblong tadpole shape, and the more square-fronted eyed shape. Priests declare the shapes and sexes to be all alike, indistinguishable from each other and square-fronted, as in No. 2. My hunter, Oto of Itami, who, with his son, saw the old barber's wife's shito dama after she had died, declared that the shape was like an egg with a tail. At Tsuboune, near Naba, two or three dozen people who had seen the shito dama of a deaf man and that of a fisher-girl there declared both to be square-fronted. Again: At Toshi Shima the old men declare that there was a carpenter whose shito dama appeared five or six times some fifteen years ago, and that it was red, instead of having the ordinary phosphorescent smoky-white appearance. Shito dama, I take it, is the astral form that a spirit can assume if it wishes to wander the earth after death. This is the story of a dissatisfied spirit which haunted a temple and also showed itself as a ghost.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

Click to enlarge
7. Rosetsu Watches the Carp

  

VI

  

A CARP GIVES A LESSON IN PERSEVERANCE [*1]

BETWEEN the years 1750 and 1760 there lived in Kyoto a great painter named Okyo-Maruyama Okyo. His paintings were such as to fetch high prices even in those days. Okyo had not only many admirers in consequence, but had also many pupils who strove to copy his style; among them was one named Rosetsu, who eventually became the best of all.

When first Rosetsu went to Okyo's to study he was, without exception, the dullest and most stupid pupil that Okyo had ever had to deal with. His learning was so slow that pupils who had entered as students under Okyo a year and more after Rosetsu overtook him. He was one of those plodding but unfortunate youths who work hard, harder perhaps than most, and seem to go backwards as if the very gods were against them.

[p. 45]

I have the deepest sympathy with Rosetsu. I myself became a bigger fool day by day as I worked; the harder I worked or tried to remember the more manifestly a fool I became.

Rosetsu, however, was in the end successful, having been greatly encouraged by his observations of the perseverance of a carp.

Many of the pupils who had entered Okyo's school after Rosetsu had left, having become quite good painters. Poor Rosetsu was the only one who had made no progress whatever for three years. So disconsolate was he, and so little encouragement did his master offer, that at last, crestfallen and sad, he gave up the hopes he had had of becoming a great painter, and quietly left the school one evening, intending either to go home or to kill himself on the way. All that night he walked, and half-way into the next, when, tired out from want of sleep and of food, he flung himself down on the snow under the pine trees.

Some hours before dawn Rosetsu awoke, hearing a strange noise not thirty paces from him. He could not make it out, but sat up, listening, and glancing towards the place whence the sound--of splashing water--came.

As the day broke he saw that the noise was caused by a large carp, which was persistently jumping out of the water, evidently trying to reach a piece of sembei (a kind of biscuit made of rice and salt) lying on the ice of a pond near which Rosetsu found himself. For full three hours the fish must have been jumping thus unsuccessfully, cutting and bruising himself against the edges of the ice until the blood flowed and many scales had been lost.

[p. 46]

Rosetsu watched its persistency with admiration. The fish tried every imaginable device. Sometimes it would make a determined attack on the ice where the biscuit lay from underneath, by charging directly upwards; at other times it would jump high in the air, and hope that by falling on the ice bit by bit would be broken away, until it should be able to reach the sembei; and indeed the carp did thus break the ice, until at last he reached the prize, bleeding and hurt, but still rewarded for brave perseverance.

Rosetsu, much impressed, watched the fish swim off with the food, and reflected.

'Yes,' he said to himself: 'this has been a moral lesson to me. I will be like this carp. I will not go home until I have gained my object. As long as there is breath in my body I will work to carry out my intention. I will labour harder than ever, and, no matter if I do not progress, I will continue in my efforts until I attain my end or die.'

After this resolve Rosetsu visited the neighbouring temple, and prayed for success; also he thanked the local deity that he had been enabled to see, through the carp's perseverance, the line that a man should take in life.

Rosetsu then returned to Kyoto, and to his master, Okyo, told the story of the carp and of his determination.

Okyo was much pleased, and did his best for his backward pupil. This time Rosetsu progressed. He became a well-known painter, the best man Okyo ever taught, as good, in fact, as his master; and he ended by being one of Japan's greatest painters.

Rosetsu took for crest the leaping carp.

Footnotes

^44:1 One day my old painter Busetsu was talking with me about Japan's greatest painters, and of one of them he told a strange story. It was interesting in one thing especially, and that was that the name of Rosetsu I could not find mentioned in Louis Gonse's book, though, of course, Maruyama Okyo was. Five names were given as those of the best pupils of Okyo; but Rosetsu was not mentioned. I wrote to my friend the Local Governor, who is an authority on Japanese paintings. His answer was, 'You are quite right: Rosetsu was one of Okyo's best pupils, perhaps the best.'

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

  

VII

  

LEGENDS TOLD BY A FISHERMAN ON LAKE BIWA, AT ZEZE

WHILE up fishing on Lake Biwa, and later shooting in the vicinity (shooting is not allowed on the lake itself, the water being considered a holy place), I often made Zeze my head-quarters. At the edge of the lake, just there, stands the cottage of an old old fisherman and his sons. They have made a little harbour for their boats; but they cultivate no ground, their cottage standing in wild grass near a solitary willow. The reason of this is that they are rich, or comparatively so, being the owners of an immense fish-trap, which runs out into the lake nearly a mile, and is a disgrace to all civilised ideas of conservation. They bought the rights from the Daimio, who owned Zeze Castle a hundred years or more ago (this is my own guess at the date, for I never asked or noted it). The trap catches enough to keep the whole of four families comfortable.

Two or three interesting little legends (truths the old

[p. 48]

senior fisherman called them) I got, either from himself or from his son while visiting his trap, or sitting under his willow, fishing myself--for stories.

'Surely the Danna San could not be interested in the simple old stories of bygone days? Even my sons do not care for them nowadays!'

'I care for anything of interest,' I said. 'And you will greatly please me by telling me any fishermen's legends of hereabouts, or even of the north-western end of the lake if you know any.'

'Well, there is our Fire Ball,' said the old fisherman. That is a curious and unpleasant thing. I have seen it many times myself. I will begin with that.'

Click to enlarge
8. The Fire-Ball or 'Shito Dama' of Akechi

  

LEGEND

'Many years ago there was a Daimio who had constructed at the foot of the southern spur of Mount Hiyei a castle, the ruins of which may still be seen just to the north of the military barracks of the Ninth Regiment in Otsu. The name of the Daimio was Akechi Mitsuhide, and it is his shito dama that we see now in wet weather on the lake. It is called the spirit of Akechi.

'The reason of it is this. When Akechi Mitsuhide defended himself against the Toyotomi, he was closely invested; but his castle held out bravely, and could not be taken in spite of Toyotomi's greater forces. As time went on, the besiegers became exasperated, and prevailed upon a bad fisherman from Magisa village to tell where was the source of water which supplied Akechi's castle. The water having been cut off, the garrison had to

[p. 49]

capitulate, but not before Akechi and most of his men had committed suicide.

'From that time, in rain or in rough weather, there has come from the castle a fire-ball, six inches in diameter or more. It comes to wreak vengeance on fishermen, and causes many wrecks, leading boats out of their course. Sometimes it comes almost into the boat. Once a fisherman struck it with a bamboo pole, breaking it up into many fiery bits; and on that occasion many boats were lost.

'In full it is called "The Spider Fire of the Spirit of the Dead Akechi." That is all, sir, that I can tell of it--except that often have I seen it myself, and feared it.'

'That is very interesting,' said I, 'and quite what I like. Can you tell me any more?'

'Perhaps, if Danna San found interest in that simple story, he would like to know the reason of why we always have such a terrible storm over the lake on February 25: so I will tell of that also.'

Click to enlarge
9. O Tani San's Tub Gets Swamped

  

LEGEND

'Long ago there lived in the village of Komatsu, on the south-eastern side of the lake, a beautiful girl called O Tani. She was the daughter of a wealthy farmer, and of a studious nature as far as it was possible for a girl to be so in those days; that is to say, she was for ever wishing to learn and to know things which were not always within the province of women to know. With the intention of inquiring and learning, she frequently crossed the lake in a boat alone, to visit a certain talented and clever young

[p. 50]

monk, who was the chief priest at one of the smaller temples situated at the foot of Mount Hiyei San, just over there where you are looking now.

'So deeply impressed was O Tani San with the priest's knowledge, she lost her heart and fell in love with him. Her visits became more frequent. Often she crossed the lake alone, in spite of her parents' protests, when the waves were too high for the safety even of a hardy fisherman like myself.

'At last O Tani could resist no longer. She felt that she must tell the good priest of her love for him, and see if she could not persuade him to renounce the Church and run away with her.

'The monk was greatly sorrowed, and did not quite know what to say, or how to put the girl off. At last he thought that he would give her an impossible task. Knowing that the weather on Lake Biwa towards the end of February is nearly impossible as far as the navigation of small boats is concerned, he said, probably not for a moment meaning it seriously:

'"O Tani San, if you successfully crossed the lake on the evening of February 25 in a washing-tub, it might be possible that I should cast off my robes and forget my calling to carry out your wishes."

'O Tani did not think of the impossible, nor did she quite understand the depth of the priest's meaning; young and foolish as she was with her blind love, she sculled herself home, thinking that the next time she crossed the lake it would be in the washing-tub and to carry off the young priest as her husband. She was supremely happy.

[p. 51]

'At last the 25th of February arrived. O Tani had taken care that the best and largest washing-tub had been left near the borders of the lake. After dark she embarked in her frail craft, and without the least fear started.

'When she was about half-way across a fearful storm broke over Hiyei Mountain. The waves arose, and the wind blew with blinding force. Moreover, the light that was usually burning on the Hiyei San side of the lake, which the priest had promised should be especially bright this night, had been blown out. It was not long before poor O Tani's tub was capsized, and in spite of her efforts to keep afloat she sank beneath the waves to rise no more.

'It is said by some that the priest himself put out the light, so as to cut off the last possible chance of O Tani's reaching the shore, being over-zealous in his thoughts of good and evil.

'Since the night that O Tani was drowned, every 25th of February has been wild and stormy, and fishermen fear to be out on that day. People say that the cause is the dissatisfied spirit of poor O Tani, who, though she did not fear death, died disconsolate at being deceived by the monk she loved.

'The washing-tub that O Tani used drifted ashore at Kinohama village, in Eastern Omi. It was picked up by Gensuke, a match-maker, who split it up and made matches of it. When this became known to the villagers of Kinohama, including Gensuke himself, they resolved that every 25th of February should be a holiday, and that a prayer should be said at their shrine for the spirit of

[p. 52]

[paragraph continues] O Tani. They call the day "Joya" (Dealer in Matches Festival), and on it no men work.'

'That is a capital story,' said I to the old fisherman; 'but I should greatly have liked to put the monk in another tub on the following 25th of February, and anchored him out, so that he should be sure of being drowned in the same way.'

'Does the Danna San know why all the little papers are tied in the black rocks at Ishiyama-dera?'

'No: I do not,' I answered; 'and, moreover, when I went there no one would or could tell me.'

'Well, it is not an uninteresting story, and I will tell it to you, for it is short.'

Click to enlarge
10. The Black Rocks at Ishiyama-dera Where Prayers Are Tied

  

LEGEND

'As the Danna San has been to Ishiyama-dera, he will know about the temple and monastery, which has a history eleven hundred years long; [*1] but few people know the real reason why the bits of paper with prayers on them are tied to the black rocks.

'The origin or the reason of tying these paper prayers--musubi no kami, as they are called--is pretty, if suicide for the romance of love can make it so.

'Many years ago in Baba Street of Otsu, then known as Shibaya Street, there was a teahouse called Kagiya, which kept very beautiful geisha. Among them was one, named O Taga hana, whose loveliness surpassed all imagination. Though scarcely seventeen, her heart was

[p. 53]

no longer her own. It had gone as completely to her lover Denbei as had his to her. It is difficult to imagine how this desperate affair came about at first, for Denbei was only the clerk of a rice-merchant in Otsu, and had but little money to spend on geisha, especially in such an expensive teahouse as Kagiya.

'Jealousy and unhappiness crept . into the heart of Denbei, not on account of any unfaithfulness on the part of O Taga hana San, but because he felt jealous of others being well enough off to go to the Kagiya teahouse and hear her sing and see her dance while they ate costly dinners.

'So much did these sorrows tell upon Denbei's heart at last, he used to falsify his master's account-books, frequently taking money, which he spent, of course, at the Kagiya teahouse in seeing the beloved O Taga hana.

'This state of affairs could not last long, and when Denbei told O Taga hana how he had procured the money to come and see her she was shocked beyond measure.

'"My dearest," she said, "the wrong which you have done out of love for me is sure to be discovered, and even were it not it would be wrong. Our love is so great that there remains but one chance for our future happiness--shinju (suicide together). Nothing else will enable us to become united, for if I ran away with you they would soon recapture me, most probably before a day and night had passed."

'"Will you leave with me to-night?" said Denbei.

'"I will meet you at two o'clock in the morning, when all are asleep, down at the flat-growing pine tree near

[p. 54]

the east end of the town. From there we will go to Ishiyama-dera, and after praying at that holy temple to our good Kwannon we will do shinju in the Hotaru Dani (Firefly Valley), and our souls will depart together."

'Denbei bowed to his sweetheart, and spoke words of gratitude for her faithfulness in recognising his love for her as the cause of his sin, and he promised that at the appointed hour he would meet her by the pine tree near the lake and take her off to Ishiyama, there to carry out their final act and die together.

'To save time, Danna San, in telling this story it is only necessary to say that Denbei and O Taga hana met, and that, after passing over the flat and uninteresting plain known as Awatsu, they reached and passed the Seta Bridge, and that shortly after, about daybreak, they found themselves at Ishiyama. There, in one of the teahouses, they remained some hours in bliss, and then went to the temple to pray to Kwannon. Then they went to the Hotaru Dani, and, after embracing each other for the last time on this earth, they each wrote a prayer on a piece of paper, twisted it into a piece of string, and fastened it in a double knot with their thumbs and little fingers through a small hole bored in the soft black rocks. Their being able to do this successfully was taken as an omen that all would be well with them after death, and was an answer to their prayer.

'Their spirits passed away together, just as the leaves of fragrant flowers blown off by autumn winds pass together under Seta Bridge.

'That, Danna San, is the origin and reason of tying

[p. 55]

these pieces of paper to the black rocks and other places at Ishiyama-dera. The custom is still followed by many country folks, who go to worship and pray for the spirits of Denbei and O Taga hana in the Firefly Valley itself.'

Footnotes

^52:1 The temple was founded A.D. 749 by the monk Ryoben Sojo at the command of the Emperor Shomei. It is the thirteenth of the Thirty-Three Holy Places.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

Click to enlarge
11. Yamato-dake no Mikoto Destroys his Enemies and Saves Himself from Being Burned by the Aid of the Miraculous Sword

  

VIII

  

A MIRACULOUS SWORD

ABOUT the year 110 B.C. there lived a brave prince known in Japanese history as Yamato-dake no Mikoto. [*1] He was a great warrior, as was his son, who is said to have been a husband to the Empress Jingo--I presume a second one, for it could not have been the Emperor who was assassinated before the Empress's conquest of Korea. However, that does not very much matter to my story, which is merely the legend attached to the miraculous sword known as the Kusanagi no Tsurugi (the grass-cutting sword), which is held as one of the three sacred treasures, and is handed down from father to son in the Imperial Family. The sword is kept at the Atsuta Shrine, in Owari Province.

At the date given by my interpreter, 110 B.C. (I should

[p. 57]

add 'or thereabouts,' allowing large margins), Yamato-dake no Mikoto had been successful at all events in suppressing the revolutionists known as the Kumaso in Kyushu. Being a man of energy, and possessing a strong force of trained men, he resolved that he would suppress the revolutionists up on the north-eastern coasts.

Before starting, Yamato-dake no Mikoto thought he should go to Ise to worship in the temples, to pray for divine aid, and to call on an aunt who lived near. Yamato-dake spent five or six days with his aunt, Princess Yamato Hime, to whom he announced his intention of subduing the rebels. She presented him with her greatest treasure--the miraculous sword--and also with a tinder-and-flint-box.

Before parting with her nephew Yamato Hime no Mikoto said: 'This sword is the most precious thing which I could give you, and will guard you safely through all dangers. Value it accordingly, for it will be one of the sacred treasures.'

(Legend says that in the age of the gods Susanoo-no Mikoto once found an old man and a woman weeping bitterly because a mammoth eight-headed snake had devoured seven of their daughters, and there remained only one more, whom, they felt sure, the eighth serpent's head would take. Susanoo-no Mikoto asked if they would give him the daughter if he killed the snake to which they gladly assented. Susanoo filled eight buckets with sake-wine, and put them where the serpent was likely to come, and, hiding himself in the vicinity, awaited events. The monster came, and the eight heads drank the eight buckets full of sake, and became, naturally,

[p. 58]

dead-drunk. Susanoo then dashed in and cut the beast to bits. In the tail he found a sword--the celebrated and miraculous sword 'Kusanagi no Tsurugi,' the grass-cutting sword of our story.)

After bidding farewell to Yamato Hime no Mikoto, the Prince took his departure, setting out for the province of Suruga, on the eastern coast, to find what he could hear, it being in a turbulent state; and it was there that he ran into his first danger, and that his enemies laid a trap for him, through their knowledge that he was fond of hunting.

There were some immense rush plains in Suruga Province where now stands the village of Yaitsu Mura ('Yaita' means 'burning fields'). It was resolved by the rebels that one of them should go and invite Yamato-dake to come out and hunt, while they were to scatter and hide themselves in the long grass, until the guide should lead him into their midst, when they would jump up and kill him. Accordingly, they sent to Yamato-dake a plausible and clever man, who told him that there were many deer on the grass plains. Would he come and hunt them? The man volunteered to act as guide.

The invitation was tempting; and, as he had found the country less rebellious than he had expected, the Prince accepted.

When the morning arrived the Prince, in addition to carrying his hunting-bow, carried the sword given him by his aunt, the Princess Yamato. The day was windy, and it was thought by the rebels that as the rushes were so dry it would be more sure, and less dangerous to themselves, to fire the grass, for it was certain that the

[p. 59]

guide would make the Prince hunt up-wind, and if they fired the grass properly the flames would rush with lightning speed towards him and be absolutely safe for themselves.

Yamato-dake did just as they had expected. He came quietly on, suspecting nothing. Suddenly the rushes took fire in front and at the sides of him. The Prince realised that he had been betrayed. The treacherous guide 'had disappeared. The Prince stood in danger of suffocation and death. The smoke, dense and choking, rushed along with rapidity and great roaring.

Yamato-dake tried to run for the only gap, but was too late. Then he began cutting the grass with his sword, to prevent the fire from reaching him. He found that whichever direction he cut in with his sword, the wind changed to that direction. If to the north he cut, the wind changed to the south and prevented the fire from advancing farther; if to the south, the wind changed to the north; and so on. Taking advantage of this, Yamato-dake retaliated upon his enemies. He got fire from his aunt's tinder-box, and where there was no fire in the rushes he lit them, cutting through the grass at the same time in the direction in which he wished the fire to go. Rushing thus from point to point, he was successful in the endeavour to turn the tables on his enemies, and destroyed them all.

It is important to note that there is in existence a sword, said to be this sword, in the Atsuta Shrine, Owari Province; a great festival in honour of it is held on June 21 every year.

From that place Yamato-dake no Mikoto went on

[p. 60]

to Sagami Province. Finding things quiet there, he took a ship to cross to Kazusa Province, accompanied by a lady he deeply loved, who was given the title of Hime (Princess) because of Yamato-dake's rank. Her name was Tachibana. They had not got more than ten miles from shore when a terrible storm arose. The ship threatened to go down.

'This,' said Tachibana Hime, 'is the doing of one of the sea-goddesses who thirst for men's lives. I will give her mine, my lord; perhaps that may appease her until you have safely crossed the wicked sea.'

Without further warning, Tachibana Hime cast herself into the sea; the waves closed over her head, to the consternation and grief of all, and to the breaking of Yamato-dake's heart.

As Tachibana Hime had expected, the sea-goddess was appeased. The wind went down, the water calmed, and the ship reached Kazusa Province in safety. Yamato-dake went as far as Yezo, putting down small rebellions on the way.

Several years afterwards, accompanied by many of his old officers, he found himself back on the side of a hill in Sagami Province overlooking the place where poor Tachibana Hime had given up her life for him by throwing herself into the sea. The Prince gazed sadly at the sea, and thrice exclaimed, with tears flowing down his cheeks,--brave though he was--'Azuma waya!' (Alas, my dearest wife!); and Eastern Japan, about the middle, has since then been called 'Azuma.'

Footnotes

^56:1 Yamato-dake no Mikoto, one of the eighty children of the Emperor Keiko, was a great hero of the prehistoric age. While yet a stripling he was sent by his father to destroy the rebels of Western Japan. In order to accomplish this end he borrowed the gown of his aunt, who was high priestess of Ise, and, thus disguised, made the rebel chieftains fall in love with him while carousing in the cave where they dwelt. Then, suddenly drawing a sword from his bosom, he smote them to death. He next subdued the province of Izumo, and finally conquered Eastern Japan, which was at that time a barbarous waste. After many adventures, both warlike and amorous, he died on the homeward march to Yamato, where the Emperor, his father, held Court.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

Click to enlarge
12. The Procession of Ghosts

  

IX

  

'THE PROCESSION OF GHOSTS' [*1]

SOME four or five hundred years ago there was an old temple not far from Fushimi, near Kyoto. It was called the Shozenji temple, and had been deserted for many years, priests fearing to live there, on account of the ghosts which were said to haunt it. Still, no one had ever seen the ghosts. No doubt the story came into the people's minds from the fact that the whole of the priests had been killed by a large band of robbers many years beyond the memory of men--for the sake of loot, of course.

So great a horror did this strike into the minds of all, that the temple was allowed to rot and run to ruin.

[p. 62]

One year a priest, a pilgrim and a stranger, passed by the temple, and, not knowing its history, went in and sought refuge from the weather, instead of continuing his journey to Fushimi. Having cold rice in his wallet, he felt that he could not do better than pass the night there; for, though the weather might be cold, he would at all events save drenching the only clothes which he had, and be well off in the morning.

The good man took up his quarters in one of the smaller rooms, which was in less bad repair than the rest of the place; and, after eating his meal, said his prayers and lay down to sleep, while the rain fell in torrents on the roof and the wind howled through the creaky buildings. Try as he might, the priest could not sleep, for the cold draughts chilled him to the marrow. Somewhere about midnight the old man heard weird and unnatural noises. They seemed to proceed from the main building.

Prompted by curiosity, he arose; and when he got to the main building he found Hiyakki Yako (meaning a procession of one hundred ghosts)--a term, I believe, which had been generally applied to a company of ghosts. The ghosts fought, wrestled, danced, and made merry. Though greatly alarmed at first, our priest became interested. After a few moments, however, more awful spirit-like ghosts came on the scene. The priest ran back to the small room, into which he barred himself; and he spent the rest of the night saying masses for the souls of the dead.

At daybreak, though the weather continued wet, the priest departed. He told the villagers what he had seen,

[p. 63]

and they spread the news so widely that within three or four days the temple was known as the worst-haunted temple in the neighbourhood.

It was at this time that the celebrated painter Tosa Mitsunobu heard of it. Having ever been anxious to paint a picture of Hiyakki Yako, he thought that a sight of the ghosts in Shozenji temple might give him the necessary material: so off to Fushimi and Shozenji he started.

Mitsunobu went straight to the temple at dusk, and sat up all night in no very happy state of mind; but he saw no ghosts, and heard no noise.

Next morning he opened all the windows and doors and flooded the main temple with light. No sooner had he done this than he found the walls of the place covered, as it were, with the figures or drawings of ghosts of indescribable complexity. There were far more than two hundred, and all different.

Could he but remember them! That was what Tosa Mitsunobu thought. Drawing his notebook and brush from his pocket, he proceeded to take them down minutely. This occupied the best part of the day.

During his examination of the outlines of the various ghosts and goblins which he had drawn, Mitsunobu saw that the fantastic shapes had come from cracks in the damp deserted walls; these cracks were filled with fungi and mildew, which in their turn produced the toning, colouring, and eventually the figures from which he compiled his celebrated picture Hiyakki Yako. [*1] Grateful

[p. 64]

was he to the imaginative priest whose stories had led him to the place. Without him never would the picture have been drawn; never could the horrible aspects of so many ghosts and goblins have entered the mind of one man, no matter how imaginative.

My painter's illustration gives a few, copied from a first-hand copy of Mitsunobu's.

Footnotes

^61:1 Somewhere between the years 1400 and 1550 there lived a family of celebrated painters covering three generations, and consequently difficult to be accurate about. There were Tosa Mitsunobu, Kano Mitsunobu, and Hasegawa Mitsunobu; sometimes Tosa Mitsunobu signed his pictures as Fujiwara Mitsunobu. When to this I add that there were other celebrated painters--Kano Masanobu, Kano Motonobu, besides their families, imitators, and name forgers--you will realise the difficulties into which one may fall in fixing on names and dates; but, as usual, I have been placed safely on high ground by a kind friend, H.E. Mr. Hattori, the Governor, whose knowledge of Art is great. Undoubtedly it was Tosa Mitsunobu who painted the picture known as the Hiyakki Yako, or as 'The One Hundred Ghosts' Procession, which is celebrated, and has served as a map of instruction in the drawing of hobgoblins and ghosts, 'spooks,' 'eries,' or whatever you may choose to call them. As far as I can judge, the picture was painted about the end of the first half of the fifteenth century.

^63:1 It is well known that certain fungi and mildews produce phosphorescent light amid certain circumstances. No doubt the priest saw the cracks in the wall amid these [p. 64] circumstances, and the noise he heard was made by rats. I once read a story about a haunted country-house in England, the ghost in which was eventually found to be a luminous fungus.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

Click to enlarge
13. Matsuo Declares the Head to be That of Kanshusai

  

X

  

A FAITHFUL SERVANT [*1]

IN the reign of the Emperor Engi, which began in the year 901 A.D., there lived a man whose name has ever since been celebrated on account of his beautiful writings, poetic and other. He was the Emperor's great favourite, and consequently he was the strong man of the day; his name was Sugawara Michizane. Needless to say, it was not very long before, with all these things in his favour, he was the head of the Government, living in luxury.

Things went well enough for a time; but the inevitable came at last. Not all the people agreed with Michizane's ideas or his politics. Secret enemies lurked at every corner. Among them was one particularly bad man named Tokihira, whose poisonous intrigues at Court were constant.

Tokihira held a Government position under Michizane, and hated him in his heart, thinking that if he could but arrange to get Michizane into the bad graces of the

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] Emperor he himself might become leader of the Government.

Michizane was a man with whom little fault could be found, and so it came to pass that Tokihira was unable to find any cause for starting evil reports about him; but as time went on he became more determined to do evil in the end.

At last an opportunity arrived. Tokihira, who had many secret agents trying to discover something to be reported to the Emperor against Michizane, heard a statement that Prince Toki (Toki no Miya) had fallen secretly in love with the beautiful daughter of Michizane, and that they held secret meetings.

Tokihira was overjoyed at the news, and went straightway to the Emperor, who received him, hearing that he had a marvellous tale of intrigue to tell.

'Your Majesty,' said Tokihira, 'much as I grieve to tell it, a serious plot is about. Sugawara Michizane has so arranged it that your Majesty's younger brother, Prince Toki, has fallen in love with his daughter. Deeply as I regret to say it, they hold secret meetings. Moreover, Michizane, your Majesty's Premier, is scheming that your Majesty may be assassinated, or at least dethroned in favour of Prince Toki, who is to marry Michizane's daughter.'

Naturally the Emperor Engi was infuriated. He was a good and sound monarch, and had ruled the people, with the aid of Michizane, fairly, firmly, and well. He had looked upon Michizane as a personal friend; and to think of Michizane conspiring his assassination, or at all events so scheming as to place Prince Toki on the

[p. 67]

throne, and to marry his own daughter to the Prince, was more than he could stand.

He sent for Michizane.

Michizane protested his innocence. True it was, he said, that the Prince had fallen in love with his daughter; but that was not much to be wondered at. His daughter was beautiful; the Prince and she were much of the same age, and had seen much of each other from their childhood. Now that they had grown older, they found that their friendship had turned to love. That was all. It was not easy for a Prince of the blood royal to meet the lady of his heart quite so openly as another might; and, no doubt, they had met, for his daughter had told him so. As to the plot asserted by Tokihira, that was absolutely fanciful, and it was an astonishment to hear of so dastardly an accusation.

Tokihira perceived the temper of the Emperor. By loud words and unscrupulous lies he upset all the unfortunate Michizane's protests; and the Emperor ordered Michizane to be sent for the rest of his life to Tsukushi, in the island of Kyushu.

Accompanied only by his faithful servant Matsuo, Michizane went into exile. The punishment of Michizane, unjust as it was, broke up the employment of many others. All those who had been closely associated with him were dismissed. Among them was Takebayashi Genzo, who had been one of Michizane's chief attendants. Genzo had been one of Michizane's literary pupils; consequently it is not astonishing that on losing employment, Genzo fled to a small town, and out of duty took with him Michizane's wife and young son Kanshusai, aged

[p. 68]

ten. All changed their names, and Genzo, to support them as well as his own family, established a small school.

Thus it was that for some time Kanshusai escaped the wicked designs against his life that had been planned by Tokihira.

Matsuo, the faithful servant who had followed his master Michizane into banishment, heard of a vile plot to assassinate his master's son, and after many weary days of thought as to how he could prevent it he perceived that the only way would be to sacrifice his own son instead.

First he told his banished master of his intention, and having obtained leave he journeyed back to Kyoto, and sought out Tokihira himself, to whom he offered his services both as a servant and as a hunter of Michizane's son Kanshusai. Tokihira readily engaged him, thinking that now he would be sure to find the boy whom he wished to have beheaded. Tokihira had taken the place of Michizane in the Emperor's favour, and had great power; his will was almost law.

So well did Matsuo play his part in Tokihira's household and among his servants, it was not long before they were all agreed that Matsuo was most faithful to his new master, and the greatest confidence was placed in him.

Shortly after this, it came to the knowledge of Tokihira that Kanshusai was hidden, under a different name, in the school which belonged to Genzo. Genzo was ordered to send the boy's head to Tokihira within forty-eight hours.

Matsuo, ever faithful, hearing of this, went to Genzo's

[p. 69]

school in disguise and disclosed to the schoolmaster, who readily assented, his scheme for saving Kanshusai. Then Matsuo sent his son Kotaro to Genzo's school, from which he never returned alive, poor boy; and though (in all honour be it said) Genzo did not like the killing of this boy, he steeled his nerves, for the sake of his former master and to save Kanshusai's life.

With one blow of his sword he took off the innocent head.

At the appointed time Tokihira's officials called at the school to fetch it, and they carried it back to Tokihira, saying: 'Now, Lord Tokihira, there is no longer fear for the future from Michizane's son, for here is his head in this box. See! And here is the schoolmaster Takebayashi Genzo, who followed your lordship's orders and cut it off.'

Tokihira was pleased, but not perfectly assured that the head was the right one: so, knowing that Matsuo had previously been employed by Michizane, and that he must know if it were Kanshusai's head or not, he called him, ordering him to take the head out of the box and identify it.

Poor Matsuo! Imagine his feelings at having to draw his only son Kotaro's head from the box, and hold it up by the hair, and assure the Lord Tokihira that it was indeed the head of Kanshusai, Michizane's son! He did so, however, with great nerve and splendid fortitude, thus saving the life of Kanshusai, and fulfilling his duty to his banished master Michizane.

Matsuo's fidelity is still adored by those who know the story.

[p. 70]

Not long after a terrible thunderstorm came over Kyoto. A thunderbolt crashed through Tokihira's palace and killed him. To this day people say that Michizane's spirit came down in the shape of that thunderbolt to be avenged.

Footnotes

^65:1 This little tragedy, showing the deep loyalty which was general 1000 years ago, was told to me by Mr. Matsuzaki of the Kencho (Government Office).

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

Click to enlarge
14. Okawa Plunges the Hosokawa Deed Into His Stomach

  

XI

  

PRINCE HOSOKAWA'S MOST VALUABLE TITLE-DEEDS [*1]

SEVERAL hundred years ago there dwelt in lands of the Hosokawas a widow and her daughter, a beautiful girl of seventeen, named Kazuye. O Kazuye San's father had been foully murdered some six months before, and both Kazuye and her mother had made up their minds to devote their fortune and their lives to bringing the criminals to justice. In these efforts they received no help, but spent the whole of their money, until at last they were almost forced to beg in the street for food. Day after day, however, they continued to pray in the temple for help, and never once lost heart or weakened in their purpose. O Kazuye told her mother that were she fortunate enough to gain the affections of a man, even he should be sacrificed in the effort after vengeance.

One day it came to pass that the poverty-stricken appearance of Kazuye and her mother, returning as usual from praying in the temple, aroused the mirth of a party

[p. 72]

of roughs, who proceeded to insult them. A handsome young samurai, Okawa Jomoyemon, happened to come along. Drawing his sword, he very soon put the roughs to flight. Having done this, and bowing low, he asked whom he had the honour of serving.

O Kazuye answered for her mother, and quickly recognised that this handsome youth was just such as she had longed to meet, so that he might fall in love and wish to help her in seeking out the murderer of her father. Therefore, not unnaturally, she encouraged him; and he fell in love with her. In the meanwhile an old friend of Kazuye's father, feeling great sorrow for her, had found a place for her in Prince Hosokawa's household; and there she won such favour in the eyes of the Prince (or, as the title then was, Daimio) that the other maids began to be jealous.

It happened that one evening Okawa, now desperately in love with O Kazuye, in spite of being the retainer of another Daimio, felt that he must see her at all costs. He arranged a secret meeting, and eventually found his way to Kazuye's apartment. Still full of desire for vengeance, she seized upon the occasion to pour forth her story and implore assistance.

Okawa, being a true knight-errant, vowed that he would speak no more of love until he himself had hunted down and killed the murderers of Kazuye's father. Just as he had finished making this vow, one of the jealous maids (who had been listening) made her presence known, and rushed off to tell her mistress.

What was to be done? Okawa, the retainer of another Daimio, caught in the castle secretly conversing

[p. 73]

with one of the Hosokawa maids of honour! Surely both he and she would suffer death! O Kazuye was not long in thinking. She hid her lover in an old armour-case. That, however, was no use. She was instantly summoned into the presence of the Daimio, and the armour-chest was carried in as well.

The Daimio, furiously angry, ordered that O Kazuye should be killed. Okawa spoke up. He said that she was in no way responsible for this secret meeting, that the fault was entirely his; and begged that he might be allowed to die in place of her. Moreover, he told, the whole story of Kazuye's life, and mentioned that her ambition in life was to avenge the death of her father.

The Daimio was greatly touched. Recognising the chivalry on both sides, he took Okawa into his own service, promising at the same time to aid them both in fulfilling their purpose.

Tears of gratitude came into Okawa's eyes, and he vowed there and then to sacrifice his life for Hosokawa on the very first opportunity.

After about a year had passed a great fire broke out in the castle. It was so sudden that nothing could be done. The wind, fanning the flames, barely gave time for the people to escape, much less to carry off the family valuables.

When all were clear of the burning mass the Daimio suddenly remembered that his title-deeds would be lost, and that such a disaster would be dangerous for his family. Realising this, he jumped from his horse, and was about to dash back to try and recover them; but his retainers held him, fearing that he would die.

[p. 74]

Okawa, hearing this, thought with delight that now an opportunity had come to him to save his new master and pay him for the kindness to himself and Kazuye. He rushed into the burning mass, and, having broken open the iron safe, seized the valuable documents. Then he found escape impossible. He was cut off by fire on all sides, and plainly saw that both he and the papers must be burned. At this moment a thought came to him. Though he must be burned, possibly his body might save the documents. Drawing his short sword, he deliberately disembowelled himself, and thrust the roll of papers into his stomach. Then he flung himself on the flaming floor and died. The fire went on. Poor Okawa was charred beyond recognition.

When the fire was over his body was recovered, and inside the roasted corpse was found the blood-stained roll of papers on which the Hosokawa family depended. From that time on, the document has been called 'Hosokawa no chi daruma'--the blood-stained document of the Hosokawas.

Footnotes

^71:1 Told to me by Mr. Matsuzaki, and said to be perfectly true, the document in question being in possession of the present Prince Hosokawa.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

Click to enlarge
15. Ishidomaro Meets His Father, But Fails to Identify Him For Sure

  

XII

  

THE STORY OF KATO SAYEMON [*1]

IN the days when Ashikaga was Shogun there served under him a knight of good family, Kato Sayemon, of whom he was especially fond. Things went well with Sayemon. He lived in what might almost be called a palace. Money he possessed in plenty. He had a charming wife who had borne him a son, and, according to old custom, he had many others who lived as wives within his mansion. There was no war in the land.

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] Sayemon found no trouble in his household. Peace and contentment reigned. He enjoyed life accordingly, by feasting and so forth. 'Oh that such a life could last!' thought he; but fate decreed otherwise.

One evening, when Sayemon was strolling about in his lovely garden, watching the fireflies and listening to singing insects and piping toads, of which he was extremely fond, he happened to pass his wife's room and to look up.

There he saw his dear wife and his favourite concubine playing chess ('go,' in Japanese). What struck him most was that they appeared perfectly happy and contented in each other's society. While Sayemon looked, however, their hair seemed to rear up from behind in the shapes of snakes which fought desperately. This filled him with fear.

Sayemon, in amazement, stealthily approached in order to see better; but he found the vision just the same. His wife and the other lady, when moving their men, smiled at each other, showing every sign of great courtesy; nevertheless, there remained the indistinct outlines of their hair assuming the forms of fighting snakes. Hitherto Sayemon had thought of them as almost sisters to each other, and so outwardly had they in fact appeared; but, now that he had seen the mysterious sign of the snakes, he knew that they hated each other more than could be understood by a man.

He became uneasy in his mind. Until then his life had been rendered doubly happy because he thought his home was peaceful; but now, he reflected, hatred and malice must be rampant in the house. Sayemon felt as if

[p. 77]

he were a rudderless boat, being drawn towards a cataract, from which no means of escape seemed possible.

He spent a sleepless night in meditation, during which he decided that to run away would be the safest course in the end. Peace was all that he craved for. To obtain it, he would devote himself to religious work for the rest of his life.

Next morning Kato Sayemon was nowhere to be found. There was consternation in the household. Men were dispatched here, there, and everywhere; but Sayemon could not be found. On the fifth or sixth day after the disappearance his wife reduced the establishment, but continued herself, with her little son Ishidomaro, to live in the house. Even the Shogun Ashikaga was greatly disconcerted at Sayemon's disappearance. No news of him came, and time passed on until a year had gone, and then another, when Sayemon's wife resolved to take , aged five, and go in search.

For five weary years they wandered about, this mother and son, making inquiries everywhere; but not the slightest clue could they get, until at last one day they were staying at a village in Kishu, where they met an old man who told them that a year before he had seen Kato Sayemon at the temple of Koya San. 'Sure,' he said, 'I knew him, for I was once a palanquin-bearer for the Shogun, and often and often saw Sayemon San. I cannot say if he is at the temple; but he was a priest there a year ago.'

For Ishidomaro and his mother there was but little sleep that night. They were in a fever of excitement. Ishidomaro was now eleven years of age, and was most

[p. 78]

anxious to have his father at home; both mother and son, happy after their long years of searching, eagerly looked forward to the morrow.

Unfortunately, according to ancient regulations, Koya San temple and mountain were only for men. No woman was allowed to ascend to worship the image of Buddha on this mountain. Thus Ishidomaro's mother had to remain in the village while he went in quest of his father.

At daybreak he started, full of hope, and telling his mother not to fear. 'I will bring back father this very evening,' said he; 'and how happy we shall all be! Farewell for the time being, and fear not for me!' So saying, Ishidomaro went off. 'True,' he said, 'I do not know my father by sight; but he has a black mole over his left eye, and so have I; besides, I feel that it is my father I am going to meet.' With that and such other thoughts in his mind the boy plodded upwards through the tall and gloomy forests, stopping here and there at some wayside shrine to pray for success.

Higher and higher Ishidomaro climbed--Koya San is near 1100 feet in height--until he reached the outer gates of the temple, of which the true name is 'Kongobuji,' for 'Koya San' means only 'Koya Mountain.'

Arrived at the first priest's house, Ishidomaro espied an old man mumbling prayers.

'Please, sir,' said he, doffing his hat and bowing low, could you tell me if there is a priest here called Kato Sayemon? Greatly should I be obliged if you could direct me to him. He has only been a priest for five years. For all that time my dear mother and myself

[p. 79]

have been in search of him. He is my father, and we both love him much, and wish him to come back to us!'

'Ah, my lad, I feel sorry for you,' answered Sayemon (for it was indeed he). 'I know of no man called Kato Sayemon in these temples.' Delivering himself of this speech, Sayemon showed considerable emotion. He fully recognised that the boy he was addressing was his son, and he was under sore distress to deny him thus, and not to recognise and take him to his heart; but Sayemon had made up his mind that the rest of his life should be sacrificed for the sake of Buddha, and that all worldly things should be cast aside. Ishidomaro and his wife needed no money or food, but were well provided for; thus he need not trouble on those grounds. Sayemon determined to remain as he was, a poor monk, hidden in the monastery on Koya San. With a desperate effort he continued:

'I don't remember ever hearing of a Kato Sayemon's having been here, though, of course, I have heard of the Kato Sayemon who was the great friend of the Shogun Ashikaga.'

Ishidomaro was not at all satisfied with this answer. He felt somehow or other that he was in the presence of his father. Moreover, the priest had a black mole over his left eye, and he, Ishidomaro, had one exactly the same.

'Sir,' said he, again addressing the priest, 'my mother has always particularly drawn my attention to the mole over my left eye, saying, "My son, your father has such a mark over his left eye, the exact counterpart now, remember this, for when you go forth to seek him this will be a sure sign to you." You, sir, have the exact

[p. 80]

mark that I have. I know and feel that you are my father!'

With that, tears came into the eyes of Ishidomaro, and, outstretching his arms, he cried, 'Father, father, let me embrace you!'

Sayemon trembled all over with emotion; but haughtily held up his head and, recovering himself, said:

'My lad, there are many men and many boys who have moles over their left eyebrows, and even over their right. I am not your father. You must go elsewhere to seek him.'

At this moment the chief priest came and called Sayemon to the evening services, which were held in the main temple. Thus it was that Sayemon preferred to devote his life to Buddha, and (as Mr. Matsuzaki tells me) to emulate Buddha, rather than return to the ways of the world or to his family, or even to recognise his one and only son!

My sympathies are with Ishidomaro, of whom, as of his poor mother, we are told nothing further. To end in Mr. Matsuzaki's words:

'What became of Ishidomaro and his mother is not known; but it is told to this day that Kato Sayemon passed the rest of his life in peace and purity, entirely sacrificing his body and soul to Buddha, and did these things without any person to mourn over him, but in perfect contentment.'

In the third book of Sir Edwin Arnold's Light of Asia are the following verses, which were addressed to Buddha, when he was a Prince, by the winds:--

[p. 81]

We are the voices of the wandering wind;
 Wander thou too, O Prince, thy rest to find;
 Leave love for love of lovers, for woe's sake
 Quit state for sorrow, and deliverance make.
 So sigh we, passing o'er the silver strings,
 To thee who know'st not yet of earthly things;
 So say we; mocking, as we pass away,
 Those lovely shadows wherewith thou dost play.

No one, I feel sure, will fail to agree with me that Sayemon appears as a weak, selfish, and unheroic personage--not as a hero, much less as a Buddha.

Footnotes

^75:1 Told to me by Mr. Matsuzaki. I cannot say that I think much of the story. Sayemon is made a hero; but he must appear to most as a rather cowardly and low creature. I remarked upon this to Mr. Matsuzaki, saying: 'I do not see that the story is finished. You make Sayemon out a model person, whereas to me he appears the worst one in the story. Surely the wife and the son should have come out as the good people; but you laud and praise Sayemon for leaving his family, and refusing to recognise them when they had no sin against themselves.' 'I do not admit the difficulty,' said Mr. Matsuzaki. 'It is the same as the Lord Buddha. He also left his wife, and devoted his life to religious affairs just as Sayemon did.' Well, I could not agree with this. Buddha was Buddha, a benefactor and helper to the whole of Asia. Sayemon was a poor miserable weakling who simply sought personal peace. As far as the story goes I defy anybody to find him a hero, or a person who in any way emulated Buddha--unless he did so from an entirely Japanese point of view. The story, however, is quite a celebrated one, referred to in many Japanese books: so Mr. Matsuzaki tells me.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

Click to enlarge
16. O Same Sees the Handsome Young Priest

  

XIII

  

GREAT FIRE CAUSED BY A LADY'S DRESS

SOME 120 years ago, in the year of Temmei, a most terrible fire broke out in the western corner of Yedo,--the worst fire, probably, that is known to the world's history, for it is said to have destroyed no fewer than 188,000 persons.

At that time there lived in Yedo, now Tokio, a very rich pawnbroker, Enshu Hikoyemon, the proud possessor of a beautiful daughter aged sixteen, whose name was O Same, which in this instance is probably derived from the word 'sameru' (to fade away), for in truth O Same San did fade away.

Enshu Hikoyemon loved his daughter dearly, and, he being a widower with no other child, his thoughts and affections were concentrated on her alone. He had long been rich enough to cast aside the mean thoughts and characteristics which had enabled him to reach his present position. From being a hard-hearted relentless money-grubber, Enshu Hikoyemon had become softhearted and generous--as far, at all events, as his daughter was concerned.

One day the beautiful O Same went to pray at her

[p. 83]

ancestors' graves. She was accompanied by her maid, and, after saying her prayers, passed the Temple of Hommyoji, which is in the same grounds at Hongo Maru Yama, and there, as she repeated her prayers before the image of Buddha, she saw a young priest, with whom she fell instantly in love. Thitherto she had had no love-affair; nor, indeed, did she fully realise what had happened, beyond the fact that the youth's face pleased her to gaze upon. It was a solemn and noble face. As O Same lit a joss-stick and handed it to the priest, to be placed before Buddha, their hands met, and she felt pass through her body a thrill the like of which she had never experienced. Poor O Same was what is known as madly in love at first sight,--in love so much that as she arose and left the temple all she could see was the face of the young priest; wherever she looked she saw nothing else. She spoke not a word to her maid on the way home, but went straight to her room.

Next morning she announced to the maid that she was indisposed. 'Go,' she said, 'and tell my dear father that I shall remain in bed. I do not feel well this day.'

Next day was much the same, and so were the next and the next.

Hikoyemon, disconsolate, tried every means to enliven his daughter. He sought to get her away to the seaside. He offered to take her to the Holy Temple of Ise or to Kompira. She would not go. Doctors were called, and could find nothing wrong with O Same San. 'She has something on her mind, and when you can get it off she will be well,' was all that they could say.

At last O Same confessed to her father that she had

[p. 84]

lost her heart to a young priest in the Hommyoji Temple. 'Nay,' she said: 'be not angry with me, father, for I do not know him, and have seen him only once. In that once I loved him, for he has a noble face, which haunts me night and day; and so it is that my heart is heavy, and my body sickens for the want of him. Oh, father, if you love me and wish to save my life, go and find him and tell him that I love him, and that without him I must die!'

Poor Hikoyemon! Here was a nice business--his daughter in love--dying of love for an unknown priest! What was he to do? First he humoured his daughter, and at last, after several days, persuaded her to accompany him to the temple. Unfortunately, they did not see the priest in question; nor did they on a second visit; and after this O Same became more disconsolate than ever, absolutely refusing to leave her room. Night and day her sobs were heard all over the house, and her father was utterly wretched, especially as he had now found out secretly that the priest with whom his daughter had fallen in love was one of the most strict of Buddha's followers, and not likely to err from the disciplinarian rules of religion.

In spite of this, Hikoyemon determined to make an effort in behalf of his daughter. He ventured to the temple alone, saw the priest, told him of his daughter's love, and asked if a union would be possible.

The priest spurned the idea, saying, 'Is it not evident to you by my robes that I have devoted my love to Buddha? It is an insult that you should make such a proposition to me!'

Hikoyemon returned to his home deeply mortified at

[p. 85]

the rebuff; but felt it his duty to be candid with his daughter.

O Same wept herself into hysterics. She grew worse day by day. Hoping to distract her mind, her father had got made for her a magnificent dress which cost nearly yen 4000. He thought that O Same would be vain enough to wish to put it on, and to go out and show it.

This was no use. O Same was not like other women. She cared not for fine raiment or for creating sensations. She put the costume on in her room, to please her father; but then she took it off again, and went back to her bed, where, two days later, she died of a broken heart.

Hikoyemon felt the loss of his pretty daughter very much. At the funeral there must have been half a mile of flower-bearers.

The superb dress was presented to the temple. Such dresses are carefully kept; they remind the priests to say prayers for their late owners as, every two or three months, they are being dusted and cleaned.

The Vicar or Head Priest of this temple, however, was not a good man. He stole this particular dress of O Same's, knowing the value, and sold it secretly to a second-hand dealer in such things.

Some twelve months later the dress was again donated to the same temple by another father whose daughter had died of a love-affair, he having bought the dress at the second-hand clothes-shop. (This girl died and was buried on the same day of the same month as O Same.)

The priest of the temple was not sorry to see the valuable garment return as a gift to his church, and,

[p. 86]

being mercenary, he sold it again. It seemed, indeed, a sort of gold-mine to himself and his church. Imagine, therefore, the feeling among the priests when, in the following year, in the same month and on exactly the same day as that on which O Same and the other girl had died, another girl of exactly the same age was buried in their cemetery, having died also of a love-affair, and having also worn the splendid dress that O Same was given, which was duly presented to the temple, at the conclusion of her burial service, for the third time.

To say that the chief priest was astonished would be to say little. He and the rest of them were sorely perplexed and troubled.

There were the honest priests, who had had nothing to do with the selling of the garment, and the dishonest head priest or vicar. The honest men were puzzled. The vicar was frightened into thinking honesty the best policy amid the circumstances. Accordingly, he assembled all the priests of the temple, made a hasty confession, and asked for advice.

The priests came to one conclusion, and that was that the spirit of O Same San was in the dress, and that it must be burned, and burned with some ceremony, so as to appease her spirit. Accordingly a time was fixed. When the day arrived many people came to the temple. A great ceremony was held, and finally the valuable garment was placed upon a stone cut in the shape of a lotus flower and lighted.

The weather was calm at the time; but as the garment took fire a sudden gust of wind came, instantly fanning the whole into flame. The gust increased into

[p. 87]

a storm, which carried one of the sleeves of the dress up to the ceiling of the temple, where it caught between two rafters and burned viciously. In less than two or three minutes the whole temple was on fire. The fire went on for seven days and seven nights, at the expiration of which time nearly the whole of the south and western portions of Yedo were gone; and gone also were 188,000 people.

The charred remains (as far as possible) were collected and buried, and a temple (which now exists), called 'Eko In,' was built at the spot, to invoke the blessing of Buddha on their souls.

NOTE BY MATSUZAKI.--At the present day the Eko In Temple is well known. Games and wrestling are held there twice a year. Visitors to the temple see the wrestling-place; but no one asks why the temple was built there.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

Click to enlarge
17. Awoto Fujitsuna Orders Every One to Search for the Half-Cent

  

XIV

  

HISTORY OF AWOTO FUJITSUNA [*1]

HOJO TOKIYORI--who, my Murray says, was born in 1246 A. D., and died seventeen years later, in 1263--was Regent for a time, young as he was.

One day he went to worship at the shrine of Tsurugaoka in Kamakura. That same evening he dreamed that one of the gods appeared to him and said:

'Hojo Tokiyori, you are very young for a ruler, and there are some who will try to deceive you, for honest men are scarce. There is one man who is of exceptional honesty, however, and if you wish to govern the people successfully it would be advisable to employ him. His name is Awoto Fujitsuna.'

Hojo Tokiyori told him of his dream. 'Nay,' said he; it was more than a dream: it was a vision that called upon me to appoint you to the post, which I have done.'

'Ah, indeed!' quoth Awoto Fujitsuna. 'Then, sir, if you appoint high officials as the result of dreams and visions, it is a risky matter, for by those dreams we may some day be ordered to be beheaded!

[p. 89]

Hojo Tokiyori laughed at this, and said he hoped not. Awoto Fujitsuna turned out a most excellent and trustworthy official, popular, just, and honest. No one had a word against him, and Hojo Tokiyori was delighted.

One day Fujitsuna was carrying over a bridge a bag of money belonging to the Government. He fell, and the bag burst. Fujitsuna collected the money--with the exception of a half-cent piece, which had rolled in some way over the edge of the bridge and fallen into the river.

Fujitsuna could have let it go, putting another in its place; but that course would not have been up to the high standard of his morals in such matters. He had lost a half-cent which belonged to the Government. It was, he knew, in the river. Consequently, he refused to move on until it was recovered. That was clearly his duty. Awoto Fujitsuna ran to the houses at either end of the bridge, telling the villagers merely that he had dropped some Government money into the river--would they come and help him to find it? Of course they would, ready to help as the Japanese country-men have been from time immemorial. All followed Fujitsuna into the river--men, women, and children--and a diligent search was kept up by several hundreds for many hours, without result, when at last, just as the sun was setting, an old farmer picked up the half-cent, which he presented to Fujitsuna.

Fujitsuna was delighted, and told the people that things were all right now: he had recovered the money--thanks to the quick sight of the farmer.

[p. 90]

'But,' they cried, 'that is only a half-cent. Where is the rest?'

'My friends,' said Fujitsuna, 'the half-cent is all that was lost; but that half-cent was not mine; it was part of the Government treasure, and was entrusted to me, and it was my duty to recover it. Here are thirty yen for you who have helped me to find it, to spend in sake. That is my money; and remember what I tell you--that, no matter how small a thing is entrusted to you by the Government, you must not lose it, but give up your life and fortune sooner.'

The villagers were much impressed with this great honesty and way of reasoning.

Hojo Tokiyori, on hearing the little story, sent for and promoted Awoto Fujitsuna to a higher position than he had held before; but, in spite of his advances and riches, the minister continued to work hard, to eat simple food, and to put on plain raiment, living in a cottage instead of occupying a palace, and devoting his life to his country.

Footnotes

^88:1 Told to me by my friend Mr. Matsuzaki.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

Click to enlarge
18. Oba Kage-chika Feels in the Tree with his Bow

  

XV

  

A LIFE SAVED BY A SPIDER AND TWO DOVES

OF Yoritomo Murray says that 'he lived from 1147 to 1199. He was the founder of the Shogunate--the first Japanese Mayor of the Palace, if one may so phrase it. A scion of the great house of Minamoto, as shrewd and ambitious as he was unscrupulous and inhuman, he was left an orphan at an early age, and barely escaped death as a lad at the hands of Kiyomori, the then all-powerful minister who belonged to the rival house of Taira.'

In this excellently-concentrated epitome of Yoritomo's fifty-two years of life, it will readily be seen that he must have had innumerable adventures. Fighting went on throughout his career; yet oddly enough, in spite of all this, he died comfortably in bed.

In the earlier half of Yoritomo's time he was once severely defeated at a battle against Oba Kage-chika in the Ishibashi mountains, in the province of Izu. So bad had been his defeat that Yoritomo, with six of his most faithful followers, to use vulgar language, made a bolt of it. They ran, not over-boldly, but to save their skins,

[p. 92]

and in their haste to escape Oba Kage-chika's men they took, like hunted hares, to a large forest, hoping there to escape by lying concealed. After they had pushed their way into the thickest and heaviest part of the forest, they came to an enormous hi no ki tree, partly rotten, and containing a hollow which was large enough to hide them all. Yoritomo and his six followers eagerly sought refuge within the tree, for in their state of tiredness they could not long hope to escape the large and active forces of Oba Kage-chika, which were following up their victory by hunting out and cutting off all those who had fled. When he reached the edge of the forest, Oba Kage-chika sent his cousin Oba Kagetoki to search for Yoritomo, saying: 'Go, my cousin, and bring in our enemy Yoritomo. It is the opportunity of your life, for sure it is that he must be in this forest. I myself will endeavour, as our men come up, to place them so as to surround the forest.' Oba Kagetoki was not pleased with his mission, for at one time he had known and been friendly with Yoritomo. However, he bowed low to his cousin and went off. Half an hour after starting Oba Kagetoki came to the enormous tree, and found his old friend Yoritomo and his six faithful attendants. His heart softened, and, instead of carrying out his duty, he returned to Oba Kage-chika, saying that he had been unable to find the enemy, and that in his opinion Yoritomo had escaped from the wood.

Oba Kage-chika was very angry, and openly said that he did not believe his cousin--that to escape from the wood was impossible in such a short time.

'Come!' said he. 'Follow me, some fifteen or twenty

[p. 93]

of you; and you, my cousin, lead the way and show us where you went, and play fair, or you shall suffer for it!'

Thus bid, Kagetoki led the way, carefully avoiding the big tree, for he was determined to save the life of Yoritomo if he could. By some misfortune, however, he chose an abominably bad path, and Kage-chika, having on a particularly heavy suit of armour, cried out, 'Enough of your leading! Let us stick to the road by which we started. It is more likely to be the one which our fugitives took. In any case, this is no road at all where you lead us, and with heavy armour on it is impossible.'

Thus it was that in due time they reached the huge tree. Kagetoki was much afraid that his cousin would go into the hollow and find Yoritomo, and set to think how he could save him.

Kage-chika was about to enter the hollow tree when a bright idea occurred to Kagetoki.

'Hold!' said he. 'It is no use wasting time by going in there. Can't you see that there is a spider's web right across the entrance? It would have been quite impossible for any one to get inside without breaking it.

Kage-chika was half-inclined to agree that his cousin was right; but, being still a little suspicious about him, he put in his bow to feel what was inside. Just as his bow was about to be thrust against Yoritomo's heavy armour (which would naturally have revealed his presence), two beautiful white doves flew out of the top of the hole.

You are right, cousin,' said Kage-chika, laughing, when he saw the doves: 'I am wasting time here, for no

[p. 94]

one can be in this tree with wild doves in it, besides the entrance being closed by a cobweb.'

Thus it was that Yoritomo's life was saved by a spider and two doves. When he became Shogun in later years, and fixed upon Kamakura as his place of residence and as the seat of government, two shrines were built in the temple of Tsuru-ga-oka, which itself is dedicated to Hachiman, the God of War. One is dedicated to the Emperor Nintoku, son of Ojin, the God of War, and the other to Yoritomo, called Shirahata Jinja. The shrines were erected to show Yoritomo's gratitude to the God of War, for doves are known in Japan as the messengers of war, not of peace.

NOTE.--I think that the shrine called by Murray 'Shirahata,' which means White Flag, is really 'Shiro hato,' the white doves. The following is from Murray:--

The Temple of Hachiman, the God of War, dating from the end of the twelfth century, stands in a commanding position on a hill called Tsuru-ga-oka, and is approached by a stately avenue of pine trees leading up the whole way from the seashore. Though both avenue and temple have suffered from the ravages of time, enough still remains to remind one of the ancient glories of the place. Three stone torii lead up to the temple, which stands at the head of a broad flight of stone steps. Notice the magnificent icho tree, nearly 20 feet in circumference, and said to be over a thousand years old, and the flowering trees scattered about the grounds.

Before ascending the flight of steps, the minor shrines to the rear deserve notice. The nearer one, painted red and called Wakamiya, is dedicated to the Emperor Nintoku, son of the God of War. The farther one, renovated in 1890, is called Shirahata Jinja, and dedicated to Yoritomo. The style and structure are

[p. 95]

somewhat unusual, black and gold being the only colours employed, and iron being the material of the four main pillars. The interior holds a small wooden image of Yoritomo.

A side path leads up hence to the main temple, which is enclosed in a square colonnade painted red. The temple, which was re-erected in 1828, after having been destroyed by fire seven years previously, is in the Ryobu Shinto style, with red pillars, beams, and rafters, and is decorated with small painted carvings, chiefly of birds and animals. In the colonnade are several religious palanquins (mikoshi) used on the occasion of the semi-annual festivals (April 15 and December 15), a wooden image of Sumiyoshi by Unkei, and a few relics of Yoritomo. Most of the relics once preserved in the temple have been removed to the residence of the Chief Priest (Hakozaki Oyatsu-kwan), and are only exhibited at festival times.

Immediately behind the temple of Hachiman is a small hill called Shirabata-yama, whence Yoritomo is said to have often admired the prospect. The base of the hill is enclosed and laid out as a garden.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 96]

Click to enlarge
19. Murakami Yoshiteru Does 'Harakiri' and Throws His Entrails at the Enemy

  

XVI

  

MURAKAMI YOSHITERU'S FAITHFULNESS

MURAKAMI YOSHITERU--We shall call him Yoshiteru for short--was one of the faithful retainers of Prince Morinaga, third son of the Emperor Godaigo, who reigned from 1319 to 1339. When I say 'reigned,' I mean that Godaigo was Emperor; but there was a Regent at the time, Hojo Takatoki, who ruled with harshness and great selfishness.

With the exception of young Prince Morinaga, the Imperial family appeared to take things easily. They preferred quietude and comfort to turbulence and quarrelling. Prince Morinaga was different. Fiery-tempered and proud, he thought that Hojo Takatoki was usurping the Emperor's rights. The man, he said, was nothing more by birth than one of the Emperor's subjects, and had no business to be made Regent.

Naturally these opinions led to trouble, and it was not very long before Prince Morinaga was obliged to leave the capital suddenly, with his followers, of whom there were some hundreds, not enough to fight Hojo Takatoki at the time.

[p. 97]

Prince Morinaga had made up his mind that it would be better to live independently in Yamato than to be under the sway of Hojo Takatoki, as were his father and his elder brothers. Having collected the most faithful of his followers--of whom the most notable was the hero of our story, Murakami Yoshiteru,--the Prince left the capital in disguise, and started for Yoshino in Yamato. There, in the wild mountains, he intended to build a castle, in which to dwell for the rest of his days independent of the Regent, whom he held in much loathing.

Prince Morinaga carried with him an Imperial flag, which, he expected, would gain for him sympathy and help even in the wild Yamato Province. Though from Kioto the then capital to the borders of Yamato is, in a direct line, only about thirty miles, the whole country is mountainous and wild; roads are non-existent, mountain paths taking their place. Consequently, it was noon on the fifth day before the Prince found himself at a little border village called Imogase. Here he found his way blocked as it were by a guard-house, the soldiery of which had been chosen from among Imogase villagers, headed by one Shoji, a rough and disagreeable man.

When Prince Morinaga and his party of about eighty followers dressed as yamabushi (fighting monks) arrived, flying the standard, they were called to a halt by the village guard, and told that they could go no farther into Yamato without leaving one of themselves as hostage. The Prince was too haughty to speak to the villagers and explain, and, unfortunately, Murakami Yoshiteru, his most trusted leader, could not be found, for he had remained some miles behind to gather straw and make a

[p. 98]

new pair of waraji (straw shoes). Shoji, leader of the Imogase villagers, was firm in his demand that one of the party should be left behind until their return. For some twenty minutes matters stood thus. Neither side wanted to fight. At last Shoji said:

'Well, you may say that you are a prince! I am a simple villager, and I don't know. You may carry the Imperial flag; but when you are dressed like yamabushi it does not look exactly as if you were a prince. As I don't want trouble, and you want to pass without trouble, -my orders being that out of all parties of over ten armed people I am to hold one as a hostage,--the only suggestion that I can make is that I keep as hostage this Imperial flag.'

The prince, glad enough to save leaving one of his faithful followers, gave the standard to Shoji as hostage, and then he and his party were allowed to pass into Yamato. They proceeded on their way. Not half-an-hour after they had passed, Murakami Yoshiteru arrived at the guard-house, having made himself a pair of straw shoes, to take the place of his old ones; and his surprise at seeing his master's flag in such low hands was equalled by his anger.

'What is the meaning of this?' he asked.

Shoji explained what had happened.

On hearing the story Murakami lost control of his temper. He flew into a violent passion. He reviled Shoji and his men as a set of low blackguards who scarcely had a right to look at the Imperial standard of Japan, much less to dare to touch it; and with that he began a general assault on the village guard, killing three

[p. 99]

or four and putting the rest to flight. Murakami then seized the standard, and ran on with it until, towards evening, he came up with the Prince and his party, who were overjoyed at what he had done and at the recovery of the flag.

Two days later the party reached Yoshino, and in the vicinity of this place they built a fortress, where for some months they dwelt in peace. It was not long, however, before the Regent heard of the prince's whereabouts, and he soon sent a small army after him. For two days the fort was desperately attacked; on the third the outer gates were taken; two-thirds of the prince's men were dead'. Murakami, had been wounded three times, and his life could not last long. Faithful to the end, he rushed to his prince, saying, 'Master, I am wounded unto death. In less than half-an-hour our enemies will have conquered us, for we have but few men left. Your Highness is unwounded, and can in disguise escape when the end comes. Give me quick your armour, and let me pretend that I am your Highness. I will show our enemies how a prince can die.'

Changing clothes hastily, and donning the prince's armour, Murakami, bleeding badly from his wounds, and already more dead than alive with weakness from the loss of blood, regained the wall, and struggling up the last steps he reached a point where he could see and be seen by the whole of the enemy.

'I am Prince Morinaga!' shouted he. 'Fate is against me, though I am in the right. Sooner or later Heaven's punishment will come down on you. Until then my curses upon you, and take a lesson as to how a

[p. 100]

prince can die, emulating it, if you dare, when your time comes!'

With this Murakami Yoshiteru drew his short sword across his abdomen, and, seizing his quivering entrails, he flung them into the midst of his enemies, his dead body falling directly afterwards.

His head was taken to the Regent in Kioto as the head of Prince Morinaga, who escaped to plot in the future.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 101]

Click to enlarge
20. O Tokoyo Sees the Girl About to be Thrown Over Cliff

  

XVII

  

A STORY OF OKI ISLANDS

THE Oki Islands, some forty-five miles from the mainland of Hoki Province, were for centuries the scene of strife, of sorrow, and of banishment; but to-day they are fairly prosperous and highly peaceful. Fish, octopus, and cuttlefish form the main exports. They are a weird, wild, and rocky group, difficult of access, and few indeed are the Europeans who have visited them. I know of only two--the late Lafcadio Hearn and Mr. Anderson (who was there to collect animals for the Duke of Bedford). I myself sent Oto, my Japanese hunter, who was glad to return.

In the Middle Ages--that is, from about the year 1000 A.D.--there was much fighting over the islands by various chieftains, and many persons were sent thither in banishment.

In the year 1239 Hojo Yoshitoshi defeated the Emperor Go Toba and banished him to Dogen Island.

Another Hojo chieftain banished another Emperor, Go Daigo, to Nishi-no-shima. Oribe Shima, the hero of our story, was probably banished by this same Hojo chieftain,

[p. 102]

whose name is given to me as Takatoki (Hojo), and the date of the story must be about 1320 A.D.

At the time when Hojo Takatoki reigned over the country with absolute power, there was a samurai whose name was Oribe Shima. By some misfortune Oribe (as we shall call him) had offended Hojo Takatoki, and had consequently found himself banished to one of the islands of the Oki group which was then known as Kamishima (Holy Island). So the relater of the story tells me; but I doubt his geographical statement, and think the island must have been Nishi-no-shima (Island of the West, or West Island [*1]).

Oribe had a beautiful daughter, aged eighteen, of whom he was as fond as she was of him, and consequently the banishment and separation rendered both of them doubly miserable. Her name was Tokoyo, O Tokoyo San.

Tokoyo, left at her old home in Shima Province, Ise, wept from morn till eve, and sometimes from eve till morn. At last, unable to stand the separation any longer, she resolved to risk all and try to reach her father or die in the attempt; for she was brave, as are most girls of Shima Province, where the women have much to do with the sea. As a child she had loved to dive with the women whose daily duty is to collect awabi and pearl-oyster shells, running with them the risk of life in spite of her higher birth and frailer body. She knew no fear.

Having decided to join her father, O Tokoyo sold what property she could dispose of, and set out on her

[p. 103]

long journey to the far-off province of Hoki, which, after many weeks she reached, striking the sea at a place called Akasaki, whence on clear days the Islands of Oki can be dimly seen. Immediately she set to and tried to persuade the fishermen to take her to the Islands; but nearly all her money had gone, and, moreover, no one was allowed to land at the Oki Islands in those days--much less to visit those who had been banished thence. The fishermen laughed at Tokoyo, and told her that she had better go home. The brave girl was not to be put off. She bought what stock of provisions she could afford, at night went down to the beach, and, selecting the lightest boat she could find, pushed it with difficulty into the water, and sculled as hard as her tiny arms would allow her. Fortune sent a strong breeze, and the current also was in her favour. Next evening, more dead than alive, she found her efforts crowned with success. Her boat touched the shore of a rocky bay.

O Tokoyo sought a sheltered spot, and lay down to sleep for the night. In the morning she awoke much refreshed, ate the remainder of her provisions, and started to make inquiries as to her father's whereabouts. The first person she met was a fisherman. 'No,' he said: 'I have never heard of your father, and if you take my advice you will not ask for him if he has been banished, for it may lead you to trouble and him to death!'

Poor O Tokoyo wandered from one place to another, subsisting on charity, but never hearing a word of her father.

One evening she came to a little cape of rocks, whereon stood a shrine. After bowing before Buddha and imploring

[p. 104]

his help to find her dear father, O Tokoyo lay down, intending to pass the night there, for it was a peaceful and holy spot, well sheltered from the winds, which, even in summer, as it was now (the 13th of June), blow with some violence all around the Oki Islands.

Tokoyo had slept about an hour when she heard, in spite of the dashing of waves against the rocks, a curious sound, the clapping of hands and the bitter sobbing of a girl. As she looked up in the bright moonlight she saw a beautiful person of fifteen years, sobbing bitterly. Beside her stood a man who seemed to be the shrine-keeper or priest. He was clapping his hands and mumbling 'Namu Amida Butsu's.' Both were dressed in white. When the prayer was over, the priest led the girl to the edge of the rocks, and was about to push her over into the sea, when O Tokoyo came to the rescue, rushing at and seizing the girl's arm just in time to save her. The old priest looked surprised at the intervention, but was in no way angered or put about, and explained as follows:--

'It appears from your intervention that you are a stranger to this small island. Otherwise you would know that the unpleasant business upon which you find me is not at all to my liking or to the liking of any of us. Unfortunately, we are cursed with an evil god in this island, whom we call Yofune-Nushi. He lives at the bottom of the sea, and demands, once a year, a girl just under fifteen years of age. This sacrificial offering has to be made on June 13, Day of the Dog, between eight and nine o'clock in the evening. If our villagers neglect this, Yofune-Nushi becomes angered, and causes great storms,

[p. 105]

which drown many of our fishermen. By sacrificing one young girl annually much is saved. For the last seven years it has been my sad duty to superintend the ceremony, and it is that which you have now interrupted.'

O Tokoyo listened to the end of the priest's explanation, and then said:

'Holy monk, if these things be as you say, it seems that there is sorrow everywhere. Let this young girl go, and say that she may stop her weeping, for I am more sorrowful than she, and will willingly take her place and offer myself to Yofune-Nushi. I am the sorrowing daughter of Oribe Shima, a samurai of high rank, who has been exiled to this island. It is in search of my dear father that I have come here; but he is so closely guarded that I cannot get to him, or even find out exactly where he has been hidden. My heart is broken, and I have nothing more for which to wish to live, and am therefore glad to save this girl. Please take this letter, which is addressed to my father. That you should try and deliver it to him is all I ask.'

Saying which, Tokoyo took the white robe off the younger girl and put it on herself. She then knelt before the figure of Buddha, and prayed for strength and courage to slay the evil god, Yofune-Nushi. Then she drew a small and beautiful dagger, which had belonged to one of her ancestors, and, placing it between her pearly teeth, she dived into the roaring sea and disappeared, the priest and the other girl looking after her with wonder and admiration, and the girl with thankfulness.

As we said at the beginning of the story, Tokoyo had been brought up much among the divers of her own

[p. 106]

country in Shima; she was a perfect swimmer, and knew, moreover, something of fencing and jujitsu, as did many girls of her position in those days.

Tokoyo swam downwards through the clear water, which was illuminated by bright moonlight. Down, down she swam, passing silvery fish, until she reached the bottom, and there she found herself opposite a submarine cave resplendent with the phosphorescent lights issuing from awabi shells and the pearls that glittered through their openings. As Tokoyo looked she seemed to . see a man seated in the cave. Fearing nothing, willing to fight and die, she approached, holding her dagger ready to strike. Tokoyo took him for Yofune-Nushi, the evil god of whom the priest had spoken. The god made no sign of life, however, and Tokoyo saw that it was no god, but only a wooden statue of Hojo Takatoki, the man who had exiled her father. At first she was angry and inclined to wreak her vengeance on the statue; but, after all, what would be the use of that? Better do good than evil. She would rescue the thing. Perhaps it had been made by some person who, like her father, had suffered at the hands of Hojo Takatoki. Was rescue possible? Indeed it was more: it was probable. So perceiving, Tokoyo undid one of her girdles and wound it about the statue, which she took out of the cave. True, it was waterlogged and heavy; but things are lighter in the water than they are out, and Tokoyo feared no trouble in bringing it to the surface--she was about to tie it on her back. However, the unexpected happened.

She beheld, coming slowly out of the depths of the cavern, a horrible thing, a luminous phosphorescent

 

Click to enlarge
21. O Tokoyo sees Yofune-Nushi Coming Towards Her

 

[p. 107]

creature of the shape of a snake, but with legs and small scales on its back and sides. The thing was twenty-seven or eight shaku (about twenty-six feet) in length. The eyes were fiery.

Tokoyo gripped her dagger with renewed determination, feeling sure that this was the evil god, the Yofune-Nushi that required annually a girl to be cast to him. No doubt the Yofune-Nushi took her for the girl that was his due. Well, she would show him who she was, and kill him if she could, and so save the necessity of further annual contributions of a virgin from this poor island's few.

Slowly the monster came on, and Tokoyo braced herself for the combat. When the creature was within six feet of her, she moved sideways and struck out his right eye. This so disconcerted the evil god that he turned and tried to re-enter the cavern; but Tokoyo was too clever for him. Blinded by the loss of his right eye, as also by the blood which flooded into his left, the monster was slow in his movements, and thus the brave and agile Tokoyo was able to do with him much as she liked. She got to the left side of him, where she was able to stab him in the heart, and, knowing that he could not long survive the blow, she headed him off so as to prevent his gaining too far an entrance into the cave, where in the darkness she might find herself at a disadvantage. Yofune-Nushi, however, was unable to see his way back to the depths of his cavern, and after two or three heavy gasps died, not far from the entrance.

Tokoyo was pleased at her success. She felt that she had slain the god that cost the life of a girl a-year to the people of the island to which she had come in search of

[p. 108]

her father. She perceived that she must take it and the wooden statue to the surface, which, after several attempts, she managed to do,--having been in the sea for nearly half-an-hour.

In the meantime the priest and the little girl had continued to gaze into the water where Tokoyo had disappeared, marvelling at her bravery, the priest praying for her soul, and the girl thanking the gods. Imagine their surprise when suddenly they noticed a struggling body rise to the surface in a somewhat awkward manner! They could not make it out at all, until at last the little girl cried, 'Why, holy father, it is the girl who took my place and dived into the sea! I recognise my white clothes. But she seems to have a man and a huge fish with her.'

The priest had by this time realised that it was Tokoyo who had come to the surface, and he rendered all the help he could. He dashed down the rocks, and pulled her half-insensible form ashore. He cast his girdle round the monster, and put the carved image of Hojo Takatoki on a rock beyond reach of the waves.

Soon assistance came, and all were carefully removed to a safe place in the village. Tokoyo was the heroine of the hour. The priest reported the whole thing to Tameyoshi, the lord who ruled the island at the time, and he in his turn reported the matter to the Lord Hojo Takatoki, who ruled the whole Province of Hoki, which included the Islands of Oki.

Takatoki was suffering from some peculiar disease quite unknown to the medical experts of the day. The recovery of the wooden statue representing himself made

[p. 109]

it clear that he was labouring under the curse of some one to whom he had behaved unjustly--some one who had carved his figure, cursed it, and sunk it in the sea. Now that it had been brought to the surface, he felt that the curse was over, that he would get better; and he did. On hearing that the heroine of the story was the 'daughter of his old enemy Oribe Shima, who was confined in prison, he ordered his immediate release, and great were the rejoicings thereat.

The curse on the image of Hojo Takatoki had brought with it the evil god, Yofune-Nushi, who demanded a virgin a-year as contribution. Yofune-Nushi had now been slain, and the islanders feared no further trouble from storms. Oribe Shima and his brave daughter O Tokoyo returned to their own country in Shima Province, where the people hailed them with delight; and their popularity soon re-established their impoverished estates, on which men were willing to work for nothing.

In the island of Kamijima (Holy Island) in the Oki Archipelago peace reigned. No more virgins were offered on June 13 to the evil god, Yofune-Nushi, whose body was buried on the Cape at the shrine where our story begins. Another small shrine was built to commemorate the event. It was called the Tomb of the Sea Serpent.

The wooden statue of Hojo Takatoki, after much travelling, found a resting-place at Honsoji, in Kamakura.

Footnotes

^102:1 Since writing this, I have found that there is a very small island, called Kamishima, between the two main islands of the Oki Archipelago, south-west of the eastern island.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

Click to enlarge
22. Tarada Sees the Mysterious Figure of a Girl

  

XVIII

  

CAPE OF THE WOMAN'S SWORD [*1]

DOWN in the Province of Higo are a group of large islands, framing with the mainland veritable little inland seas, deep bays, and narrow channels. The whole of this is called Amakusa. There are a village called Amakusa mura, a sea known as Amakusa umi, an island known as Amakusa shima, and the Cape known as Joken Zaki, which is the most prominent feature of them all, projecting into the Amakusa sea.

History relates that in the year 1577 the Daimio of the province issued an order that every one under him was to become a Christian or be banished.

During the next century this decree was reversed; only, it was ordered that the Christians should be executed. Tens of thousands of Christianised heads were collected and sent for burial to Nagasaki, Shimabara and Amakusa.

This--repeated from Murray--has not much to do

[p. 111]

with my story. After all, it is possible that at the time the Amakusa people became Christian the sword in question, being in some temple, was with the gods cast into the sea, and recovered later by a coral or pearl diver in the Bunroku period, which lasted from 1592 to 1596. A history would naturally spring from a sword so recovered. But to the story.

The Cape of Joken Zaki (the Woman's Sword Cape) was not always so called. In former years, before the Bunroku period, it had been called Fudozaki (Fudo is the God of Fierceness, always represented as surrounded by fire and holding a sword) or Fudo's Cape. The reason of the change of names was this.

The inhabitants of Amakusa lived almost entirely on what they got out of the sea, so that when it came to pass that for two years of the Bunroku period no fish came into their seas or bay and they were sorely distressed, many actually starved, and their country was in a state of desolation. Their largest and longest nets were shot and hauled in vain. Not a single fish so large as a sardine could they catch. At last things got so bad that they could not even see fish schooling outside their bay. Peculiar rumbling sounds were occasionally heard coming from under the sea off Cape Fudo; but of these they thought little, being Japanese and used to earthquakes.

All the people knew was that the fish had completely gone--where they could not tell, or why, until one day an old and much-respected fisherman said:

'I fear, my friends, that the noise we so often hear off Cape Fudo has nothing to do with earthquakes, but that the God of the Sea has been displeased.'

[p. 112]

One evening a few days after this a sailing junk, the Tsukushi-maru, owned by one Tarada, who commanded her, anchored for the night to the lee of Fudozaki.

After having stowed their sails and made everything snug, the crew pulled their beds up from below (for the weather was hot) and rolled them out on deck. Towards -the middle of the night the captain was awakened by a peculiar rumbling sound seeming to come from the bottom of the sea. Apparently it came from the direction in which their anchor lay; the rope which held it trembled visibly. Tarada said the sound reminded him of the roaring of the falling tide in the Naruto Channel between Awa and Awaji Island. Suddenly he saw towards the bows of the junk a beautiful maid clothed in the finest of white silks (he thought). She seemed, however, hardly real, being surrounded by a glittering haze.

Tarada was not a coward; nevertheless, he aroused his men, for he did not quite like this. As soon as he had shaken the men to their senses, he moved towards the figure, which, when but ten or twelve feet away, addressed him in the most melodious of voices, thus:

'Ah! could I but be back in the world! That is my only wish.'

Tarada, astonished and affrighted, fell on his knees, and was about to pray, when a sound of roaring waters was heard again, and the white-clad maiden disappeared into the sea.

Next morning Tarada went on shore to ask the people of Amakusa if they had ever heard of such a thing before, and to tell them of his experiences.

'No,' said the village elder. 'Two years ago we never

[p. 113]

heard the noises which we hear now off Fudo Cape almost daily, and we had much fish here before then; but we have even now never seen the figure of the girl whom (you say) you saw last night. Surely this must be the ghost of some poor girl that has been drowned, and the noise we hear must be made by the God of the Sea, who is in anger that her bones and body are not taken out of this bay, where the fish so much liked to come before her body fouled the bottom.'

A consultation was held by the fishermen. They concluded that the village elder was right--that some one must have been drowned in the bay, and that the body was polluting the bottom. It was her ghost that had appeared on Tarada's ship, and the noise was naturally caused by the angry God of the Sea, offended that his fish were prevented from entering the bay by its uncleanness.

What was to be done was quite clear. Some one must dive to the bottom in spite of the depth of water, and bring the body or bones to the surface. It was a dangerous job, and not a pleasant one either,--the bringing up of a corpse that had lain at the bottom for well over a year.

As no one volunteered for the dive, the villagers suggested a man who was a great swimmer--a man who had all his life been dumb and consequently was a person of no value, as no one would marry him and no one cared for him. His name was Sankichi or (as they called him) Oshi-no-Sankichi, Dumb Sankichi. He was twenty-six years of age; he had always been honest; he was very religious, attending at the temples and shrines

[p. 114]

constantly; but he kept to himself, as his infirmity did not appeal to the community. As soon as this poor fellow heard that in the opinion of most of them there was a dead body at the bottom of the bay which had to be brought to the surface, he came forward and made signs that he would do the work or die in the attempt. What was his poor life worth in comparison with the hundreds of fishermen who lived about the bay, their lives depending upon the presence of fish? The fishermen consulted among themselves, and agreed that they would let Oshi-no-Sankichi make the attempt on the morrow; and until that time he was the popular hero.

Next day, when the tide was low, all the villagers assembled on the beach to give Dumb Sankichi a parting cheer. He was rowed out to Tarada's junk, and, after bidding farewell to his few relations, dived into the sea off her bows.

Sankichi swam until he reached the bottom, passing through hot and cold currents the whole way. Hastily he looked, and swam about; but no corpse or bones did he come across. At last he came to a projecting rock, and on the top of that he espied something like a sword wrapped in old brocade. On grasping it he felt that it really was a sword. On his untying the string and drawing the blade, it proved to be one of dazzling brightness, with not a speck of rust.

'It is said,' thought Sankichi, 'that Japan is the country of the sword, in which its spirit dwells. It must be the Goddess of the Sword that makes the roaring sound which frightens away the fishes--when she comes to the surface.'

[p. 115]

Feeling that he had secured a rare treasure, Sankichi lost no time in returning to the surface. He was promptly hauled on board the Tsukushi-maru amid the cheers of the villagers and his relations. So long had he been under water, and so benumbed was his body, he promptly fainted. Fires were lit, and his body was rubbed until he came to, and gave by signs an account of his dive. The head official of the neighbourhood, Naruse Tsushimanokami, examined the sword; but, in spite of its beauty and excellence, no name could be found on the blade, and the official expressed it as his opinion that the sword was a holy treasure. He recommended the erection of a shrine dedicated to Fudo, wherein the sword should be kept in order to guard the village against further trouble. Money was collected. The shrine was built. Oshi-no-Sankichi was made the caretaker, and lived a long and happy life.

The fish returned to the bay, for the spirit of the sword was no longer dissatisfied by being at the bottom of the sea.

Footnotes

^110:1 The title to this old and hitherto untold legend is not much less curious than the story itself, which was told to me by a man called Fukuga, who journeys much up and down the southern coast in search of pearls and coral.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 116]

Click to enlarge
23. Yogodayu Saves the Bee's Life in Kizugawa Valley

  

XIX

  

HOW YOGODAYU WON A BATTLE

DURING the reign of the Emperor Shirakawa, which was between the years 1073 and 1086 A.D., there lived a general whose name was Yogodayu. He had built a fort for himself and his small army in the wilds of Yamato, not far from the Mountain of Kasagi, where, about the year 1380, the unfortunate Emperor Go-Daigo camped among the same rocky fastnesses and eventually perished. Even to-day, as one winds in and out of the narrow gorge where the railway passes Kasagi, in the Kizugawa valley, one is struck by the extreme wildness of the scenery. Here it was that Yogodayu built his fort. Some months later he was attacked by his wife's brother, whom he detested, and got badly beaten, so much so as to have only some twenty warriors left alive. With these he escaped to Kasagi Mountain, and hid himself for two days in a cave, in fear and trembling that he should be discovered. On the third day Yogodayu, finding that he was not pursued, ventured forth to admire the scenery. While thus occupied he saw a bee in a large spider's-web struggling in vain to free itself. Struggle as it might, it

[p. 117]

only made things worse. Yogodayu, feeling sympathy for the bee, relieved it from its captivity and let it fly, saying:

'Ah, little bee! fly back to liberty and to your hive. I wish I could do the same. It is a pleasure to relieve those in captivity, even though one is at the mercy of one's enemy, as I am.'

That night Yogodayu dreamed that a man dressed in black and yellow saluted him, and said: 'Sir, I have come to tell you that it is my desire to help you and fulfil the resolve which I came to this morning.'

'And who, pray, may you be?' answered Yogodayu in his dream.

'I am the bee whom you released from the spider's web, and deeply grateful; so much so that I have thought out a plan by which you can defeat your enemy and regain your lost fortune.'

'How is it possible for me to defeat my enemy with only a remnant of my force--some twenty warriors?' quoth Yogodayu.

'It is very simple,' was the answer. 'Follow exactly the instructions I give you, and you shall see.'

'But I have no walls behind which the few friends I have can make a show of fighting. It is impossible for me to attack my enemy.'

The bee smiled and said: 'You shall not want walls. You shall be attacked, and, with the help of some ten millions of the bees of Yamato, you shall put your enemies to rout. Listen! When you have fixed upon the day and the place where you will fight your brother-in-law, build a wooden house, place in it as many hundred empty jars and receptacles as your men can find, so that we bees

[p. 118]

may come and hide in them. You must live in the house with your twenty and odd men, and manage to let your enemy know where you are, and that you are collecting a force to attack him. It will then not be long before he attacks you. When he does, we bees will come out in our millions and help you. You are sure of victory. Fear nothing; but do as I say.'

As Yogodayu was about to speak the bee disappeared, and he awoke from his dream. Deeply impressed, he related it to his men. It was arranged that these should split themselves up into couples and return to their native province, collect what men they could, and be back at the cave some thirty days later. Yogodayu went off alone. Thirty days later they all met again at the cave on Kasagi yama. Altogether they were now eighty men. Quietly they set to, and, following the bee's advice, built a wooden . house at the entrance of the valley, and put therein some two thousand jars. No sooner had this been done than the bees arrived in countless thousands, until there must have been well-nigh two millions. One of Yogodayu's men was sent to propagate reports that he was strongly fortifying himself.

Two days later his brother-in-law came to attack him.

Yogodayu began fighting carelessly, so as to draw the enemy, who, seeing this, came on in full force and in a most unguarded way. As soon as the whole of the enemy's force lay revealed, the bees swarmed out of their hiding-places, and flew among them in such blinding swarms--stinging as they went here, there, and everywhere--that there was no standing against them. The enemy,

[p. 119]

without a single exception, turned and ran. They were pursued by the bees, and by Yogodayu's eighty men, who simply cut them down as they liked, for each of the enemy had fully 3000 bees attending him. Many lost their minds and went mad.

Thus, after completely defeating his old enemy, Yogodayu became repossessed of his fortress; and, to commemorate the event, he built a small temple at the back of Kasagi yama. All the dead bees that could be found were collected and buried there, and once a-year during the rest of his life Yogodayu used to go and worship there.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

Click to enlarge
24. Makino Heinei Gets Blown Away in the Storm

  

XX

  

THE ISOLATED OR DESOLATED ISLAND

MANY years ago the Lord of Kishu, head of one of the three families of the Tokugawas, ordered his people to hold a hunting-party on Tomagashima (Toma Island). In those days such hunting-parties were often ordered, more for the purpose of improving drill and organisation than for sport. It brought men together, and taught others to handle them both on land and at sea. It made men recognise their commanders and superiors, and it disclosed what men were worthy of being made such. Hunting-parties of this kind were considered as military manoeuvres.

On this particular hunt or manoeuvre, the Lord of Kishu was to make a kind of descent by water on the island of Toma, and kill all the game that his landing-party could beat up.

Boats and junks were armed as if for war, and so were the men--except that they wore no armour.

The day for the entertainment was fine. Some sixty boats put to sea, and landed successfully about eight hundred men on Toma Island; and busy indeed were they chasing boar and deer the whole morning.

[p. 121]

Towards afternoon, however, a storm of great violence came on and completely stopped the sport. The men were ordered to return to the shore and regain their boats before these should be smashed on the beach.

On embarking they put out to sea with the intention of gaining the mainland. On shore trees were being uprooted, columns of sand flew high in the air, and the gale was indeed terrific; if on shore it was as bad as this, it must be much worse at sea. The Lord of Kishu's boats and junks were tossed about as if they were floating leaves.

One of the party was a notedly brave man, Makino Heinei, who had been nicknamed 'Ino shishi' (Wild Boar) on account of his reckless bravery. Seeing that neither junks nor boats were making headway against the storm, he pushed the small boat off the junk, jumped into it alone, took the oars, laughed at every one, and cried: 'See here! You all seem to be too frightened to make headway. Look at what I do and follow me. I am not afraid of the waves, and none of you should be if you are to serve our Lord of Kishu faithfully.'

With that Makino Heinei shot out into the wild sea, and by extraordinary exertion managed to get some three hundred yards ahead of the rest of the fleet. Then the gale increased to such violence that he was incapable of doing anything. For fear of being blown out of the boat, he was obliged to hold tight to the mast and otherwise abandon his fate to good fortune. At times even the heart of the Wild Boar quailed. Often his boat was lifted clean out of the water by the wind; waves towered over him; he closed his eyes and awaited his fate.

[p. 122]

[paragraph continues] Finally, one squall more powerful than the rest blew his boat out of the water, and it was seen from the other boats (which lay at anchor) to disappear into the horizon. Heinei clung to the boat tightly. When the mast blew away he held on to the ribs. He prayed hard and earnestly. Some eight hours after the storm began, Heinei found the boat in comparatively smooth water. She was flooded, and she was a wreck; but still she floated, and that was all he cared for at the moment. Moreover, Heinei felt encouraged, because between two dark clouds he could see an opening and some stars, though at present it was absolutely dark and the driving rain had not ceased. Suddenly, when Heinei was wondering how far he had been blown from shore or from his friends, crack!--he felt his boat plump into a rock. The shock was so violent (for the boat was still being driven fast by the gale) that our hero lost his balance and was thrown fully ten feet away. Falling on soft stuff, Heinei thought he was in the sea; but his hands suddenly realised that it was soft wet sand. Delighted at this discovery, he looked at the clouds and the sky, and came to the conclusion that in another hour it would be daylight. In the meantime he thanked the gods for his deliverance, and prayed for his friends and for his lord and master.

As morning broke Heinei arose stiff, weary, and hungry. Before the sun appeared he realised that he was on an island. No other land was in sight, and it puzzled him sorely to guess where he could be, for from all the Kishu islands the mainland could be easily seen.

'Oh, here is a new tree! I have never seen that in

[p. 123]

Kishu,' said he. 'And this flower--that also is new--while here is a butterfly more brilliant than any I know.'

So saying and thinking, Heinei began looking about for food, and, being a Japanese, easily satisfied his appetite with the shellfish which were abundantly strewn everywhere after the storm.

The island on which Heinei had been cast was fair in size--some two miles across and ten in circumference. There was one small hill in the middle, which Heinei resolved to ascend, to see if he could discover Kishu from the top of it. Accordingly he started. The undergrowth of bush was so great that Heinei made a detour to another bay. The trees were quite different from any he had ever seen before, and there were many kinds of palms. At last he found to his delight a well-worn path leading up the mountain. He took it; but when he came to a damp place in the way he was in no whit reassured, for there he saw footmarks which could have been made by no one who was not a giant--they were fully eighteen inches in length. A warrior belonging to Kishu must fear nothing, thought Heinei, and, arming himself with a stout stick, he proceeded. Near the top he found the opening to a somewhat large cave, and, nothing daunted, began to enter, prepared to meet anything. What was his surprise when an enormous man, fully eight feet in height, appeared before him, not more than ten feet from the entrance! He was a hideous, wild-looking creature, nearly black, with long unkempt hair, flashing angry eyes, and a mouth that stretched from ear to ear, showing two glittering rows of teeth; and he wore no clothes except the skin of a wild-cat tied round his loins.

[p. 124]

As soon as he saw Heinei he came to a standstill, and said, in Japanese, 'Who are you? how have you got here? and what have you come for?'

Makino Heinei answered these questions as fully as he thought necessary by telling his name and adding, 'I am a retainer of the Lord of Kishu, and was blown away by the storm after we had been hunting and holding manoeuvres on Toma Island.'

'And where are these places you speak of? Remember that this island is unknown to the world and has been for thousands of years. I am its sole occupant, and wish to remain so. No matter how I came. I am here. My name is Tomaru, and my father was Yamaguchi Shoun, who died, with his master Toyotomi Hidetsugu, on Koyasan Mountain in 1563. Both died by their own hands; and I got here, no matter how, and here I intend to remain undisturbed. I heard of your Lord of Kishu and of the Tokugawa family before I left Japan, and for that reason I will help you by giving you my old boat, in which I arrived. Come to the beach. I will send you off in the right direction, and if you continue sailing north-west you shall in time reach Kishu. But it is a long way off--a very long way.'

With that they walked down to the beach.

'See,' said Tomaru: 'the boat is well-nigh rotten, for it is many years since she was put here; but with luck you may reach Kishu. Stay--you must have some provision. I can give only dry fish and fruits; but to these you are welcome. And I must give you a present for your master, the Lord of Kishu. It is a kind of seaweed. You shall have some for yourself also. It is

[p. 125]

my great discovery on this island. No matter how bad a sword-cut you may get, it will stop the blood flowing and cure at once. Now, jump into the boat and row away. I like to be alone. You may speak of your adventure; but you are not to mention my name. Farewell!'

Heinei could only do as he was bid. Consequently, he made off. Rowing night and day and aided by favourable currents, he found himself off the coast of Kishu on the third day after leaving the island. The people were much astonished to see him alive, and the Lord of Kishu rejoiced, especially at the sword-cut-healing seaweed, which he had planted in the sea at a part of the coast which he renamed and called Nagusa-gori (District of the famous Seaweed).

Later Makino Heinei sailed again by permission of his Lord to get more seaweed. The island was found; but the giant had disappeared.

NOTE.--Mujinto Island, in the Pacific, is the group called Bonin Islands by Europeans.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

Click to enlarge
25. O Tsuru Sees the Giant Carp

  

XXI

  

CHIKUBU ISLAND, LAKE BIWA

MANY years ago, when I was a boy, there was a song about a Chinaman. It began:

In China once there lived a man,
 And his name was Ding-dong-dang.
 His legs were long, and his feet were small,
 And this Chinese man couldn't walk at all.

Chorus:

Chi-chi-Margie, Chi-chi-Marah,
 Ding-dong, ding-dong, ding-dong dah,
 Kossi-kossi-ki, kossi-kossi-ka,
 Chikubu, Chikubu, Chikubu Chang.

Little in those days did I think that I should come across an island--or any other place, for the matter of that--which bore the name of part of this wild and idiotic chorus, 'Chikubu, Chikubu, Chikubu Chang.' It sounds truly wild. Well, so it is. I have found an island on Lake Biwa which is pronounced and spelt exactly as in the chorus of this song of my youth. 'Chikubu' is there, and I am puzzled to know where the composer found it. In my Japanese I can't find it.

[p. 127]

[paragraph continues] However, let us to the story. It is not a very good one; but, as it relates to the only island of importance in the lake, it is worth chronicling.

Chikubu-shima is situated about two-thirds up towards the north-western end of Lake Biwa, in Omi Province. The lake is some thirty-five miles long and twelve broad. The island is holy, I believe, and it is said to have been caused by an earthquake nearly 600 years B.C. Fuji Mountain made its appearance at the same time. Thus we have (so far as we like to believe it) the geographical pedigree of Lake Biwa and its principal island.

The nearest land to Chikubu is Tsuzurao Cape, which is about two miles away. There, some three hundred years ago, dwelt two sisters, O Tsuru and Kame. They were fifteen and eleven respectively, and dwelt with their old and only uncle, their father and mother and all their other relations being dead. Tsuru (the crane) and Kame (the turtle) were devoted to each other; in fact, the poor girls clung to each other as the remnants of a family should cling. They loved each other. They were inseparable.

At that time there was much fear among the inhabitants of Tsuzurao Point of a large carp--a carp of such size that it was called 'The Master of Lake Biwa.' It was said that this fish ate dogs, cats, and sometimes people, if they were unwise enough to swim into water sufficiently deep for him to manoeuvre in. His principal hover was in the waters surrounding Chikubu Island, at the northern end of the lake.

When O Tsuru reached the age of fifteen, and her sister O Kame was eleven, O Tsuru became sick with

[p. 128]

consumption; from bad she grew worse, and her poor little sister O Kame became quite disconsolate; she cried because of her sister's illness, and went by herself to pray at all the temples in the neighbourhood. Day after day she thought of nothing but her sister's illness; but all she did, poor child, was in vain. O Tsuru became worse.

In her great distress O Kame thought that she should venture to the wild and sacred island of Chikubu, there to pray to the Goddess of Mercy, Kwannon. To do so with any chance of her prayers being heard, it was necessary that she should go alone. She would row off secretly that night.

After darkness had come and her uncle's household had gone to sleep, O Kame crept forth and went down to the edge of the lake, where her uncle's boat and many others lay. Getting into one, the lightest she could find, she sculled towards Chikubu Island. The sky was clear and the water glistened.

In less than an hour this whole-hearted child of Nippon was kneeling before the ever-pleasing and soothing figure of Kwannon, the goddess ever ready to listen to the prayers of the unhappy; and there she prayed to the full extent of her feelings, weeping between-times in sorrow for the sickness of her sister.

When poor O Kame had finished praying she got into her boat and began to row back to Tsuzurao. She had got within half-a-mile of that place when a terrible storm arose, and in the third squall her boat was capsized. O Kame was no swimmer, and as she sank into the depths of the lake the giant carp saw her, and instantly carried her off and devoured her.

[p. 129]

Next morning there was consternation at Tsuzurao. When it was found that both O Kame San and one of the fishermen's boats were missing it was naturally surmised that she had gone out on the lake, and probably to Chikubu Island to pray to Kwannon.

Boats went off in search; but nothing could be found, save the marks of her footsteps from the shore to the shrine dedicated to Kwannon. On hearing this sad news, O Tsuru, who lay nigh unto death, became worse; but in spite of her sad condition she could not bear the idea of lingering on in the world without her sister O Kame. Consequently she resolved to destroy her life as near as she could think to the place where O Kame had died, so that her spirit might journey with hers until perhaps they should become born again together. At all events, it was clearly her duty to follow her sister.

When the dusk of evening arrived O Tsuru crept out from her room and gained the beach, where she, like her little sister, took the lightest boat which she could find, and rowed herself out, in spite of her weakness, to a spot where she thought that the carp might have killed her sister. There, standing in the bows of the boat, she cried aloud:

'Oh, mighty carp, that hast devoured my sister, devour me also, that our spirits may follow the same path and become reunited. It is for this I cast myself into the lake!

So saying, O Tsuru shut her eyes and jumped into the water. Down, down, down she went, until she reached the bottom. No sooner had she alighted there, feeling (curiously enough) no effects of being under water, than she heard her name called.

[p. 130]

'Strange indeed,' thought she, 'that I should hear my name at the bottom of Lake Biwa!'

She opened her eyes, and beheld standing beside her an old priest. O Tsuru asked him who he was, and why he had called her.

'I was a priest,' he explained. 'Perhaps I am one now. At all events, I often come to the bottom of the lake. I know all about your little sister Kame, of her faithfulness and affection for you, and of yours for her; I know also of the storm which capsized her boat when she had been praying to Kwannon on Chikubu Island, and of her being taken and eaten by that horrible carp. Believe me, none of these are reasons why you should take your own life. Go back on earth, rather, and pray to Buddha for your sister's blessing and for her soul. I will see that you are avenged on the carp, and I will see that you get well and strong. Take my hand, so, and I will take you back on shore.'

Having said this and carried Tsuru to land, the priest disappeared. For some time she lay unconscious; but when she came fully to her senses O Tsuru found herself on Chikubu Island, and, feeling considerably stronger than she had felt for some time, she went to the shrine dedicated to Kwannon, and passed the remainder of the night in prayer.

In the morning, having gone to the beach, she saw boats in the distance coming from Tsuzurao Point; but (what was more extraordinary) there lay, not ten feet from the shore where she stood, an enormous carp, fully nine feet in length, dead!

[p. 131]

Among the search-boats that arrived was one containing her uncle and a priest.

Tsuru told her story. The carp was buried at a small promontory on the island, which is called Miyazaki. It was named Koizuka Miya-zaki (the Carp's Grave at Temple Cape).

O Tsuru lived to a ripe old age, and was never ill again. History tells of her at the age of seventy informing Ota Nobunaga, who came to destroy temples in the neighbourhood, that if he touched the shrines on Chikubu Island she herself would see to his destruction.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

Click to enlarge
26. They Monkeys Listen to the Priest's Sermon

  

XXII

  

REINCARNATION

IN the far-north and mountainous portion of Echigo Province is a temple which during the reign of the Emperor Ichijo had a curious story attached to it; and, though the Emperor Ichijo reigned so long ago as between the years 987 and 1011 A. D., the teller of the story assured me that he believed the temple to be in existence still.

The temple's name is Kinoto, and it is situated in the hills in wild woods, which in those days must have been almost virgin forest.

The monk who reigned supreme over the Kinoto Temple was a youngish man, but very devout; he read sacred sermons from the holy Buddhist Bible, aloud, twice a-day.

One day the good youth perceived that two monkeys had come down from the mountain and sat listening to his reading with serious faces and no tricks. He was amused, and, taking no notice, continued to read. As soon as he had finished, the monkeys went off into the hills.

[p. 133]

The monk was surprised to see the monkeys appear at both his sermons next day; and when on the third day they came again he could not help asking why they came so regularly.

'We have come, holy father, because we like to hear the words and sermons of Buddha as read by yourself, and greatly do we desire to retain all the wisdom and virtues which we have heard you recite. Is it possible for you to copy out the great and holy Buddhist book?'

'It would be a very laborious affair,' answered the priest, highly astonished; 'but, so rare an interest is it that you animals take in the sermons of our Great Lord Buddha, I will make an effort to satisfy your wish, hoping that thereby you may be benefited.'

The monkeys bowed and left the priest, pleased with themselves and the promise they had obtained, while the priest set to at his gigantic labours of copying the Buddhist Bible. Some six or seven days later about five hundred monkeys came to the temple, each bearing parchment paper, which they laid before the priest, their foreman saying how deeply grateful they would be when they had got the copy of the Bible, so that they might know the laws and mend their ways; and, bowing again before the priest, they retired, all except the first two monkeys. These two set diligently to work to find food for the priest while he wrote. Day after day they went into the mountains, returning with wild fruits and potatoes, honey and mushrooms; and the priest wrote steadily on, being thus attended, until he had copied five volumes of the sacred book.

When he had reached the end of the fifth volume

 

Click to enlarge
27. The Priest Writes the First Five Volumes

 

[p. 134]

the monkeys, for some unaccountable reason, failed to come, and the good priest was quite nervous on their account. The second day of their absence he went in search of them, fearing that they must have been overcome by some misfortune. Everywhere the priest found traces of their forages in his behalf,--branches broken off the wild fruit trees, scratchings and holes where they had been looking for wild potatoes. Evidently the monkeys had worked hard, and the poor priest felt deeply anxious on their account.

At last, when near the top of the mountain, his heart gave a bound and was filled with sorrow when he came to a hole which the monkeys had made in looking for wild potatoes--so deep that they had been unable to get out. No doubt both of them had died of broken hearts, fearing that the priest would think they had deserted him.

There remained nothing to do but to bury the monkeys and pray for their blessing; which he did. Shortly after this the priest was called away from the temple to another: so, as he saw no necessity to continue copying the Buddhist Bible, he put the five volumes he had copied into one of the pillars of the temple, which had a sort of shelf cupboard cut in it.

Forty years later there arrived at the temple one Kinomi-ta-ka Ason, who had become Governor or Lord of Echigo Province. He came with half of his retainers and domestics, and asked the priests if they knew anything of the unfinished copy of the Buddhist Bible. Was it in the temple still?

'No,' they said, 'we were none of us here at the

[p. 135]

time your Lordship mentions. But there is one old man, a servant, who is eighty-five years of age, and he may be able to tell you something. We will send for him.'

Shortly afterwards a man with flowing white beard was ushered in.

'Is it the old document that a priest began copying out for the monkeys you want? Well, if so, that has never been touched since, and is a matter of so little importance that I had nearly forgotten about it. The document is in a little secret shelf which is hollowed out in one of the main pillars of the temple. I will fetch it.'

Some ten minutes later the documents were in the hands of Kinomi-ta-ka Ason, who was in ecstasy of delight at the sight of them. He told the priests and the old man that he was the Lord of Echigo Province, and that he had journeyed all the way to their temple to see if unfinished volumes of the Bible remained there.

'For,' he said, 'I was the senior of the two monkeys who were so anxious to obtain copies of the whole of our Lord Buddha's sermons; and, now that I have been born a man, I wish to complete them.'

Kinomi-ta-ka Ason was allowed to take the five volumes away with him, and for five years he kept copying out the sacred book. He copied three thousand volumes in all, and it is said that they are now kept in the Temple of Kinoto, in Echigo, as its most sacred treasure.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

Click to enlarge
28. O Kinu San Inspects the Place Where Takadai Jiro Committed Suicide

  

XXIII

  

THE DIVING-WOMAN OF OISO BAY

OISO, in the Province of Sagami, has become such a celebrated place as the chosen residence of the Marquis Ito and of several other high Japanese personages, that a story of a somewhat romantic nature, dating back to the Ninan period, may be interesting.

During one of the earlier years of the period, which lasted from '116 to 1169 A. D., a certain knight, whose name was Takadai Jiro, became ill in the town of Kamakura, where he had been on duty, and was advised to spend the hot month of August at Oiso, and there to give himself perfect rest, peace, and quietness.

Having obtained permission to do this, Takadai Jiro lost no time in getting to the place and settling himself down, as comfortably as was possible, in a small inn which faced the sea. Being a landsman who (with the exception of his service at Kamakura) had hardly ever seen the sea, Takadai was pleased to dwell in gazing at it both by day and by night, for, like most Japanese of high birth, he was poetical and romantic.

After his arrival at Oiso, Takadai felt weary and dusty. As soon as he had secured his room he threw off his

[p. 137]

clothes and went down to bathe. Takadai, whose age was about twenty-five years, was a good swimmer, and plunged into the sea without fear, going out for nearly half-a-mile. There, however, misfortune overtook him. He was seized with a violent cramp and began to sink. A fishing-boat sculled by a man and containing a diving-girl happened to see him and went to the rescue; but by this time he had lost consciousness, and had sunk for the third time.

The girl jumped overboard and swam to the spot where he had disappeared, and, having dived deep, brought him to the surface, holding him there until the boat came up, when by the united efforts of herself and her father Takadai was hauled on board, but not before he had realised that the soft arm that clung round his neck was that of a woman.

When he was thoroughly conscious again, before they had reached the shore, Takadai saw that his preserver was a beautiful ama (diving-girl) aged not more than seventeen. Such beauty he had never seen before--not even in the higher circles in which he was accustomed to move. Takadai was in love with his brave saviour before the boat had grounded on the pebbly beach. Determined in some way to repay the kindness he had received, Takadai helped to haul their boat up the steep beach and then to carry their fish and nets to their little thatched cottage, where he thanked the girl for her noble and gallant act in saving him, and congratulated her father on the possession of such a daughter. Having done this, he returned to his inn, which was not more than a few hundred yards away.

[p. 138]

From that time on the soul of Takadai knew no peace. Love of the maddest kind was on him. There was no sleep for him at night, for he saw nothing but the face of the beautiful diving-girl, whose name (he had ascertained) was Kinu. Try as he might, he could not for a moment put her out of his mind. In the daytime it was worse, for O Kinu was not to be seen, being out at sea with her father, diving for the haliotis shell and others; and it was generally the dusk of evening before she returned, and then, in the dim light, he could not see her.

Once, indeed, Takadai tried to speak to O Kinu; but she would have nothing to say to him, and continued busying herself in assisting her father to carry the nets and fish up to their cottage. This made Takadai far worse, and he went home wild, mad, and more in love than ever.

At last his love grew so great that he could endure it no longer. He felt that at all events it would be a relief to declare it. So he took his most confidential servant into the secret, and despatched him with a letter to the fisherman's cottage. O Kinu San did not even write an answer, but told the old servant to thank his master in her behalf for his letter and his proposal of marriage. 'Tell him also,' said she, 'that no good could come of a union between one of so high a birth as he and one so lowly as I. Such a badly matched pair could never make a happy home.' In answer to the servant's expostulation, she merely added, 'I have told you what to tell your master: take him the message.'

Takadai Jiro, on hearing what O Kinu had said, was not angry. He was simply astonished. It was beyond

[p. 139]

his belief that a fisher-girl could refuse such an offer in marriage as himself--a samurai of the upper class. Indeed, instead of being angry, Takadai was so startled as to be rather pleased than otherwise; for he thought that perhaps he had taken the fair O Kinu San a little too suddenly, and that this first refusal was only a bit of coyness on her part that was not to be wondered at. 'I will wait a day or two,' thought Takadai. 'Now that Kinu knows of my love, she may think of me, and so become anxious to see me. I will keep out of the way. Perhaps then she will be as anxious to see me as I am to see her.'

Takadai kept to his own room for the next three days, believing in his heart that O Kinu must be pining for him. On the evening of the fourth day he wrote another letter to O Kinu, more full of love than the first, despatched his old servant, and waited patiently for the answer.

When O Kinu was handed the letter she laughed and said:

'Truly, old man, you appear to me very funny, bringing me letters. This is the second in four days, and never until four days ago have I had a letter addressed to me in my life. What is this one about, I wonder?'

Saying this, she tore it open and read, and then, turning to the servant, continued: 'It is difficult for me to understand. If you gave my message to your master correctly he could not fail to know that I could not marry him. His position in life is far too high. Is your master quite right in his head?'

'Yes: except for the love of you, my young master is

[p. 140]

quite right in his head; but since he has seen you he talks and thinks of nothing but you, until even I have got quite tired of it, and earnestly pray to Kwannon daily that the weather may get cool, so that we may return to our duties at Kamakura. For three full days have I had to sit in the inn listening to my young master's poems about your beauty and his love. And I had hoped that every day would find us fishing from a boat for the sweet aburamme fish, which are now fat and good, as every other sensible person is doing. Yes: my master's head was right enough; but you have unsettled it, it seems. Oh, do marry him, so that we shall all be happy and go out fishing every day and waste no more of this unusual holiday.'

'You are a selfish old man,' answered O Kinu. 'Would you that I married to satisfy your master's love and your desire for fishing? I have told you to tell your master that I will not marry him, because we could not, in our different ranks of life, become happy. Go and repeat that answer.'

The servant implored once more; but O Kinu remained firm, and finally he was obliged to deliver the unpleasant message to his master.

Poor Takadai! This time he was distressed, for the girl had even refused to meet him. What was he to do? He wrote one more imploring letter, and also spoke to O Kinu's father; but the father said, 'Sir, my daughter is all I have to love in the world: I cannot influence her in such a thing as her love. Moreover, all our diving-girls are strong in mind as well as in body, for constant danger strengthens their nerves: they are not like the weak

[p. 141]

farmers' girls, who can be influenced and even ordered to marry men they hate. Their minds are, oftener than not, stronger than those of us men. I always did what Kinu's mother told me I was to do, and could not influence Kinu in such a thing as her marriage. I might give you my advice, and should do so; but, sir, in this case I must agree with my daughter, that, great as the honour done to her, she would be unwise to marry one above her own station in life.'

Takadai's heart was broken. There was nothing more that he could say and nothing more that he could do. Bowing low, he left the fisherman and retired forthwith to his room in the inn, which he never left, much to the consternation of his servant.

Day by day he grew thinner, and as the day approached for his return from leave, Takadai was far more of an invalid than he had been on his arrival at Oiso. What was he to do? The sentiment of the old proverb that 'there are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it' did not in any way appeal to him. He felt that life was no longer worth having. He resolved to end it in the sea, where his spirit might perhaps linger and catch sight occasionally of the beautiful diving-girl who had bewitched his heart.

Takadai that evening wrote a last note to Kinu, and as soon as the villagers of Oiso were asleep he arose and went to the cottage, slipping the note under the door. Then he went to the beach, and, after tying a large stone to a rope and to his neck, he got into a boat and rowed himself about a hundred yards from shore, where he took the stone in his arms and jumped overboard.

[p. 142]

Next morning O Kinu was shocked to read in the note that Jiro Takadai was to kill himself for love of her. She rushed down to the beach, but could see only an empty fishing-boat some three or four hundred yards from shore, to which she swam. There she found Takadai's tobacco box and his juro (medicine box). O Kinu thought that Takadai must have thrown himself into the sea somewhere hereabouts: so she began to dive, and was not long before she found the body, which she brought to the surface, after some trouble on account of the weight of the stone which the arms rigidly grasped. O Kinu took the body back to shore, where she found Takadai's old servant wringing his hands in grief.

The body was taken back to Kamakura, where it was buried. O Kinu was sufficiently touched to vow that she would never marry any one. True, she had not loved Takadai; but he had loved, and had died for her. If she married, his spirit would not rest in peace.

No sooner had O Kinu mentally undertaken this generous course than a strange thing came to pass.

Sea-gulls, which were especially uncommon in Oiso Bay, began to swarm into it; they settled over the exact spot where Takadai had drowned himself. In stormy weather they hovered over it on the wing; but they never went away from the place. Fishermen thought it extraordinary; but Kinu knew well enough that the spirit of Takadai must have passed into the gulls, and for it she prayed regularly at the temple, and out of her small savings built a little tomb sacred to the memory of Takadai Jiro.

By the time Kinu was twenty years of age her beauty

[p. 143]

was celebrated, and many were the offers she had in marriage; but she refused them all, and kept her vow of celibacy. During her entire life the sea-gulls were always on the spot where Takadai had been drowned. She died by drowning in a severe typhoon some nine years later than Takadai; and from that day the sea-gulls disappeared, showing that his spirit was now no longer in fear of O Kinu marrying.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 144]

Click to enlarge
1. Iganosuke Dives for the Pipe and Finds the Idol

  

XXIV

  

THEFT AND RECOVERY OF A GOLDEN KWANNON

IN the period of Gen-roku, which lasted from 1688 to 1704, when the Shogun or military ruler Tsunayoshi's power was in full sway, he presented a solid gold figure of Kwannon, the Goddess of Mercy, to each of the three leading families of the provinces of Kii, Mito, and Owari, and they were considered as of the highest and greatest value by each of these leading Lords or Daimios, who had them kept in their inner palaces, so that they were almost impossible to get at, and were considered at least absolutely safe from robbers; but even in spite of this the Lord of Kii took additional precautions by always having a man night and day to guard his idol.

At the same period lived a most redoubtable robber whose name was Yayegumo. He was more than an ordinary robber, and was what the people called a 'fuin-kiri,' which means 'seal breaker' or 'seal cutter'; a first-class burglar, in fact, who never descended to robbing the poor, but only robbed the richest and most difficult palaces and castles that were to be got at, taking from

[p. 145]

them only the highest and most valuable treasures they possessed.

This bold robber broke into the Lord of Kii's Palace--no one knew how--took the idol of Kwannon, and left his name written on a piece of paper. The Lord of Kii, very angry, sent for the guard, whose name was Mumashima Iganosuke, and reprimanded him severely, asking him what excuse he had to make. 'None, my lord: tiredness overcame me and I slept. There is but one way in which I can show my regret, and that I will do by destroying myself.'

The Lord of Kii, who was a man of wisdom, answered that before he did this it would be more useful if Iganosuke would follow up the robber and try to recover the idol. Iganosuke, who had always been a faithful servant, readily consented, and, having obtained indefinite leave, went away. For fully four months he was quite unsuccessful, though he had travelled half over the country. At last he heard reports of robberies in Chugoku, and then later in Shikoku Province. Hurrying down from Izumo to Okayama, he there got on board a ship bound across the Inland Sea for Takamatsu, in Shikoku. The weather was fine and the sea smooth, and Iganosuke was in high spirits, for he had heard that one or two of the robberies had undoubtedly been done by Yayegumo, and he felt that at last he must be getting nearer the man he wished to catch--perhaps, even, he was on that very boat! Who could tell? Thinking of these possibilities, Iganosuke kept very much to himself, watching the people, whose spirits all seemed to be affected by the beautiful weather, for, though mostly strangers, they were all sociable.

[p. 146]

Among them was a good-looking young samurai who had attracted Iganosuke by his refined appearance, as also by a beautiful gold pipe which he drew out from its case and smoked while chatting to his neighbour. By and by a samurai of some sixty years of age came up to the young man, and said:

'Sir, I have lost my pipe and tobacco-pouch somewhere on this ship. I am a confirmed smoker, and almost dying for a whiff of tobacco. Might I borrow yours for a moment or two?'

The young samurai handed both his pipe and his pouch to the old man with a bow, saying that this afforded him great pleasure.

The old samurai, after his three puffs of the pipe, was about to empty out the ash and refill it. To do so, without thinking what he was about, he knocked the pipe on the outside of the ship. To his horror the gankubi (the bowl) dropped off into the sea. The old man knew that the pipe was gold and of great value, and was utterly confused. He did not know what to say. His apologies were profuse; but they did not bring back the end of the pipe. The young samurai, of course, was much annoyed; but it would be no use getting angry. In any case that would have been an excessively vulgar proceeding, more especially with so old a man. He said:

'Ah! the pipe was given to me by the lord of my clan for meritorious service rendered in the big hunt last year, and truly I do not know how I shall be able to face the disgrace of incurring his anger.' He grew pale as he mused.

[p. 147]

The old samurai felt more sorry than ever when he heard this, and said:

'There is only one way I see that you can face your lord, and that is by my death. I also was a samurai of some importance when younger, and know how to conduct myself. It is right that I should disembowel myself as an apology to you for my carelessness.' And, saying this, the old samurai drew his right arm and shoulder from under his kimono.

Surprised at the old man's high sense of honour, the young samurai seized the hand in which he held his sword and prevented him, saying:

'That will really do no good. It would not make it easier for me to explain to my lord. Your death can bring no apology to him. It was I to whom he gave the pipe, and it is I who have lost it by lending it to you. It is I, therefore, who should offer the apology to my lord by doing harakiri!' Then the young samurai prepared to kill himself.

Iganosuke, who had been watching the incident, stepped forward and said:

'Gentlemen, I also am a samurai, and I have heard what you say. Let me say that, though the pipe-end has fallen into the sea, it in no way follows that it is lost beyond recovery. Both of you appear to me to be unnecessarily hasty. I am a good diver and swimmer; our ship is becalmed; and the water hereabouts is not very deep. I am quite ready to try and help you to recover the pipe if you will allow me.'

Of course, both the other samurai were pleased at this idea, of which, being no swimmers themselves, they had

[p. 148]

never thought, And Iganosuke. lost no time in throwing off his kimono and diving into the sea, where he was thoroughly at home, having been in his younger days so expert a swimmer that he gave lessons to many of the samurai at Kii.

Down he went to the bottom, finding not much more than seven Japanese fathoms of five feet each. The bottom was composed almost entirely of stones and was very clear. Iganosuke had not moved many feet along before he saw the end of the gold pipe, and at the same time something else gleaming between the stones. Thrusting the pipe between his teeth, he seized the other object, and to his great astonishment found it to be no less a thing than the gold figure of Kwannon which had been stolen from the castle of the Lord of Kii.

Carefully returning to the surface, Iganosuke scrambled on board, and handed the pipe-end to the grateful young samurai, who, with the old one, bowed to the ground.

When Iganosuke had thrown on his clothes, he said:

'I am a retainer of the Lord of Kii, and I have come from our castle of Takegaki to hunt for the robber who stole the very figure of Kwannon which I have just by good fortune while looking for your pipe recovered. Is it not wonderful? Truly the old saying, "Nasakewa hito no tame naradzu" [*1] is quite true!'

Then the old man, in a wild state of delight, cried: 'Even more curious is this. My name is Matsure Fujiye of Takamatsu. Only a month ago the robber whom you name Yayegumo Fuin-kiri, the seal-breaker, came into the bedroom of my lord, and was about to steal great

[p. 149]

valuables, when I, who was on guard, tried to take him. Though an old man, I am a fencer; but he was too clever for me and escaped. I followed him down to the beach, but was not fast enough, and he got away. Since then I have always wondered what he had in his kimono pockets, for the bright rays of some gilded thing shot out of them. The robber had not got far from the shore before a great storm arose. He was wrecked and drowned. Both his body and the boat were recovered some days later, and I identified them; but there was nothing in his pocket. It is clear that when his boat upset the robber lost the Kwannon, which must have been what I saw shining out of his pocket.'

Truly this was a wonderful string of coincidences!

Iganosuke, who had no further cause to travel, returned to the Lord of Kii, and reported his adventures and good fortune. So much pleased was the Daimio, he gave Iganosuke a present.

The figure of the gold Kwannon was better guarded than ever before. Undoubtedly it had miraculous power, and it may still be among the treasures of Kii.

Footnotes

^148:1 Favour is not for other people.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

Click to enlarge
29. Furuzuka Iga Cuts Off the Head of the Ex-Emperor Shutoku, Who is His Own Son

  

XXV

  

SAIGYO HOSHI'S ROCK

SOME twelve miles south of Shodo shima (Shodo island) is the largish island of Nao or Naoshima, on the western side of the enchanting Inland Sea, which it has been my good fortune to cruise over at will, helped, instead of being hindered, by the Japanese Government, in consequence of the kindness of Sir Ernest Satow. Naoshima has but few inhabitants, not, I think, more than from sixty to a hundred; in the time of our story, about the year 1156, there were only two,--Sobei and his good wife O Yone. These lived alone at a beautiful little bay, where they had built a fishing-hut, and cultivated some three thousand tsubo of land, with the produce of which and an unlimited supply of fish they were perfectly happy, untroubled by the quarrels of the day, which were then particularly serious, it being the Hogen period, which, lasting from 1156 to 1160, took its name from what was known as the Hogen rebellion or (to put it correctly) revolution. It was during this exciting period that the ex-Emperor Shutoku (life, 1124-1141), who was suspected of leading the rebellion, was for safety banished by those in power to the island of Naoshima.

Stranded, marooned in little else than the clothes he

[p. 151]

stood in, he was in an unenviable plight. As far as he knew, the island was desolate. After his marooners had left him he strolled on the beach, wondering what next he should do. Should he take his life, or should he struggle to retain it? While pondering these questions night overcame Shutoku before he had thought of making a shelter, and he sat, in consequence, contemplating the past and listening to the sad waves.

Next morning, as the sun rose above the horizon, the ex-Emperor began to move. He had resolved to live. He had not gone far along the beach when he found marks of feet upon the sand, and shortly afterwards, from across a little rocky promontory, he saw smoke ascending in the still air. Lightened in heart, the ex-Emperor stepped out, and after some twenty minutes of stiff climbing came down into the bay where stood the hut of Sobei and his wife. Marching boldly up, he told them who he was, and how he had been marooned and exiled, and asked them many questions.

'Sir,' said Sobei, 'my wife and I are very humble people. We live in peace, for there are none to disturb us here, and we are passing through our lives very happily. To our humble fare you are truly welcome. Our cottage is small; but you shall have its shelter while we build another and a better for you, and at all times we shall be your servants.'

The ex-Emperor was pleased to hear these words of friendship, and became one of the family. He helped to build a lodge for himself. He helped the old couple in their fishing and agriculture, and became deeply attached to them.

[p. 152]

In the autumn he fell ill, and was nursed through a dangerous fever, his medicines being made by O Yone from leaves, seaweeds, and other natural products of the island; and towards the spring he began to recover. In his convalescence the ex-Emperor went out one day to sit by the sea and admire the scenery, and became so absorbed in a flock of seagulls that were following a school of sardines that he failed to notice what was going on around him. When he looked up suddenly it was to find himself surrounded by no less than fourteen knights in armour.

As soon as these noticed that the ex-Emperor had seen them, one the eldest, a grey-haired and benevolent-looking old man, stepped up to him, and, bowing, said:

'Oh, my beloved Sovereign, at last I have found you! My name is Furuzuka Iga, and regretfully I am obliged to tell you that I am sent by the Mikado to secure your head. He fears while you live, even in banishment, for the peace of the country. Please enable me to take your head as speedily and as painlessly as possible. It is my misfortune to have to do it.'

The ex-Emperor seemed in no way surprised at this speech. Without a word, he arranged himself and stretched his neck to receive the blow from Iga's sword.

Iga, touched by his manly conduct, began to weep, and exclaimed:

'Oh, what a brave sovereign! what a samurai! How I grieve to be his executioner!' But his duty was plain: so he nerved himself and struck off the ex-Emperor's head with a single blow.

As soon as the head fell upon the sand the other

[p. 153]

knights came up and respectfully placed the head in a silken bag and awaited orders from their chief.

'My friends,' said Furuzuka Iga, 'go back to the boat and take the head of Shutoku to the Emperor. Tell him that his orders have been carried out, and that he need have no future fear. Go without me, for I remain here to weep over the deed which I have had to do.'

The knights were astonished; but they departed, and Iga gave way to grief.

Soon it came to pass that Sobei and his wife went to look for the ex-Emperor, for his absence had been long. They knew the spot where he loved to sit and gaze at the beautiful scenery. Thus it was that they found Iga weeping.

'What is this?' they cried. 'What means this blood upon the sand? Who, sir, may you be, and where is our guest?'

Iga explained that he was an envoy from the Mikado, and that it had been his painful duty to kill the ex-Emperor.

The fury of Sobei and his wife knew no bounds. Instinctively they decided that they must both die after avenging the ex-Emperor by killing Iga. They proceeded to attack him with their knives--Sobei in front and his wife from behind.

Iga avoided them by his proficiency in jujitsu. In two seconds he had both of them by the wrists, and then said:

'Good people,--for I know you to be such,--listen to my story. The ex-Emperor who has been in exile on this island for nearly a year, and whom you have befriended

[p. 154]

and prevented from perishing from starvation and exposure, is not the real ex-Emperor, but my own son Furuzuka Taro!'

Sobei and his wife looked at him in bewilderment, and asked for an explanation.

'Listen, and I will tell you,' said Furuzuka Iga. 'As the result of the revolution in the Imperial Household, ex-Emperor Shutoku was taken for the enemy of the reigning Emperor, and was sentenced to exile on this island, which was supposed to be uninhabited, and is so for all but yourselves. The ex-Emperor must have died had you not been here to support him, and, though I am attached to the Imperial Court, I did not like one who had been my sovereign so to perish. It was my duty to bring the ex-Emperor here and maroon him. I marooned instead my own son, who was very much like him, and was glad to take the ex-Emperor's place. Unfortunately, the Mikado's mind became uneasy during the winter, fearing that so long as the ex-Emperor remained alive there might be further trouble, and I was again sent to Naoshima Island, this time to bring back the ex-Emperor's head. You know now what I have had to do. Was ever a father called upon to carry out so terrible a commission? Pity me; be not angered. You have lost your friend, and I my son; but the ex-Emperor still lives; moreover, he knows of my loyalty to him, and will be here shortly in secret and in disguise. That is why I have remained, and that is the whole of the story I have to tell; and both of you must know how deeply grateful I feel towards you both in your great kindness to my son Taro.'

[p. 155]

The poor samurai bowed to the ground, and the old couple, too simple to know what to do, remained silent, with tears of sorrow and of sympathy streaming down their faces.

For fully half an hour nothing was said. They remained weeping on the blood-stained beach, waiting for the tide to rise and wash away the marks; and they might have been longer had it not been that suddenly they heard the sweet strains of the biwa (a musical instrument of four strings, a lute) Then Iga arose and, drying his eyes, said, 'Here, my friends, comes the real ex-Emperor, though in disguise. He never goes anywhere without his lute, and he has signs and signals with me by certain airs he plays. He is asking now if it is safe to come forward, and if I give no answer it is safe. Listen, and see him approach!'

Sobei and his wife had never listened to such soft and bewitching music before, and, hearts full of sorrow, they sat listening. Nearer and nearer the music came, until they saw coming along the beach a man in poor clothes, whom they might almost have mistaken for their dead friend, so like was he to him.

When he came nearer, Iga went up and bowed, and then led the stranger to the fisherman and his wife, whom he made known, telling the ex-Emperor what kindness they had shown his son Taro. The ex-Emperor was pleased, and said that he was deeply grateful and considered them as part of that faithful body who had worked to save his life. Just then a ship was seen to round the point of the bay. It was the ship in which Iga had arrived, the ship which had borne away his son's head. The ex-Emperor, followed by Iga, Sobei, and his

[p. 156]

wife, kneeled on the sand near the bloody stain, and prayed long for the peace of the spirit of Taro.

Next day the ex-Emperor announced his intention of remaining for the rest of his life on the island of Naoshima with Sobei and O Yone. Iga was taken to the mainland by Sobei, and found his way back to the capital.

The ex-Emperor, attended by the faithful old couple, lived for a year on the island. His time was passed in playing on the biwa and in praying for the spirit of Taro. At the end of the year he died from mournfulness. Sobei and his wife devoted all their spare time to building a small shrine to his memory. It is said to be standing to this day.

In the third year of Ninnan the famous but eccentric priest and poet, Saigyo, who was related to the Imperial family, spent seventeen days on the island, praying night and day. During this time he sat on the favourite rock of Taro and the ex-Emperor. The rock is still known as 'Saigyo iwa' (Saigyo's Rock).

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 157]

Click to enlarge
30. O Ai San Continues Her Prayers Under the Fall

  

XXVI

  

HOW MASAKUNI REGAINED HIS SIGHT

SOME seventy years ago there dwelt in Kyoto a celebrated swordmaker, a native of the province of Awa, in Tokushima. Awanokami Masakuni--for such was his name--dwelt in Kyoto for the purpose of business, and because he was nearer the homes of the grandees, for whom it paid him best to make swords. With him lived his beautiful little daughter Ai, or O Ai San ('Ai' meaning 'love'). She was fourteen, and only a child; but her beauty was enough to make her an object of affection to any one who happened to see her. O Ai thought of no one but her father, and of him she was extremely fond.

As time went on Masakuni so improved in the art of making swords and forging blades that he came to be regarded with much jealousy by the other swordmakers, all of whom, including Masakuni, lived in the Karasu-Tengu district of Kyoto, where it was the fashion for swordmakers to dwell in those days. Alas, the skill of Masakuni cost him an eye! Though the samurai and wearers of swords held ethical ideas of honour and Bushi said to be far above the average, it does not appear that

[p. 158]

the swordmakers were the same. They often committed the most horrible and cowardly crimes. One of these was to put out either one or both of the eyes of their sword-making rivals while they slept. Thus it came to pass one night that little O Ai San was awakened from her sleep by the piercing cry of her father, and found him writhing on the floor in agony, with his right eye stabbed and burst.

O Ai summoned aid; but nothing could save the eye. It was done for; and, though the place could be healed, Masakuni must give up all idea of ever having the use of his right eye again. There was not even the satisfaction of catching his assailant, for he did not know who it was. Amid these circumstances it was evident that Masakuni could no longer remain a swordmaker: after the loss of his eye it would be impossible for him to carry out any of the fine work needed to keep up his reputation. Consequently, he returned to his native village, Ohara, in the province of Awa, with his daughter.

Poor Masakuni had not been long settled in his old home before his left eye began to feel bad, and in less than a week there appeared to be every chance of his losing its use altogether.

Ai was disconsolate. For her dear father to lose the use of both eyes was terrible. She loved him dearly, and knew that his only remaining pleasures in life were herself and beautiful scenery. What could she do, poor child? She waited on him day and night, cooked, and was his nurse. When she had exhausted every means in her power to do good, and her father's left eye grew worse, she betook herself to praying. Daily she toiled up the

[p. 159]

wild and rocky mountain of Shiratake, near the summit of which there was a little shrine dedicated to Fudo, sometimes thought of as the God of Wisdom. There, day after day, she prayed that she might be led to the knowledge that would cure her father, and, though it was now the icy month of January, after so doing she divested herself of clothing and stood for nearly half an hour under the waterfall from which the mountain takes its name, as was the custom of all who wished to impress upon the Deity the earnestness and sincerity of their prayers.

For three months O Ai had thus gone up the mountain daily to pray and undergo the terrible cold of the waterfall; yet her prayer seemed unanswered, for there was no improvement in her father. O Ai, however, did not lose heart. Towards the end of February she climbed again. In spite of the severe cold (ice was hanging on to many parts of the rock), O Ai, after praying to Fudo San, divested herself of clothing and stepped under the fall, there to continue her prayers as long as she could possibly stand and live. So great was the cold, in a few moments she lost consciousness, and slipped down into the basin of the fall, receiving a severe blow on the head.

Just then, by unusual good fortune, an old man, followed by his servant, came up the mountain and was looking at and admiring the waterfall. The white body of O Ai San caught his eye while it was being churned in the basin of the fall not thirty feet from where he stood. The old man and the servant hastened to pull out the body and began to rub it, and found that life was not extinct. O Ai was half-drowned and numbed,

[p. 160]

insensible from cold and the blow, and the blood was flowing freely from the wound.

They made up their minds to save this beautiful girl, and set to with vigour. A fire was lit; her clothes were warmed and put on; and in less than twenty minutes she had opened her eyes and was able to speak. Seeing this, the old man asked:

'Is it by accident we find you thus nearly dead, or have you tried to take your own life?'

'No,' said the girl: 'it is not that I wish to take my own life. It is to save the eyesight of my father that I have come here to pray; this is the hundredth day of my prayer. To-morrow and every following day I shall be here to pray again, and so continue; for it is against the teachings of Buddha to despair.' O Ai then related the history of her father's blindness.

The old man, answering, said:

'If devotion to duty has its reward, yours, young lady, has come. Perhaps you are not aware who I am. My name is Uozumi, Dr. Uozumi. I am the chief doctor in Kyoto, and am the only one at present who has passed his full degrees in the Medical Sciences of the Dutch. I have just been to the Palace at Yedo, and am now on my return to Kyoto. I have only put in here with my ship for to-day, and have come up this mountain to admire the scenery. Now I have found you, and so grieve with you in your trouble that I will stay here a week or two and see what can be done for your father. Do not let us lose time: put on the rest of your clothes, and let us go to your house.'

O Ai San was delighted. At last, she thought, her

[p. 161]

prayer had been answered by Fudo San. With joy in her heart, she almost ran down the mountain, forgetting all about her own narrow escape and the long gash she had received in her head. Dr. Uozumi found it hard to keep anywhere near this healthy young maid.

Arrived at the house, Uozumi made an examination of the patient and ordered remedies after the Dutch prescriptions, the medicines for which he fortunately had with him. Day after day the doctor and O Ai attended on Masakuni, and at the end of the tenth day his left eye was perfectly cured.

Masakuni was delighted at the partial recovery of his sight, and, like his daughter, attributed the good fortune of the celebrated doctor's arrival to the mercy of Fudo San. Having purified his body and soul by living on a vegetable diet and bathing in cold water for ten days, he began making two swords, which some time afterwards he finished. One he presented to the god Fudo, and the other to Doctor Uozumi. They were afterwards known as the celebrated swords made by the semi-blind Masakuni.

The doctor thought it a pity to allow such a skilled artist as Masakuni to remain in this remote village of Awa Province, and also that the beautiful O Ai should be allowed to rust there: so he persuaded them to join him in Kyoto. Subsequently he obtained a place as maid of honour in the palace of the Duke of Karasumaru for O Ai San, where she was perfectly happy.

Five years later Masakuni died, and was buried in the cemetery of Toribeyama, at the eastern end of Kyoto. So my story-teller, Fukuga, tells me.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 162]

Click to enlarge
31. O Cho San Commits Suicide

  

XXVII

  

SAGAMI BAY

HATSUSHIMA ISLAND is probably unknown to all foreigners, and to 9999 out of every 10,000 Japanese; consequently, it is of not much importance. Nevertheless, it has produced quite a romantic little story, which was told to me by a friend who had visited there some six years before.

The island is about seven miles south-east of Atami, in Sagami Bay (Izu Province). It is so far isolated from the mainland that very little intercourse goes on with the outer world. Indeed, it is said that the inhabitants of Hatsushima Island are a queer people, and prefer keeping to themselves. Even to-day there are only some two hundred houses, and the population cannot exceed a thousand. The principal production of the island is, of course, fish; but it is celebrated also for its jonquil flowers (suisenn). Thus it will be seen that there is hardly any trade. What little the people buy from or sell to the mainland they carry in their own fishing-boats. In matrimony also they keep to themselves, and are generally conservative and all the better for it.

[p. 163]

There is a well-known fisherman's song of Hatsushima Island. It means something like the following, and it is of the origin of that queer verse that the story is:--

To-day is the tenth of June. May the rain fall in torrents!
 For I long to see my dearest O Cho San.
 Hi, Hi, Ya-re-ko-no-sa! Ya-re-ko-no-sa!

Many years ago there lived on the island the daughter of a fisherman whose beauty even as a child was extraordinary. As she grew, Cho--for such was her name--improved in looks, and, in spite of her lowly birth, she had the manners and refinement of a lady. At the age of eighteen there was not a young man on the island who was not in love with her. All were eager to seek her hand in marriage; but hardly any dared to ask, even through the medium of a third party, as was usual.

Amongst them was a handsome fisherman of about twenty years whose name was Shinsaku. Being less simple than the rest, and a little more bold, he one day approached Gisuke, O Cho's brother, on the subject. Gisuke could see nothing against his sister marrying Shinsaku; indeed, he rather liked Shinsaku; and their families had always been friends. So he called his sister O Cho down to the beach, where they were sitting, and told her that Shinsaku had proposed for her hand in marriage, and that he thought it an excellent match, of which her mother would have approved had she been alive. He added: 'You must marry soon, you know. You are eighteen, and we want no spinsters on Hatsushima, or girls brought here from the mainland to marry our bachelors.'

[p. 164]

'Stay, stay, my dear brother! I do not want all this sermon on spinsterhood,' cried O Cho. 'I have no intention of remaining single, I can tell you; and as for Shinsaku I would rather marry him than any one else--so do not worry yourself further on that account. Settle the day of the happy event.'

Needless to say, young Gisuke was delighted, and so was Shinsaku; and they settled that the marriage should be three days thence.

Soon, when all the fishing-boats had returned to the village, the news spread; and it would be difficult to describe the state of the younger men's feelings. Hitherto every one had hoped to win the pretty O Cho San; all had lived in that happy hope, and rejoiced in the uncertain state of love, which causes such happiness in its early stages. Shinsaku had hitherto been a general favourite. Now the whole of their hopes were dashed to the ground. O Cho was not for any of them. As for Shinsaku, how they suddenly hated him! What was to be done? they asked one another, little thinking of the comical side, or that in any case O Cho could marry only one of them.

No attention was paid to the fish they had caught; their boats were scarcely pulled high enough on the beach for safety; their minds were wholly given to the question how each and every one of them could marry O Cho San. First of all, it was decided to tell Shinsaku that they would prevent his marriage if possible. There were several fights on the quiet beach, which had never before been disturbed by a display of ill-feeling. At last Gisuke, O Cho's brother, consulted with his sister and Shinsaku; and they decided, for the peace of the island, to break

[p. 165]

off the marriage, O Cho and her lover determining that at all events they would marry no one else.

However, even this great sacrifice had no effect. There were fully thirty men; in fact, the whole of the bachelors wanted to marry O Cho; they fought daily; the whole island was thrown into a discontent. Poor O Cho San! What could she do? Had not she and Shinsaku done enough already in sacrificing happiness for the peace of the island? There was only one more thing she could do, and, being a Japanese girl, she did it. She wrote two letters, one to her brother Gisuke, another to Shinsaku, bidding them farewell. 'The island of Hatsushima has never had trouble until I was born,' she said. 'For three hundred years or more our people, though poor, have lived happily and in peace. Alas! now it is no longer so, on account of me. Farewell! I shall be dead. Tell our people that I have died to bring them back their senses, for they have been foolish about me. Farewell!'

After leaving the two letters where Gisuke slept, O Cho slipped stealthily out of the house (it was a pouring-wet and stormy night and the 10th of June), and cast herself into the sea from some rocks near her cottage, after well loading her sleeves with stones, so that she might rise no more.

Next morning, when Gisuke found the letters, instinctively he knew what must have happened, and rushed from the house to find Shinsaku. Brother and lover read their letters together, and were stricken with grief, as, indeed, was every one else. A search was made, and soon O Cho's straw slippers were found on the point of rocks near her house. Gisuke knew she must have jumped into the sea

[p. 166]

here, and he and Shinsaku dived down and found her body lying at the bottom. They brought it to the surface, and it was buried just beyond the rocks on which she had last stood.

From that day Shinsaku was unable to sleep at night. The poor fellow was quite distracted. O Cho's letter and straw slippers he placed beside his bed and surrounded them with flowers. His days he spent decorating and weeping over her tomb.

At last one evening Shinsaku resolved to make away with his own body, hoping that his spirit might find O Cho; and he wandered towards her tomb to take a last farewell. As he did so he thought he saw O Cho, and called her aloud three or four times, and then with outstretched arms he rushed delightedly at her. The noise awoke Gisuke, whose house was close to the grave. He came out, and found Shinsaku clasping the stone pillar which was placed at its head.

Shinsaku explained that he had seen the spirit of O Cho, and that he was about to follow her by taking his life; but from this he was dissuaded.

'Do not do that; devote your life, rather, and I will help with you in building a shrine dedicated to Cho. You will join her when you die by nature; but please her spirit here by never marrying another.'

Shinsaku promised. The young men of the place now began to be deeply sorry for Shinsaku. What selfish beasts they had been! they thought. However, they would mend their ways, and spend all their spare time in building a shrine to O Cho San; and this they did. The shrine is called 'The Shrine of O Cho San of Hatsushima,'

[p. 167]

and a ceremony is held there every 10th of June. Curious to relate, it invariably rains on that day, and the fishermen say that the spirit of O Cho comes in the rain. Hence the song:--

To-day is the tenth of June. May the rain fall in torrents!
 For I long to see my dearest O Cho San.
 Hi, Hi, Ya-re-ko-no-sa! Ya-re-ko-no-sa!

The shrine still stands, I am told.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 168]

Click to enlarge
32. Kume Slays the Eagle, Torijima

  

XXVIII

  

THE KING OF TORIJIMA [*1]

MANY years ago there lived a Daimio called Tarao. His castle and home were at Osaki, in Osumi Province, and amongst his retinue was a faithful and favourite servant whose name was Kume Shuzen. Kume had long been land-steward to the Lord Tarao, and indeed acted for him in everything connected with business.

One day Kume had been despatched to the capital, Kyoto, to attend to business for his master, when the Daimio Toshiro of Hyuga quarrelled with the Daimio of Osumi over some boundary question, and, Kume not being there to help his master, who was a hasty person, the two clans fought at the foot of Mount Kitamata.

[p. 169]

[paragraph continues] The Lord Tarao of Osumi was killed, and so were most of his men. They were most completely beaten. The survivors retired to their lord's castle at Osaki; but the enemy followed them up, and again defeated them, taking the castle.

Messengers had been despatched to bring back Kume, of course; but Kume decided that there was only one honourable thing to do, and that was to gather the few remaining samurai he could and fight again in his dead master's behalf. Unfortunately, only some fifty men came to his call. These, with Kume, hid in the mountains with the intention of waiting until they had recruited more. One of Toshiro's spies found this out, and all except Kume were taken prisoners.

Being hotly pursued, Kume hid himself in the daytime, and made for the sea by night. After three clays he reached Hizaki, and there, having bought all the provision he could carry, hid himself until an opportunity should come of seizing a boat in the darkness, hoping to baffle his pursuers.

Kume was no sailor; in fact, he had hardly ever been in a boat, and never except as a passenger. There was no difficulty in finding a boat. He pushed it off and let it drift, for he could not use the oar, and understood nothing about a sail. Fortunately, Hizaki is a long cape on the S.E. coast, facing the open Pacific, and therefore there was no difficulty in getting away, the wind being favourable and the tide as well; besides, there is here a strong current always travelling south towards the Loochoos. Kume was more or less indifferent as to where he went, and even if he had cared he could not

[p. 170]

have helped himself, for, though his knowledge of direction on land was very good, as soon as he found himself out of sight of land he was lost. All he knew was that where the sun rose there was no land which he could reach, that China lay in the direction in which it set, and that to the south there were islands which were reputed to hold savages, Nambanjin (foreign southern savages). Thus Kume drifted on, he knew not whither, lying in the bottom of the boat, and in no way economising his provisions; and it naturally came to pass that at the end of the second day he had no water left, and suffered much in consequence.

Towards morning on the fifth day Kume lay half-asleep in the bottom of the boat. Suddenly he felt it bump.

'What ho, she bumps!' said he to himself in his native tongue, and, sitting up, he found he had drifted on to a rocky island. Kume was not long in scrambling ashore and dragging his boat as high as he was able. The first thing he set about doing was to find water to quench his thirst. As he wandered along the rocky shore hunting for a stream, Kume knew that the island could not be inhabited, for there were tens of thousands of sea-fowl perched upon the rocks, feeding along the beach and floating on the water; others were sitting on eggs. Kume could see that he was not likely to starve while the birds were breeding, and he could see, moreover, that fish were there in abundance, for birds of the gannet species were simply gorging themselves with a kind of iwashi (sardine), which made the surface of the calm sea frizzle into foam in their endeavours to

[p. 171]

escape the larger fish that were pursuing them from underneath. Shoals of flying-fish came quite close to shore, pursued by the magnificent albacore; which clearly showed that fishermen did not visit these parts. Shell-fish were in plenty in the coral pools, and among them lay, thickly strewn, the smaller of the pearl mussels with which Kume was familiar in his own country.

There was no sand on this island--that is to say, on the seashore. Everything seemed to be of coral formation, except that there was a thick reddish substance on the top of all, out of which grew low scrubby trees bearing many fruits, which Kume found quite excellent to eat. There was no trouble in finding water: there were several streams flowing down the beach and coming from the thick scrub.

Kume returned to his boat, to make sure that it was safe, and, having found a better cove for it, he moved it thither. Then, having eaten some more fruit and shellfish and seaweed, Kume lay down to sleep, and to think of his dead master, and wonder how he could eventually avenge him on the Daimio Toshiro of Hyuga.

When morning broke Kume was not a little surprised to see some eight or nine figures of people, as he first thought, sleeping; but when it grew lighter he found that they were turtles, and it was not long before he was on shore and had turned one; but then, recollecting that there was plenty of food without taking the life of a beast so much venerated, he let it go. 'Perhaps,' thought he, like Urashima, my kindness to the turtle may save me. Indeed, these turtles may be messengers or retainers of the Sea King's Palace!'

[p. 172]

One thing that Kume now decided was to learn to row and sail his boat. He set to that very morning, and almost mastered the art of using the immense sculling oar used by present and ancient Japanese alike. In the afternoon he visited the highest part of his island; but it was not high enough to enable him to see land, though he thought at one time that he could discern that faint line of blue on the horizon which prophesies distant land.

However, he was safe for the time; he had food in plenty, and water; true, the birds somewhat bothered him, for they did not act as might have been expected. There seemed something uncanny in the way they sat on their perches and watched him. He did not like that, and often threw a stone at them; but even that had little effect--they only seemed to look more serious.

Though Kume was no sailor, he was a good enough swimmer, as are most Japanese who live anywhere along the sea provinces, and he was quite able to dive in moderation and up to a depth of three Japanese fathoms--fifteen feet. Thus it was that Kume spent all the time he was not practising in his boat in diving for shellfish; he soon found that there were enormous quantities of pearl oysters, which contained beautiful pearls; and, having collected some fifty or sixty, large and small, he cut one of the sleeves of his coat and made a bag which he determined to fill. One day while Kume was diving about after his pearls and shell-fish, he found that by looking in the holes of rocks beneath the low-tide level he could find pearls that had fallen from the dead and rotten shells above; in one case they were like gravel, and he took them out of a cavity by handfuls. Discoloured

[p. 173]

they certainly were; but Kume knew them from their roundness of shape, and rubbing with sand or earth soon proved them to be pearls. Thus it was that he worked with renewed energy, hoping all the time to make sufficient money to be able eventually to avenge his dead master.

One day, some six weeks after he had landed on the island, he saw a distant sail. Through the day he watched it carefully; but it did not seem to come or go much nearer, and Kume came to the conclusion that it must be the sail of a stationary fishing-boat, for there was breeze enough to have taken it oil out of sight twice over since he had watched, if it had wanted to go.

'Surely there must be land somewhere over there beyond the boat: it would not be there for half a day if not. To-morrow, now that I can manage to sail and row my boat, I will start on an expedition and see. I do not expect to find my own countrymen there; but I may find Chinese who may be friendly, and if I find the southern savages I shall not, with my good Japanese sword, be afraid of them!'

Next morning Kume provisioned his boat with fruit, water, shell-fish, and eggs, and, tying his bag of pearls about him, set sail in a south-westerly direction. There was little wind, and the boat went slowly; but Kume steered steadily all night, as was natural, considering the little he knew. He dared not go to sleep and thus perhaps lose all idea of the direction whence he had come. Thus it came that when morning broke the sun rose on his port side, and he found himself not more than some four miles from an island which lay

[p. 174]

right ahead of him. Quite elated with his first success in navigation, Kume seized his oars and helped the boat along. On reaching the land his reception was anything but pleasant. At least one hundred angry savages were on the beach with spears and staves; but what were they (as my translator asks) to a Japanese samurai? Fifteen of them were put out of action without his getting a scratch, for Kume was well up in all the defensive arts that his military training had given him, and the tricks in jujitsu were familiar to him.

The rest of his adversaries became frightened and began to run. Kume caught one of them, and tried to ask what island this was, and what kind of people they were. By signs he explained that he was a Japanese and in no way an enemy, but on the contrary wished to be friendly, and, as they could see, he was alone. Greatly impressed with Kume's prowess, and glad that he did not wish to resume hostilities, the natives stuck their spears point-downwards in the sand, and came forward to Kume, who sheathed his sword and proceeded to examine the fifteen men he had laid low. Eleven of these had fallen by some clever jujitsu trick, and were to all intents and purposes dead; but Kume took them in various ways and restored them to life by a well-known art called kwatsu (really artificial breathing), which has been practised in Japan for hundreds of years in connection with some secret jujitsu tricks which are said to kill you--unless some one is present who knows the art of kwatsu you must die if left for over two hours without being restored. At present it is illegal to kill temporarily even though you know the art of kwatsu. Kume restored nine of his

[p. 175]

fallen enemies, which in itself was considered to be a marvellous performance, and gained him much respect. Two others were dead. The rest had wounds from which they recovered.

Peace being established, Kume was escorted by the chief to the village and given a hut to himself, and he found the people kind and agreeable. A wife was given to him, and Kume settled down to the life of the island, and to learn the language, which in many ways resembled his own.

Sugar and yams were the principal things planted,--with, of course, rice in the hills and where there was sufficient water for terracing,--but fishing formed the principal occupation of all. Four or five times a-year the islanders were visited by a junk which bought their produce, and exchanged things they wanted for it--such as beds, iron rods, calico, and salt. After three months' residence Kume was able to talk the language a little, and had managed to narrate his adventures; moreover, he had explained that the island from which he had sailed--he had named it Torijima, [*1] on account of the birds there--was a far better island than their own for all marine produce. 'Do, my friends,' said Kume, 'accompany me over there and see. I have shown you my pearls. I am not much of a diver; but, for those that are divers there are as many as you can wish--also sea-slugs, beche-de-mer, and namako of the very best kinds.'

'Do you know that the island which you call "Tori" is bewitched?' they asked. 'It is impossible to go there, for there is a gigantic bird which comes twice a-year and

[p. 176]

kills all men who have ventured to land. It could not have been there when you were, or you could not have lived a day.'

'Well, my friends,' said Kume, 'I am not afraid of a bird, and, as you have been very kind to me, I should like to show you my Torijima, for, though small, it is better than your island for all the things which come from the sea, and you would say so if you came. Please say that some of you will accompany me.'

At last thirty men said they would go; that would be three boat-loads of them.

Accordingly, next evening they started, and, as the direction was well known to the Loochooans, they reached the shores of Torijima just as the sun arose.

Kume's boat arrived first. Though he had been fully warned of the great bird which must have been absent when he was in the island, Kume landed alone, and was proceeding up the shore when an immense eagle with a body larger than his own swept down on him and began to fight. Kume, being a Japanese, immediately cut the monster in half.

From that day Torijima has been settled on by fishermen, and has afforded more pearls, coral, and fish than the other, which they named Kumijima, and sometimes Shuzen shima (both being his names); moreover, Kume Shuzen was made the king of both islands. Kume never got back to Japan to avenge his master the Lord Tarao. Indeed, he was better off than he had ever been before, and lived a happy life on the two wild Loochoo islands, which had not yet come under the Chinese rule, being too small to be thought of.

[p. 177]

After some fifteen years Kume died and was buried on Kumijima. My story-teller says that those who visit the Loochoos and pass Kumijima will notice from the sea a monument erected to Kume Shuzen.

Footnotes

^168:1 It is impossible to say exactly to which of the Torijima islands this story relates. There are two--one a rock islet some sixty miles east of Okinawajima, the main island on which is the capital of all the islands, Nafa; and the other or larger Torijima, between longitude 128 degrees and 129 degrees, and not far south of latitudinal line 38 degrees. My story-teller declares the tale to be about the Rocky Island South, which charts show as 60 feet above water at high tide, by reason of there being an island adjacent called Kumeshima; while I argue that it is more probably about the northern Torijima, adjacent to which is a large island named Takuneshima, which might very well have been meant for Kumeshima. With Japanese, Chinese, and English names, these islands are very puzzling. The Japanese, though excellent map-makers, are bad geographers, changing names as they think fit.

^175:1 Tori-bird Island.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

Click to enlarge
33. Okureha is Saved by the Goddess

  

XXIX

  

THE PERPETUAL LIFE-GIVING WINE

BETWEEN the north-eastern boundary of Totomi Province and the north-western of Suruga Province stands a lofty mountain, Daimugenzan. It is a wild and rugged mountain, clad nearly three-quarters up with lofty pines, yenoki, icho, camphors, etc. There are but few paths, and hardly any one goes up the hill. About half-way up through the forest is a shrine erected to Kwannon; but it is so small that no priest lives there, and the building is rotting away. No one knows why it was put up in such an inaccessible place--except, perhaps, one solitary girl and her parents, who used to go there for some reason of their own.

One day, about 1107 A.D., the girl was praying for her mother's recovery from sickness. Okureha was her name. She lived at Tashiro, at the foot of the mountain, and was the beauty of the countryside,--the daughter of a much-loved samurai of some importance. Amid the solemn silence Okureha clapped her hands thrice before Kwannon as she prayed, causing mountain echoes to resound. Having finished her prayers, Okureha began to make her

[p. 179]

way downwards, when she was suddenly sprung upon by a ruffianly-looking man, who seized her by the arm.

She cried aloud for help; but nothing came except the echoes of her voice, and she gave herself up for lost.

Suddenly a piercing cold breeze came along, carrying the autumn leaves in little columns. Okureha struggled violently with her assailant, who seemed to weaken to the cold wind as it struck his face. Okureha weakened too. In a few seconds the man fell down as in a drunken sleep, and she was on the point of falling (she knew not why) and of sleeping (scarce could she keep her eyes open). Just then the wind came hot instead of cold, and she felt herself awake again. On looking up she saw advancing towards her a beautiful girl, apparently not many years older than herself. The stranger was dressed in white, and seemed to glide. Her face was white as the snow which capped Mount Daimugenzan; her brows were crescent-shaped, like those of Buddha; her mouth was like flowers. In a silvery voice she called to Okureha, saying:

'Be neither surprised nor afraid, my child. I saw that you were in danger, and I came to your rescue by putting that savage creature to sleep; I sent the warm breeze so that you might not fall. You need not fear that the man is dead. I can revive him if I choose, or keep him as he is if I wish. What is your name?'

Okureha fell on her knees to express her thanks, and, rising, said: 'My name is Okureha. My father is the samurai who owns the greater part of the village of Tashiro, at the foot of the mountain. My mother being

 

Click to enlarge
34. The Goddess of Mount Daimugenzan

 

[p. 180]

ill, I have come up to this old shrine to pray Kwannon for her recovery. Five times have I been up before, but never met any one until to-day, when this dreadful man attacked me. I owe my deliverance entirely to you, holy lady, and I am humbly and deeply grateful. I do hope I shall be able to come here and pray at this shrine again. My father and mother prayed here before I was born both to Kwannon and to the Tennin [*1] of the mountain. They had no child, and I was sent to them after their prayers. Therefore it is right that I should come here to pray for my mother; but this horrid man has frightened me so that I shall be afraid to come alone again.'

The Mountain Goddess (for such was Okureha's rescuer) smiled, and said: 'You need have no fear, my pretty child. Come here when you will, and I shall be your protector. Children who are as devoted to their parents as you are deserve all that is good, and are holy in themselves. If you wish to please me, come again to-morrow, so that we may converse; and bring me some flowers from the fields, for I never descend low enough on earth to get these, though they are my favourites--they smell so sweet. And now you had better go home. When you have had time to reach there I will restore this horrid man to life and let him go. He is not likely to return to molest you.'

'I shall be here to-morrow,' said Okureha, bowing her thanks amid her 'Sayonaras.'

Okureha San was so much impressed by the face of the Goddess that she could not sleep, and at daybreak next morning was out in the fields gathering flowers,

[p. 181]

which she took up the mountain to the shrine, where she found the goddess waiting.

They talked on many subjects, and enjoyed each other's company, and arranged to meet often. Consequently, whenever Okureha had time she always went up the mountain. This continued for nearly a year, when Okureha went up with flowers for the goddess as usual; but she was looking sad, and felt sad.

'Why is this?' asked the goddess. 'Why are you so sad?'

'Ah, your Holiness is right,' said Okureha. 'I am sad, for this may be the last day I can come up here and see you. I am now seventeen years of age, and my parents think me old enough to marry. Twelve years ago my father arranged that I should marry the son of one of his friends, Tokue, of Iwasakimura, when we were old enough. Now I am said to be old enough: so I must marry. The wedding is to be in three days. After that I shall have to stay at home and work for my husband, and I fear I shall not see you any more. That is why I am sad.' As she spoke tears ran down her cheeks, and there was for a few moments no consoling her; but the goddess soothed her, saying:

'You must not be sad, dear child. On the contrary, you are about to enter the happiest state of life, by being married. If people were not married, and did not produce children to inherit new spirits and life, there could be no continuation. Go back, my child, happily; get married and produce children. You will be happy and doing your duty to the world and to the goddess. Before we say farewell, I give you this small gourd of

[p. 182]

furoshu. [*1] Take care of it on your way down the mountain, and when you are married give some to your husband. You will both remain as you are in appearance, never growing a day older though you live for centuries, as you will do; and also it will bring you perfect happiness. Now, farewell!'

Again the tears came to Okureha's eyes as she bade farewell to her benefactress; but she mustered all her pluck, and, making her last bow, took her way down the mountain, weeping as she went. Three days later Okureha was married. It was a lucky day according to the calendars, and, moreover, it was the year that the Emperor Toba came to the throne, 1108 A.D.

One day, when celebrating this event at a picnic, Okureha gave her husband some of the furoshu sake, and took the rest herself, as the goddess had bidden her. They were sitting on a beautiful green grassy spot, whereon grew wild violets of delicious fragrance; at their feet gurgled a mountain stream of sparkling clearness. To their surprise, they found petals of cherry blossom suddenly falling all round them. There were no cherry trees near, and at first they were much puzzled; but they saw in the blue sky one white cloud which had just sailed over them, and seated thereon was the Goddess of Mount Daimugenzan. Okureha recognised her, and pointed her out to her husband as their benefactress. The white cloud carried her up to the top of the mountain, where it hovered until the shades of evening hid it.

Okureha and her husband never grew older. They lived for hundreds of years as Sennins in Mount Daimugenzan.

Footnotes

^180:1 Angel.

^182:1 Sake wine of perpetual youth.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 183]

Click to enlarge
35. The Old Hermit Entertains the Children

  

XXX

  

THE HERMIT'S CAVE

MANY years ago there lived in the village of Nomugi, in Hida Province, an old farmer named Jinnai, with his wife. They had a daughter on whom they simply doted. Her name was Yuka. She was seven years of age, and an extremely beautiful child. Unfortunately, just at this age she developed something the matter with her leg, which grew worse and worse until the limb became deformed. O Yuka suffered no pain; but her parents were much troubled. Doctors, drugs, and the advice of many friends made Yuka's leg no better.

'How sad it will be for her later on!' thought her mother and father. 'Even now it is sad that she should have a deformed leg when she plays with other children.'

There being no help, Yuka and her parents had to make the best of things. In any case, Yuka was not the only deformity in the village. There were other cases.--One of Yuka's boy playmates, Tarako, had been born blind; and another, Rinkichi, was so deaf that he could hold his ear to the temple bell while the other children struck it, and he never heard the sound, though he

[p. 184]

felt a vibration. Well, these two were perhaps no better off than Yuka, and at last her parents began to console themselves. The child played about and seemed perfectly happy.

Nomugi village is at the foot of the great mountain Norikuradake, which rises 10,500 feet, and is a wild place of volcanic origin.

Many of the children of Nomugi used to go daily and play on the grassy slope of an old dam at the end of the village. They would throw stones into the water, fish, sail boats, and pick flowers. The dam was a kind of club for the children. From morning to evening they were there, having with them their rice to eat.

One day, while thus playing, they were surprised by an old man with a long white beard approaching them. He came from the direction of the mountain. All stopped their games to watch him. He came on into their midst, and, patting them on the head, seemed to make friends naturally. Taking notice of Yuka's bad leg, the old man said: 'Come! how is this? Have not your parents tried to cure it?' Little Yuka answered that they had, but that they could not do any good. The old man made her lie down on the grass, and began to manipulate the leg, pulling it this way and that way, and rubbed in some red medicine which he took from a case. The old man then operated on Tarako the blind boy, and on Rinkichi the deaf one.

'Now, my children,' said he, 'you all love your fathers and mothers, and it will be a great pleasure to them to find you cured of your ailments. You are not well yet; but you will be, if you do what I tell you, in less than three

[p. 185]

or four days. You are not to mention having seen me until I tell you that you may--after you are cured. Tomorrow you will meet me at the flat rock under the cave on Mount Norikuradake. You know the place. Very well: until to-morrow good-bye, and if I find you do as I tell you I will make you all laugh by showing you some fancy tricks.' Then he trudged off in the direction whence he had come.

The children continued their play, thinking 'What a nice old man!' And, strange to say, O Yuka, as she walked home, felt her leg to be of greater use.

Very little attention is paid to Japanese children. They are nearly always good and well-behaved, little grown-up people in fact; and therefore they ate their suppers and went to bed as such, giving no account of their day's amusements, or of the strange old man.

Next day they went to the flat rock. As it was wet, they had not started until late; but they found the old man, and, though he had no time to play with them and show the tricks which he had promised, he attended to Yuka's leg, and to the dumb boy and the blind.

'Now go home,' he said, 'and come back here tomorrow. By the time you get home Yuka's leg will be well, Tarako will be able to see, and Rinkichi able to hear; and I am sure your relations will be delighted. To-morrow, if it is fine, you must come early, and we shall have lots of fun.'

Even before they got home everything came about as the old man had said. The three children were recovered. The villagers and the parents rejoiced together; but all were mystified as to who the magician could be.

[p. 186]

'If he returns to the mountain, as the children say, then he must live in the cave,' said one. 'He must be a Sennin,' said another. 'It is rumoured that the most famous priest, Kukai shonin, who founded the sacred temple on Mount Koyasan, in Kii Province, was able to make these wondrous cures in children,' added another. But, with all the gossiping and conjectures, none could explain how it was possible to bring sight to a boy who had been born blind. At last some one suggested that two or three should follow the children secretly on the following day: by hiding themselves they might be able to see what happened. This excellent plan was adopted.

In the morning about thirty children started off at daybreak, followed, unknown to themselves, by two men of the village.

When the children arrived at the flat rock--which is said to be large enough to measure one thousand Japanese mats of six feet by three feet--they found the old man seated at one end of it. The two men who had followed hid themselves in some fine azalea bushes.

First they saw the old man rise to his feet, and then go over to the children and hear from the three cured ones how they felt, and how their parents had been pleased. Tarako was the most delighted, perhaps, of the three; for he had never seen the world before, or even his parents.

'Now, my children, you have come here to see me, and I am going to amuse you all. See here!' Saying this, the old man picked up some dead sticks, and, blowing at their ends, produced blossoming cherry branches, plum blossoms, and peach, and handed a branch of each to the

[p. 187]

girls. Next he took a stone and threw it into the air, and behold! it turned into a dove. Another turned into a hawk, or, in fact, into any bird a boy chose to name.

'Now,' said the old man, 'I will show you some animals that will make you laugh.' He recited some mystic verse, and monkeys came leaping on the flat rock and began to wrestle with one another. The children clapped their hands in delight; but one of the men who was hidden exclaimed in his astonishment:

'Who can this wizard be? No other but a wizard could do such things!'

The venerable old man heard, and, looking cautiously round, said:

'Children, I can do no more tricks to-day. My spell has gone. I will go to my home, and you had better go to yours. Farewell.'

So saying, the old man bowed to them, and turned up the mountain path, taking the direction of the cave.

The two men came out from their hiding, and they, with the children, tried to follow him. In spite of his great age, he was much more nimble than they among the rocks; but they got far enough to see him enter the cave. Some minutes later they came to the entrance, and bowed before it. The entrance was surrounded by fragrant flowers; but into its dark depths they did not venture.

Suddenly O Yuka pointed upwards, crying, 'There is the old grandfather!' They all looked up; and standing on a cloud was the old man, right over the summit of the mountain.

'Ah, now it is quite clear!' cried one of the men. 'It is the famous hermit of Mount Norikuradake.' They all

[p. 188]

bowed low, and then went home to report to the villagers what they had seen.

Subscriptions were collected; a small temple was built inside the cave, and they called it the 'Sendokutsu Temple,' which means The Sennin's Temple.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

Click to enlarge
36. The Spirit of Fuji Shows Yosoji the Health-Giving Stream

  

XXXI

  

YOSOJI'S CAMELLIA TREE

IN the reign of the Emperor Sanjo began a particularly unlucky time. It was about the year 1013 A. D. when Sanjo came to the throne--the first year of Chowa. Plague broke out. Two years later the Royal Palace was burned down, and a war began with Korea, then known as 'Shiragi.'

In 1016 another fire broke out in the new Palace. A year later the Emperor gave up the throne, owing to blindness and for other causes. He handed over the reins of office to Prince Atsuhara, who was called the Emperor Go Ichijo, and came to the throne in the first year of Kwannin, about 1017 or 1018. The period during which the Emperor Go Ichijo reigned--about twenty years, up to 1036--was one of the worst in Japanese history. There were more wars, more fires, and worse plagues than ever. Things were in disorder generally, and even Kyoto was hardly safe to people of means, owing to the bands of brigands. In 1025 the most appalling outbreak of smallpox came; there was hardly a village or a town in Japan which escaped.

[p. 190]

It is at this period that our story begins. Our heroine (if such she may be called) is no less a deity than the goddess of the great mountain of Fuji, which nearly all the world has heard of, or seen depicted. Therefore, if the legend sounds stupid and childish, blame only my way of telling it (simply, as it was told to me), and think of the Great Mountain of Japan, as to which anything should be interesting; moreover, challenge others for a better. I have been able to find none myself.

During the terrible scourge of smallpox there was a village in Suruga Province called Kamiide, which still exists, but is of little importance. It suffered more badly than most other villages. Scarce an inhabitant escaped. A youth of sixteen or seventeen years was much tried. His mother was taken with the disease, and, his father being dead, the responsibility of the household fell on Yosoji--for such was his name.

Yosoji procured all the help he could for his mother, sparing nothing in the way of medicines and attendance; but his mother grew worse day by day, until at last her life was utterly despaired of. Having no other resource left to him, Yosoji resolved to consult a famous fortuneteller and magician, Kamo Yamakiko.

Kamo Yamakiko told Yosoji that there was but one chance that his mother could be cured, and that lay much with his own courage. 'If,' said the fortune-teller, 'you will go to a small brook which flows from the southwestern side of Mount Fuji, and find a small shrine near its source, where Oki-naga-suku-neo [*1] is worshipped, you may be able to cure your mother by bringing her water

[p. 191]

therefrom to drink. But I warn you that the place is full of dangers from wild beasts and other things, and that you may not return at all or even reach the place.'

Yosoji, in no way discouraged, made his mind up that he would start on the following morning, and, thanking the fortune-teller, went home to prepare for an early start.

At three o'clock next morning he was off.

It was a long and rough walk, one which he had never taken before; but he trudged gaily on, being sound of limb and bent on an errand of deepest concern.

Towards midday Yosoji arrived at a place where three rough paths met, and was sorely puzzled which to take. While he was deliberating the figure of a beautiful girl clad in white came towards him through the forest. At first Yosoji felt inclined to run; but the figure called to him in silvery notes, saying:

'Do not go. I know what you are here for. You are a brave lad and a faithful son. I will be your guide to the stream, and--take my word for it--its waters will cure your mother. Follow me if you will, and have no fear, though the road is bad and dangerous.'

The girl turned, and Yosoji followed in wonderment.

In silence the two went for fully four miles, always upwards and into deeper and more gloomy forests. At last a small shrine was reached, in front of which were two Torii's, and from a cleft of a rock gurgled a silvery stream, the clearness of which was such as Yosoji had never seen before.

'There,' said the white-robed girl, 'is the stream of which you are in search. Fill your gourd, and drink of

[p. 192]

it yourself, for the waters will prevent you catching the plague. Make haste, for it grows late, and it would not be well for you to be here at night. I shall guide you back to the place where I met you.'

Yosoji did as he was bid, drinking, and then filling the bottle to the brim.

Much faster did they return than they had come, for the way was all downhill. On reaching the meeting of the three paths Yosoji bowed low to his guide, and thanked her for her great kindness; and the girl told him again that it was her pleasure to help so dutiful a son.

'In three days you will want more water for your mother,' said she, 'and I shall be at the same place to be your guide again.'

'May I not ask to whom I am indebted for this great kindness?' asked Yosoji.

'No: you must not ask, for I should not tell you,' answered the girl. Bowing again, Yosoji proceeded on his way as fast as he could, wondering greatly.

On reaching home he found his mother worse. He gave her a cup of the water, and told her of his adventures. During the night Yosoji awoke as usual to attend to his mother's wants, and to give her another bowl of water. Next morning he found that she was decidedly better. During the day he gave her three more doses, and on the morning of the third day he set forth to keep his appointment with the fair lady in white, whom he found seated waiting for him on a rock at the meeting of the three paths.

'Your mother is better I can see from your happy face,' said she. 'Now follow me as before, and make

[p. 193]

haste. Come again in three days, and I will meet you. It will take five trips in all, for the water must be taken fresh. You may give some to the sick villagers as well.'

Five times did Yosoji take the trip. At the end of the fifth his mother was perfectly well, and must thankful for her restoration; besides which, most of the villagers who had not died were cured. Yosoji was the hero of the hour. Every one marvelled, and wondered who the white-robed girl was; for, though they had heard of the shrine of Oki-naga-suku-neo, none of them knew where it was, and but few would have dared to go if they had known. Of course, all knew that Yosoji was indebted in the first place to the fortune-teller Kamo Yamakiko, to whom the whole village sent presents. Yosoji was not easy in his mind. In spite of the good he had brought about, he thought to himself that he owed the whole of his success in finding and bringing the water to the village to his fair guide, and he did not feel that he had. shown sufficient gratitude. Always he had hurried home as soon as he had got the precious water, bowing his thanks. That was all, and now he felt as if more were due. Surely prayers at the shrine were due, or something; and who was the lady in white? He must find out. Curiosity called upon him to do so. Thus Yosoji resolved to pay one more visit to the spring, and started early in the morning.

Now familiar with the road, he did not stop at the meeting of the three paths, but pursued his way directly to the shrine. It was the first time he had travelled the road alone, and in spite of himself he felt afraid, though he could not say why. Perhaps it was the oppressive

[p. 194]

gloom of the mysterious dark forest, overshadowed by the holy mountain of Fuji, which in itself was more mysterious still, and filled one both with superstitious and religious feelings and a feeling of awe as well. No one of any imagination can approach the mountain even to-day without having one or all of these emotions.

Yosoji, however, sped on, as fast as he could go, and arrived at the shrine of Oki-naga-suku-neo. He found that the stream had dried up. There was not a drop of water left. Yosoji flung himself upon his knees before the shrine and thanked the God of Long Breath that he had been the means of curing his mother and the surviving villagers. He prayed that his guide to the spring might reveal her presence, and that he might be enabled to meet her once more to thank her for her kindness. When he arose Yosoji saw his guide standing beside him, and bowed low. She was the first to speak.

'You must not come here,' she said. 'I have told you so before. It is a place of great danger for you. Your mother and the villagers are cured. There is no reason for you to come here more.'

'I have come,' answered Yosoji, 'because I have not fully spoken my thanks, and because I wish to tell you how deeply grateful I am to you, as is my mother and as are the whole of our villagers. Moreover, they all as well as I wish to know to whom they are indebted for my guidance to the spring. Though Kamo Yamakiko told me of the spring, I should never have found it but for your kindness, which has now extended over five weeks. Surely you will let us know to whom we are so much

[p. 195]

indebted, so that we may at least erect a shrine in our temple?'

'All that you ask is unnecessary. I am glad that you are grateful. I knew that one so truly filial as you must be so, and it is because of your filial piety and goodness that I guided you to this health-giving spring, which, as you see, is dry, having at present no further use. It is unnecessary that you should know who I am. We must now part: so farewell. End your life as you have begun it, and you shall be happy.' The beautiful maiden swung a wild camellia branch over her head as if with a beckoning motion, and a cloud came down from the top of the Mount Fuji, enveloping her at first in mist. It then arose, showing her figure to the weeping Yosoji, who now began to realise that he loved the departing figure, and that it was no less a figure than that of the great Goddess of Fujiyama. Yosoji fell on his knees and prayed to her, and the goddess, acknowledging his prayer, threw down the branch of wild camellia.

Yosoji carried it home, and planted it, caring for it with the utmost attention. The branch grew to a tree with marvellous rapidity, being over twenty feet high in two years. A shrine was built; people came to worship the tree; and it is said that the dewdrops from its leaves are a cure for all eye-complaints.

Footnotes

^190:1 The God of Long Breath.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 196]

Click to enlarge
37. Yoda Emon Finds Himself on a Whale's Back

  

XXXII

  

WHALES

THERE are many stories and superstitions regarding whales. I take one, dating back to the period of 'Hoen' (1135), which will show the veneration and the fear in which the Japanese have always held these creatures. I will annex the translation by Mr. Ando, of our Consulate, of a newspaper paragraph of date February 12, 1907, showing that the superstitions are still current.

Some hundred and seventy-two years ago, when the 'Hoen' period began, the shrine of Atsuta at Nagoya was burned down. For some reason this calamity was said at the time to have happened because the head shrine-watcher, Yoda Emon, had startled one of the gods. [*1]

Well, at any rate the holy shrine was burned down, and the caretaker was exiled to Oshima Island, in Idzu

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] Province, now generally known as 'Vries' Island. It is the largest and most northerly of the group of islands which run in a chain towards the south-east. The nearest to Oshima is Toshi Island, often named Rishima, of which our story is told.

Yoda Emon was a man of active mind and pursuits. Perhaps that is why he startled the god who caused the fire at Atsuta. In any case, he felt his exile greatly. He could gain no news of home or family, and he fretted and worried himself to such an extent that at last his nights became sleepless and he thought to himself that if some relief to his mind did not come soon he must either kill himself or go mad.

At last it occurred to him that possibly he might get permission to go fishing; and the permission was given him, on condition that he kept within a mile of the shore. Day after day Yoda took the boat which was lent him, and returned generally with a goodly supply of fish, singing to himself as he rowed in to and out from the shore. He soon managed to sleep soundly and regain his strength. After a month or two Yoda became quite a popular person, giving his fish away free to any who chose to take them, and he was soon allowed a wider range than the one-mile limit. He became an expert sailor, and had it not been for the loss of his family he would have been quite happy in his new home. One day, the morning being calm, Yoda ventured farther away than usual, hoping to capture some of the larger fish which were reputed to be plentiful some ten miles from Toshishima. He was lucky, and landed three magnificent fish of the mackerel family, known as 'sara'

[p. 198]

in Japan, 'seer' in India, and 'albacore' with us in England, who never see them. Unfortunately, after this the wind, instead of springing up from the south-east as usual, came out from the north-west, and, instead of being able to return to Oshima, Yoda found himself being blown farther from it. The wind came stronger and stronger, until a gale was blowing, and soon the currents caused a high and breaking sea. Darkness set in, and Yoda thought to himself that this was a visitation upon him for having caught fish. 'Oh,' cried he aloud, 'what foolish sin have I now committed? Surely my position as a banished priest should have told me that I was sinning in catching fish!' He flung himself on the bottom of the boat and prayed; but his prayers availed him nothing, for the wind increased in force, and so did the sea. Long after midnight a big wave smashed the boat to splinters. Half-stunned, half-drowned, Yoda clung to the large oar, and so remained for some three hours.

At last he felt himself being bumped against what he took to be a rock, and letting go the oar scrambled on to it more dead than alive. After many efforts, so exhausted was he and so numbed, he sat there only half-conscious in the dark.

Towards morning the turn of tide caused the sea to smooth down, and as the sun rose Yoda found to his horror that it was no rock upon which he sat, but the back of a live whale of gigantic size. Yoda knew neither what to do nor what to think; he dared not move, for fear of disturbing the whale's repose. Not even when the animal blew water and air from its spout-hole did he

[p. 199]

venture to turn his body. But silently he muttered prayers all the time. At last, when the sun was full up, the whale began to turn round, and as it did so Yoda saw a large fishing-boat not more than half a mile away. He shouted and shouted at the top of his voice, trying to attract attention; but move he dared not, lest the whale should leave him. The wind was still high; but the sea was smooth.

Suddenly the fishing-boat changed its course, and the whale lay still again, basking in the sunshine. The boat advanced rapidly, and when about eighty feet from the whale brought up to the wind and lay still. A life-line with a buoy attached was drifted towards the whale, and when it was near enough Yoda slid off to take it, and was hauled into the boat, thoroughly thankful for his rescue. As soon as Yoda was on board, the boat began to roll, for the whale lashed his tail and was playing about, causing quite a heavy sea; but, to the relief of all, the creature headed south for the open Pacific.

The crew on the fishing-boat belonged to Toshi Island, and had heard of Yoda Emon, and, being good-natured fellows, felt sorry for him in his exile. After his astonishing adventure with the whale, they did not in the least mind taking him back to Oshima, which they reached about sundown.

Yoda immediately reported himself, and was congratulated on his extraordinary escape.

After this Yoda gave up fishing, and submitted without grumbling to the severe discipline of his exile. On the occasion of Prince Tanin ascending the throne, an ordinance was issued giving freedom to many prisoners

[p. 200]

and exiles. Yoda Emon was among them, and was given permission to return home; but he said he had made so many friends on the island, and his life had been saved so miraculously, that he preferred to live where he was. And he obtained official permission to do so, and to send for his family, which after building a house he did. In the first year of Koji 1142-1141., Yoda was made Mayor of Shichito--that is the seven islands lying round or south of Oshima and including itself. 'Now,' thought he, 'I shall be able to repay the kindness that the whale showed me in saving my life!' And he issued an order that no whales were to be chased or killed anywhere near the islands over which he had jurisdiction. At first there was some grumbling; but the Government sent messengers to Oshima to say that the Emperor approved Yoda Emon's order, and furthermore, that during Yoda's life no whale was to be killed anywhere in Shichito.

 

WHALE AND WHALER.--Some years ago there lived a wealthy fisherman called Matsushima Tomigoro at Matsushima, in Nagasaki. He made a large fortune by whale-fishing. One night he dreamed a strange dream. A whale (zato kujira), carrying a baby whale, appeared before his pillow, and requested him to let her and the baby go safely--they were going to pass a certain part of the sea at a certain time and date. Matsushima heartlessly did not accede, but took advantage of the information. He put a net in the said sea at the due time, and caught a whale and her baby. Not long after, the cruel fisherman began to reap the harvest of his

[p. 201]

mercilessness. Misfortune after misfortune befell him, and all his wealth disappeared. 'It must be the result of his cruelty in killing the whale and its baby,' said the neighbours; and for some time they never caught whales carrying babies. (Translated by Mr. Ando.)

Footnotes

^196:1 The gods principally worshipped at Atsuta are the Sun Goddess Amateras, her brother Susa-no-o, Prince Yamato-take, his wife Miyazu-hime, and her brother Take-ino-tane; but the object most venerated is the sword called 'Kusa-nagi no Tsurugi,' one of the three principal antique objects which form the Imperial Regalia of Japan, and of which I have previously told a story or two, notably that of 'Yamato-dake no Mikoto' (<page 56> et seq.).

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 202]

Click to enlarge
38. Hanano San Takes the Cherry Branch From the Youth

  

XXXIII

  

THE HOLY CHERRY TREE OF MUSUBI-NO-KAMI TEMPLE

IN the province of Mimasaka is a small town called Kagami, and in the temple grounds is a shrine which has been there for some hundreds of years, and is dedicated to Musubi-no-Kami, the God of Love. Near by once stood a magnificent old cherry tree which was given the name of Kanzakura, or Holy Cherry, and it is in honour of this tree that the shrine dedicated to the God of Love was built.

Long ago, when the village of Kagami was smaller than it is at present, it had as one of its chief residents a man called Sodayu. Sodayu was one of those men, to be found in most Japanese villages, who with but little work thrive on the work of others and grow richer than most. He bought and he sold their crops, making commission both ways, and before he was middle-aged he was a rich man.

Sodayu was a widower; but he had a lovely daughter who was aged seventeen, and it was thought by Sodayu that the time had now arrived for him to look about for a desirable husband for Hanano. Accordingly he called her to him and said:

'The time has come, my dear child, when it is my

[p. 203]

duty to find you a suitable husband. When I have done so you will, I trust, approve of him, for it will be your duty to marry him.'

Of course, O Hanano bowed her willingness to do just as her father decreed; but at the same time she confided in her favourite servant Yuka that she did not care about being married to a man that she might not love.

'What can I do--what would you advise me to do--my dear O Yuka? Do try and think how you can help me to obtain a man I can love. A handsome man he must be, and not more than twenty-two years of age.'

O Yuka answered that the advice asked for was difficult to give; but there was one thing, she said. 'You can go to the temple and pray at the shrine of Musubi-no-Kami, the God of Love. Pray him that the husband your father finds may be handsome and after your own heart. They say that if you pray at this shrine twenty-one days in succession you will obtain the kind of lover you want.'

O Hanano was pleased with the idea, and that afternoon, accompanied by Yuka, her maid, she went to pray at the shrine of Musubi-no-Kami. Day after day they continued until the twenty-first and last day of the series had arrived. They had finished their prayers and were on their way from the temple and passing under the great cherry tree known as the 'Kanzakura' or Holy Cherry, when they saw, standing near its stem, a youth of some twenty or twenty-one years. He was handsome, with a pale face and expressive eyes. In his hand he held a branch of cherry-blossom. He smiled pleasantly at Hanano, and she at him; then, bowing, he came forward

[p. 204]

and smilingly presented her with the blossom. Hanano blushed, and took the flowers. The youth bowed again and walked away; as did Hanano, who had a fluttering heart and felt very happy, for she thought that this youth must be the one sent by the God of Love in answer to her prayers. 'Of course it must be,' she said to O Yuka. This is the twenty-first, and that completes the course of prayer you spoke of. Am I not lucky? And is he not handsome? I do not think it possible that a more handsome youth was ever seen. I wish he had not gone away so soon.' This and much more did O Hanano prattle to her maid on their way home, upon reaching which the first thing she did was to put the cherry-blossom branch into a vase in her own room.

'O Yuka!' she called for the twentieth time at least. 'Now you must go and find out all you can about the young man; but say nothing to my father as yet. Possibly it is not the husband he is choosing for me; but I can love no other, at all events, and I must love him in secret if this is the case. Now go, dear Yuka. Find out all you can and you will prove yourself more faithful and dear to me than ever.' And the faithful maid went on her young mistress's errand.

Now, O Yuka found out nothing about the youth they had seen under the Holy Cherry tree; but she found out that there was another youth in the village who had fallen greatly in love with her mistress, and, as he had heard that O Hanano's father was looking out for a suitable husband, he intended to apply next day himself. His name was Tokunosuke. He was a fairly well-connected youth, and had some means; but his looks were in no

[p. 205]

way comparable with those of the youth who had handed the cherry branch to Hanano. Having discovered this much, Yuka returned to her young mistress and reported.

Next day, early in the morning, at the most formal calling hour, Tokunosuke went by appointment to see Hanano's father. Hanano was called to serve tea, and saw the young man. Tokunosuke was scrupulously formal and polite to her, and she to him; and soon after he left Hanano was told by her father that that was the young man whom he had chosen to be her husband. 'He is desirable in every way,' he added. 'He has money. His father is my friend, and he has secretly loved you for some months. You can ask for nothing better.'

O Hanano made no answer, but burst out crying and left the room; and Yuka was called in her stead.

'I have found a most desirable young man as husband for your mistress,' said Sodayu; 'but instead of showing pleasure and gratitude she has flown from the room crying. Can you explain to me the reason? You must know her secrets. Has she a lover unknown to me?'

O Yuka was not prepared to face the anger of her mistress's father, and she thought that truth in this especial instance would further Hanano's interests best. So she told the story faithfully and boldly. Sodayu thanked her for it, and again called his daughter to him, telling her that she must either produce her lover or .allow Tokunosuke to call and press his suit. Next morning Tokunosuke did call; but Hanano told him with tears in her eyes that she could not love him, for she loved another, whose name she did not even know herself.

[p. 206]

'This is a strange piece of news,' thought Tokunosuke to himself. 'Almost insulting to love a man whose name she does not know!' And, bowing low, he left the house, determined to find out who his nameless rival was, even if he had to disguise himself and follow Hanano to do so.

That very afternoon Hanano and Yuka went to pray as usual, and on coming away they again found the handsome youth standing under the cherry tree, and again he advanced and smilingly handed Hanano a branch full of bloom; but again no words came from his lips, and it was evident to Tokunosuke (who was hiding behind some stone lanterns) that they could not have known each other long.

In a few moments they bowed and separated. O Hanano and her maid walked away from the temple, while the youth under the cherry tree looked after them.

Tokunosuke was now furiously jealous. He came from his hiding-place, and accosted the youth under the cherry tree in a rude and rough tone.

'Who are you, you hateful rascal? Give me your name and address at once! And tell me how you dare tempt the beautiful O Hanano San to love you!' He was about to seize his enemy by the arm when the enemy jumped suddenly back a step, and before Tokunosuke had time to catch him a sudden gust of wind blew the bloom thickly off the cherry tree. So thick and quickly did the blossoms fall, they blinded Tokunosuke for some moments. When he could see again the handsome youth was gone; but there was a strange moaning sound inside the cherry tree, while one of the temple priests came rushing at him in great anger, crying 'Ah! you sacrilegious villain!

[p. 207]

What do you mean by attempting violence here? Do you not know that this cherry tree has stood here for hundreds of years? It is sacred, and contains a holy spirit, which sometimes comes forth in the form of a youth. It is he that you tried to touch with your filthy and unholy hand. Begone, I say, and never dare enter this temple again!'

Tokunosuke did not want pressing. He took to his heels and ran, and he ran straight to the house of Sodayu, and told what he had seen, and what had befallen himself, omitting nothing, even to the names the priest had called him.

'Perhaps now your daughter may consent to marry me,' he finished by saying. 'She cannot marry a holy spirit!'

O Hanano was called, and told the story, and was very much upset that the face to whom she had given her heart was that of a spirit. 'What sin have I committed,' she cried, 'falling in love with a god?' And she rushed off to implore forgiveness at the shrine. Long and earnestly she prayed that her sin might be forgiven her. She resolved to devote the rest of her life to the temple, and as she refused to marry she obtained her father's consent. Then she applied for permission to live in the temple and become one of its caretakers. She shaved her head, wore a white linen coat and the crimson pantaloons which denote that you are no longer of the world. O Hanano remained in the temple for the rest of her life, sweeping the grounds, and praying.

The temple still stands. It is highly probable that if the stump of the cherry tree remains another tree is planted beside it, as is usual.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 208]

Click to enlarge
39. The Woodcutter Saves Choyo From Robbers

  

XXXIV

  

A STORY OF MOUNT KANZANREI

FAR up on the north-eastern coast of Korea is a high mountain called Kanzanrei, and not far from its base, where lies the district of Kanko Fu, is a village called Teiheigun, trading in little but natural products such as mushrooms, timber, furs, fish, and a little gold.

In this village lived a pretty girl called Choyo, an orphan of some means. Her father, Choka, had been the only merchant in the district, and he had made quite a fortune for those parts, which he had left to Choyo when she was some sixteen summers old.

At the foot of the mountain of Kanzanrei lived a woodcutter of simple and frugal habits. He dwelt alone in a broken-down hut, associated with but the few to whom he sold his wood, and was considered generally to be a morose and unsociable man. The 'Recluse' he was called, and many wondered who he was, and why he kept so much to himself, for he was not yet thirty years of age and was remarkable for his good looks and strong frame. Sawada Shigeoki was his name, but the people did not know it.

[p. 209]

One evening, as the Recluse was wending his way down the rough mountain path with a large load of firewood on his back, he was resting in a particularly wild and rocky pass darkened by the huge pine trees which towered on every hand, and was startled by a rustling sound close below. He looked nervously round, for the place in which he was had the reputation of being haunted by tigers, and with some truth, for several people had lately been killed by them. On this occasion, however, the sound which had startled the Recluse was caused by no tiger, but only by a pheasant which fluttered off her nest, and was imitating the sign of a wounded bird, to draw the intruder's attention away from the direction of her nest. Strange, however, was it, thought the Recluse, that the bird should have so acted, for she could neither have seen nor heard him; and so he listened intently to find the cause. There were not many minutes to wait. Almost immediately the Recluse heard the sounds of voices and of scuffling, and, hiding himself behind the trunk of a large tree, he waited, axe in hand.

Soon he saw being carried, pushed, and dragged down the path, a girl of surpassing beauty. She was in charge of three villainous men whom the Recluse soon recognised as bandits.

As they were coming his way the Recluse retained his position, hidden behind the great pine, and grasping more firmly his axe; and as the four approached him he sprang out and blocked their way.

'Who have you here, and what are you doing with this girl?' cried he. 'Let her go, or you will have to suffer!'

[p. 210]

Being three to one, the robbers were in no fear, and cried back, 'Stand out of our way, you fool, and let us pass--unless you wish to lose your life.' But the woodcutter was not afraid. He raised his axe, and the robbers drew their swords. The woodcutter was too much for them. In an instant he had cut down one and pushed another over the precipice, and the third took to his heels, only too glad to get away with his life.

The Recluse then bent down to attend to the girl, who had fainted. He fetched water and bathed her face, bringing her back to her senses, and as soon as she was able to speak he asked who she was, whether she was hurt, and how she had come into the hands of such ruffians.

Amid sobs and weeping the girl answered:

'I am Choyo Choka. My home is the village of Teiheigun. This is the anniversary of my father's death, and I went to pray at his tomb at the foot of Gando Mountain. The day being fine, I decided to make a long tour and come back this way. About an hour ago I was seized by these robbers; and the rest you know. Oh, sir, I am thankful to you for your bravery in saving me. Please tell me your name.'

The woodcutter answered:

'Ah, then, you are the famous beauty of Teiheigun village, of whom I have so often heard! It is an honour indeed to me that I have been able to help you. As for me, I am a woodcutter. The "Recluse" they call me, and I live at the foot of this mountain. If you will come with me I will take you to my hut, where you can rest; and then I will see you safely to your home.'

Choyo was very grateful to the woodcutter, who

[p. 211]

shouldered his stack of wood, and, taking her by the hand, led her down the steep and dangerous path. At his hut they rested, and he made her tea; then took her to the outskirts of her village, where, bowing to her in a manner far above that of the ordinary peasant, he left her.

That night Choyo could think of nothing but the brave and handsome woodcutter who had saved her life; so much, indeed, did she think that before the morn had dawned she felt herself in love, deeply and desperately.

The day passed and night came. Choyo had told all her friends of how she had been saved and by whom. The more she talked the more she thought of the woodcutter, until at last she made up her mind that she must go and see him, for she knew that he would not come to see her. 'I have the excuse of going to thank him,' she thought; 'and, besides, I will take him a present of some delicacies and fish.'

Accordingly, next morning she started off at daybreak, carrying her present in a basket. By good fortune she found the Recluse at home, sharpening his axes, but otherwise taking a holiday.

'I have come, sir, to thank you again for your brave rescue of myself the other day, and 1 have brought a small present, which, I trust, however unworthy, you will deign to accept,' said the love-sick Choyo.

'There is no reason to thank me for performing a common duty,' said the Recluse; but by so fair a pair of lips as yours it is pleasing to be thanked, and I feel the great honour. The gift, however, I cannot accept; for then I should be the debtor, which for a man is wrong.'

[p. 212]

Choyo felt both flattered and rebuffed at this speech, and tried again to get the Recluse to accept her present; but, though her attempts led to friendly conversation and to chaff, he would not do so, and Choyo left, saying:

'Well, you have beaten me to-day; but I will return, and in time I shall beat you and make you accept a gift from me.'

'Come here when you like,' answered the Recluse. 'I shall always be glad to see you, for you are a ray of light in my miserable but; but never shall you place me under an obligation by making me accept a gift.'

It was a curious answer, thought Choyo as she left; but 'Oh, how handsome he is, and how I love him! and anyway I will visit him again, often, and see who wins in the end.'

Such was the assurance of so beautiful a girl as Choyo. She felt that she must conquer in the end.

For the next two months she visited the Recluse often, and they sat and talked. He brought her wild-flowers of great rarity and beauty from the highest mountains, and berries to eat; but never once did he make love to her or even accept the slightest present from her hands. That did not deter Choyo from pursuing her love. She was determined to win in the end, and she even felt that in a way this strange man loved her as she loved him, but for some reason would not say so.

One day in the third month after her rescue Choyo again went to see the Recluse. He was not at home: so she sat and waited, looking round the miserable hut and thinking what a pity it was that so noble a man should live in such a state, when she, who was well off, was only

[p. 213]

too anxious to marry him;--and of her own beauty she knew well. While she was thus musing, the woodcutter returned, not in his usual rags, but in the handsome costume of a Japanese samurai, and greatly astonished was she as she rose to greet him.

'Ah, fair Choyo, you are surprised to see me now as I am, and it is also with sorrow that I must tell you what I do, for I know well what is in both your heart and mind. To-day we must part for ever, for I am going away.'

Choyo flung herself upon the floor, weeping bitterly, and then rising, said, between her sobs: 'Oh, now, this cannot be! You must not leave me, but take me with you. Hitherto I have said nothing, because it is not for a maid to declare her love; but I love you, and have loved you ever since the day you saved me from the robbers. Take me with you, no matter where; even to the Cave where the Demons of Hell live will I follow you if you will but let me! You must, for I cannot be happy without you.'

'Alas,' cried the Recluse, 'this cannot be! It is impossible; for I am a Japanese, not a Korean. Though I love you as much as you love me, we cannot be united. My name is Sawada Shigeoki. I am a samurai from Kurume. Ten years ago I committed a political offence and had to fly from my country. I came to Korea disguised as a woodcutter, and until I met you I had not a happy day. Now our Government is changed and I am free to return home. To you I have told this story, and to you alone. Forgive my heartlessness in leaving you. I do so with tears in my eyes and sorrow in my heart. Farewell!' So saying, the 'brave samurai' (as my

[p. 214]

raconteur calls him) strode from the hut, never to see poor Choyo again.

Choyo continued to weep until darkness came on and it was too late for her to return home in safety: so she spent the night where she was, in weeping. Next morning she was found by her servants almost demented with fever. She was carried to her home, and for three months was seriously ill. On her recovery she gave most of her money to temples, and in charity; she sold her house, keeping only enough money to buy herself rice, and spent the remainder of her days alone in the little hut at the foot of Mount , where at the age of twenty-one she was found dead of a broken heart. The samurai was brave; but was he noble in spite of his haughty national pride? To the Japanese mind he acted as did Buddha when he renounced his worldly loves. What chance is there, if all men act thus, of a sincere friendship between Japan and Korea?

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 215]

Click to enlarge
Mad Joan, Though Muttering, is Dead and a Skeleton

  

XXXV

  

WHITE BONE MOUNTAIN

AT the foot of Mount Shumongatake, up in the northwestern province of Echigo, once stood, and probably even still stands in rotten or repaired state, a temple of some importance, inasmuch as it was the burial-ground of the feudal Lord Yamana's ancestors. The name of the temple was Fumonji, and many high and important priests kept it up generation after generation, owing to the early help received from Lord Yamana's relations. Among the priests who presided over this temple was one named Ajari Joan, who was the adopted son of the Otomo family.

Ajari was learned and virtuous, and had many followers; but one day the sight of a most attractive girl called Kiku, [*1] whose age was eighteen, upset all his religious equilibrium. He fell desperately in love with her, offering to sacrifice his position and reputation if she Would only listen to his prayer and marry him; but the lovely O Kiku San refused all his entreaties. A year later she was taken seriously ill with fever and died, and

[p. 216]

whispers went abroad that Ajari the priest had cursed her in his jealousy and brought about her illness and her death. The rumour was not exactly without reason, for Ajari went mad within a week of O Kiku's death. He neglected his services, and then got worse, running wildly about the temple, shrieking at night and frightening all those who came near. Finally, one night he dug up the body of O Kiku and ate part of her flesh.

People declared that he had turned into the Devil, and none dared go near the temple; even the younger priests left, until at last he was alone. So terrified were the people, none approached the temple, which soon ran to rack and ruin. Thorny bushes grew on the roof, moss on the hitherto polished and matted floors; birds built their nests inside, perched on the mortuary tablets, and made a mess of everything; the temple, which had once been a masterpiece of beauty, became a rotting ruin.

One summer evening, some six or seven months later, an old woman who owned a tea-house at the foot of Shumongatake Mountain was about to close her shutters when she was terrified at the sight of a priest with a white cap on his head approaching. 'The Devil Priest! The Devil Priest!' she cried as she slammed the last shutter in his face. 'Get away, get away! We can't have you here.'

'What do you mean by "Devil Priest"? I am a travelling or pilgrim priest, not a robber. Let me in at once, for I want both rest and refreshment,' cried the voice from outside. The old woman looked through a crack in the shutters, and saw that it was not the dreaded maniac, but a venerable pilgrim priest: so she

[p. 217]

opened the door and let him in, profuse in her apologies, and telling him how they were all frightened out of their wits by the priest of Fumonji Temple who had gone mad over a love-affair.

'Oh, sir, it is truly terrible! We hardly dare go within half a mile of the temple now, and some day the mad priest is sure to come out of it and kill some of us.'

'Do you mean to tell me that a priest has so far forgotten himself as to break through the teachings of Buddha and make himself the slave of worldly passions?' asked the traveller.

'I don't know about the worldly passions,' cried the old lady; 'but our priest has turned into a devil, as all the people hereabouts will tell you, for he has even dug up and eaten of the flesh of the poor girl whom he caused to die by his cursing!'

'There have been instances of people turning devils,' said the priest; 'but they are usually common people and not priests. A courtier of the Emperor So's turned into a serpent, the wife of Yosei into a moth, the mother of Ogan into a Yasha [*1]; but I have never heard of a priest turning into a devil. Besides, Ajari Joan, your priest at Fumonji Temple, was a virtuous and clever man, I have always heard. I have cone here, in fact, to do myself the honour of meeting him, and to-morrow I shall go and see him.'

The old lady served the priest with tea and begged him to think of no such thing; but he persisted, and said that on the morrow he would do as he mentioned,

[p. 218]

and read the mad priest a lecture; and then he laid himself down to rest for the night.

Next afternoon the old priest, true to his word, started for the Fumonji Temple, the old lady accompanying him for the first part of the walk, to the place where the path which led to the temple turned up the mountain, and there she bade him good-bye, refusing to go another step.

The sun was beginning to set as the priest came in sight of the temple, and he saw that the place was in great disorder. The gates had tumbled off their hinges, withered leaves were thickly strewn everywhere and crumpled under his feet; but he walked boldly on, and struck a small temple-bell with his staff. At the sound came many birds and bats from the temple, the bats flapping round his head; but there was no other sign of life. He struck the bell again with renewed force, and it boomed and clanged in echoes. At last a thin, miserable-looking priest came out, and, looking wildly about, said:

'Who are you, and why have you come here? The temple has long since been deserted, for some reason which I cannot understand. If you want lodging you must go to the village. There is neither food nor bedding here.'

'I am a priest from Wakasa Province. The pretty scenery and clear streams have caused me to linger long on my journey. It is too late now to go to the village, and I am too tired: so please let me remain for the night,' said the priest. The other made answer:

'I cannot order you away. This place is no longer more than a ruined shed. You can stay if you like; but you can have neither food nor bedding.' Having said

[p. 219]

this, he sat on the corner of a rock, while the pilgrim priest sat on another, close by. Neither spoke until it was dark and the moon had risen. Then the mad priest said, 'Find what place you can inside to sleep. There are no beds; but what there is of the roof keeps the mountain dew from falling on you during the night, and it falls heavily here and wets you through.' Then he went into the temple--the pilgrim priest could not tell where, for it was dark and he could not follow, the place being littered with idols and beams and furniture which the mad priest had hacked to pieces in the early stages of his madness. The pilgrim, therefore, felt his way about until he found himself between a large fallen idol and a wall; and here he decided to spend the night, it being as safe a place in which to hide from the maniac as any he could find without knowing his way about or having a light. Fortunately for himself, he was a strong and healthy old man and was well able to do without food, and also to stand unharmed the piercing and damp cold. The pilgrim priest could hear the sound of the many streams which gurgled down the mountain-side. There was also the unpleasant sound of squeaking rats as they chased and fought, and of bats which flew in and out of the place, and of hooting owls; but beyond this nothing--nothing of the mad priest. Hour after hour passed thus until one o'clock, when suddenly, just as the pilgrim felt himself dozing off, he was aroused by a noise. The whole temple seemed as if it were being knocked down. Shutters were slammed with such violence that they fell to the floor; right and left idols and furniture were being hurled about. In and out ran the sound of

[p. 220]

the naked pattering feet of the crazed priest, who shouted:

'Oh, where is the beautiful O Kiku, my sweetly beloved Kiku? Oh, where, oh, where is she? The gods and the devils have combined to defraud me of her, and I care for neither and defy them all. Kiku, Kiku, come to me!'

The pilgrim, thinking his cramped position would be dangerous if the maniac came near him, availed himself of an opportunity, when the latter was in a far-off part of the temple, to get out into the grounds and hide himself again. It would be easier to see what went on, thought he, and to run if necessary.

He hid himself first in one part of the grounds and then in another. Meanwhile the mad priest paid several rushing visits to the outsides of the temple, keeping up all the time his awful cries for O Kiku. Towards morning he retired once more to the part of the temple in which he lived, and no more noise was made. Our pilgrim then went forth from his hiding, and seated himself on the rock which he had occupied the evening before, determined to see if he could not force a conversation with the demented man and read him a lesson from the sacred teachings of Buddha. He sat patiently on until the sun was high; but all remained silent. There was no sign of the mad priest.

Towards midday the pilgrim heard sounds in the temple; and by and by the madman came out, looking as if he had just recovered from a drunken orgy. He appeared dazed and was quiet, and started as he saw the old priest seated on the rock as he had been the night before. The old man rose, and approaching him said:

[p. 221]

'My friend, my name is Ungai. I am a brother priest--from the Temple of Daigoji, in Wakasa Province. I came hither to see you, hearing of your great wisdom; but last night I heard in the village that you had broken your vows as a priest and lost your heart to a maiden, and that from love of her you have turned into a dangerous demon. I have in consequence considered it my duty to come and read you a lecture, as it is impossible to pass your conduct unnoticed. Pray listen to the lecture and tell me if I can help you.'

The mad priest answered quite meekly:

'You are indeed a Buddha. Please tell me what I can do to forget the past, and to become a holy and virtuous priest once more.'

Ungai answered:

'Come out here into the grounds and seat yourself on this rock.' Then he read a lecture out of the Buddhist Bible, and finished by saying, 'And now, if you wish to redeem your soul, you must sit on this rock until you are able to explain the following lines, which are written in this sacred book: 'The moon on the lake shines on the winds between the pine trees, and a long night grows quiet at midnight! Having said this, Ungai bowed low and left the mad priest, Joan, seated on the rock reflecting.

For a month Ungai wandered from temple to temple, lecturing. At the end of that time he came back by way of Fumonji Temple, and thought he would go up to it and see what had happened to mad Joan. At the teahouse at which he had first put up he asked the old landlady if she had seen or heard any more of the crazy priest.

'No,' she said: 'we have neither seen nor heard of

[p. 222]

him. Some people say he has left; but no one knows, for none dare go up to the temple to see.'

'Well,' said Ungai, 'I will go up to-morrow morning -and find out.'

Next morning Ungai went to the temple, and found Joan still seated exactly as he had left him on the rock muttering the words: 'The moon on the lake shines on the winds between the pine trees, and a long night grows quiet at midnight!' Joan's hair and beard had become long and grey in the time, and he appeared to be miserably thin and almost transparent. Ungai was struck with pity at Joan's righteous determination and patience, and tears came to his eyes.

'Get up, get up,' said he, 'for indeed you are a holy and determined man.'

But Joan did not move. Ungai poked him with his staff, to awaken him, as he thought; but, to his horror, Joan fell to pieces, and disappeared like a flake of melting snow.

Ungai stayed in the temple for three days, praying for the soul of Joan. The villagers, hearing of this generous action, rebuilt the temple and made him their priest. Their temple had formerly belonged to the Mitsu sect; but now it was transferred to Ungai's 'Jo do' sect, and the title or name of 'Fumonji' was changed to 'Hakkotsuzan' (White Bone Mountain). The temple is said to have prospered for hundreds of years after.

Footnotes

^215:1 Chrysanthemum.

^217:1 Vampire bat.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 223]

Click to enlarge
41. The Sentry Finds Watanabe Tatsuzo on the Pine Branch

  

XXXVI

  

A STORMY NIGHT'S TRAGEDY [*1]

ALL who have read anything of Japanese history must have heard of Saigo Takamori, who lived between the years 1827 and 1877. He was a great Imperialist, fighting for the Emperor until 1876, when he gave over owing to his disapproval of the Europeanisation going on in the country and the abandonment of ancient national ways. As practical Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Army, Saigo fled to Kagoshima, where he raised a body of faithful followers, which was the beginning of the Satsuma Rebellion. The Imperialists defeated them, and in September of 1877 Saigo was killed--some say in the last battle, and others that he did 'seppuku,' and that his head was cut off and secretly buried, so that it should not fall into the hands of his enemies. Saigo Takamori was highly honoured even by the Imperialists. It is hard to call him a rebel. He did not rebel against his Emperor, but only against the revolting idea of becoming Europeanised. Who can say that he was not right? He was a man of fine sentiment and great loyalty. Should all of us

[p. 224]

follow meekly the Imperial order in England if we were told that we were to practise the manners and customs of South Sea Islanders? That would be hardly less revolting to us than Europeanisation was to Saigo.

In the first year of Meiji i868 the Tokugawa army had been badly beaten by Saigo at Fushimi, and Field-Marshal Tokugawa Keiki had the greatest difficulty in getting down to the sea and escaping to Yedo. The Imperial army proceeded along the Tokaido road, determined to break up the Tokugawa force. Their advance guard had reached Hiratsuka, under Mount Fuji, on the coast.

It was a spring day, the 5th of April, and the cherry trees were in full bloom. The country folk had come in to see the victorious troops, who formed the advance guard of those who had beaten the Tokugawa. There were many beggars about, together with pedlars and sellers of sweets, roasted potatoes, and what-not. Towards evening clouds carne over the skies; at five o'clock rain began; at six every one was under cover.

At the principal inn were a party of the Headquarters' Staff officers, including the gallant Saigo. They were making the best of the bad weather, and not feeling particularly lively, when they heard the soft and melodious notes of the shakuhachi at the gate.

'That is the poor blind beggar we saw playing near the temple to-day,' said one. 'Yes: so it is,' said another. 'The poor fellow must be very wet and miserable. Let us call him in.'

'A capital idea,' assented all of them, among whom was Saigo Takamori. 'We will have him in and raise a

[p. 225]

subscription for him if he can raise our spirits in this weather.' They gave the landlord an order to admit the blind flute-player.

The poor man was led in by a side door and brought into the presence of the officers. 'Gentlemen,' said he, you have done me a very great honour, and a kindness, for it is not pleasant to stand outside playing in the rain with cotton clothes on. I think I can repay you, for I am said to play the shakuhachi well. Since I have been blind it has become my only pleasure, and not only that but also my only means of living. It is hard now in these unsettled days, when everything is upside-down, to earn a living. Not many travellers come to the inns while the Imperial troops occupy them. These are hard days, gentlemen.'

'They may be hard days for you, poor blind fellow; but say nothing against the Imperial troops, for we have to be suspicious, there being spies of the Tokugawa. Three eyes, indeed, does each of us need in his head.'

'Well, well, I have no wish to say aught against the Imperial troops,' said the blind man. 'All I have to say is that it is precious hard for a blind man to earn enough rice wherewith to fill his stomach. Only once a-week on an average am I called to play to private parties or to shampoo some rheumatic person such as this wet weather produces--the blessing of the Gods be on it!'

'Well, we will see what we can do for you, poor fellow,' said Saigo. 'Go round the room, and see what you can collect, and then we will start the concert.'

Matsuichi did as he was bid, and returned to Saigo

[p. 226]

some ten minutes later with five or six yen, to which Saigo added, saying:

'There, poor fellow: what do you think of that? Say no more that the Imperial troops cause you to have an empty belly. Say, rather, that if you lived near them long the skin of your belly might become so overstretched as to cause you perforce to open your eyes, and then indeed you might find yourself put about for a trade. But let us hear your music. We are dull of spirit to-night, and want enlivening.'

'Oh, gentlemen, this is too much, far too much, for my poor music! Take some of it back.'

'No, no,' they answered. 'We are troops and officers of the Imperial Army: our lives are uncertain from day to day. It is a pleasure to give, and to enjoy music when we can.'

The blind man began to play, and he played long and late. Sometimes his airs were lively, and at other times as mournful as the spring wind which blew through the cherry trees; but his manner was enchanting, and all were grateful to him for having afforded a night's amusement. At eleven o'clock the concert finished and they went to rest; the blind beggar left the inn; and Kato Shichibei, the proprietor, locked it up, in spite of the sentries posted outside.

The inn was surrounded by hedges, and several clumps of bamboos stood in the corners. At the far end was an artificial mountain with a lake at its foot, and near the lake a little summer-house over which towered a huge and ancient pine tree, one of the branches of which stretched right back over the roof of the inn. At about one o'clock

[p. 227]

in the morning the form of a man might have been seen stealthily climbing this huge tree until he had reached the branch which hung over the inn. There he stretched himself flat, and began squirming along, evidently intent upon reaching the upper floor of the house. Unfortunately for himself, he cracked a small branch of dead wood, and the sound caused a sentry to look up. 'Who goes there?' cried he, bringing his musket round; but there was no answer. The sentry shouted for help, and it was not more than twenty seconds before the whole house was up and out. No escape for the man on the tree was possible. He was taken prisoner. Imagine the astonishment of all when they found that he was the blind beggar, but now not blind at all; his eyes flashed fire of indignation at his captors, for the great plan of his young life was dead.

'Who is he?' cried one and all, 'and why the trickery of being blind last evening?'

'A spy--that is what he is! A Tokugawa spy,' said one. 'Take him to Headquarters, so that the chief officers may interrogate him; and be careful to hold his hands, for he has every appearance of being a samurai and a fighter.'

And so the prisoner was led off to the Temple of Hommonji, where the Headquarters of the Staff temporarily were.

The prisoner was brought into the presence of Saigo Takamori and four other Imperial officers, one of whom was Katsura Kogoro. He was made to kneel. Then Saigo, who was the Chief, said, 'Hold your head up and give us your name.'

[p. 228]

The prisoner answered:

'I am Watanabe Tatsuzo. I am one of those who have the honour of belonging to the bodyguard of the Tokugawa Government.'

'You are bold,' said Saigo. 'Will you have the goodness to tell us why you have been masquerading as a blind beggar, and why you were caught in an attempt to break into the inn?'

'I found that the Imperial Ambassador was sleeping there, and our cause is not bettered by killing ordinary officers!'

'You are a fool,' answered Saigo. 'How much better would you find yourself off if you killed Yanagiwara, Hashimoto, or Katsura?'

'Your question is stupid,' was the unabashed answer. 'Every man of us does his little. My efforts are only a fragment; but little by little we shall gain our ends.'

'Have you a comrade here?' asked Saigo.

'Oh, no,' answered the prisoner. 'We act individually as we think best for the cause. It was my intention to kill any one of importance whose death might strengthen us. I was acting entirely as I thought best.'

And Saigo said:

'Your loyalty does you credit, and I admire you for that; but you should recognise that after the last victory of the Imperial troops at Fushimi the Tokugawa's tenure of office, extending over three hundred years, has come to an end. It is only natural that the Imperial family should return to power. Your intention is presumably to support a power that is finished. Have you never heard the proverb which says that "No single support

[p. 229]

can hold a falling tower"? Now tell me truthfully the absurd ideas which appear to exist in your mind. Do you really think that the Tokugawa have any further chance?'

'If you were any other than the heroic or admirable Saigo I should refuse to answer these questions,' said the prisoner; 'but, as you are the great Saigo Takamori and I admire your loyalty and courage, I will confess that after our defeat some two hundred of us samurai formed into a society swearing to sacrifice our lives to the cause in any way that we were able. I regret to say that nearly all ran away, and that I am (as far as I am able to judge) about the only one left. As you will execute me, there will be none.'

'Stop,' cried Saigo: 'say no more. Let me ask you: Will you not join us? Look upon the Tokugawa as dead. Too many faithful but ignorant samurai have died for them. The Imperial family must reign: nine-tenths of the country demand it. Though your guilt stands confessed, your loyalty is admirable, and we should gladly take you to our side. Think before you answer.'

No thought was necessary. Watanabe Tatsuzo answered instantly.

'No--never. Though alone, I will not be unfaithful to my cause. You had better behead me before the day dawns. I see the strength of your arguments that the Imperial family must and should reign; but that cannot alter my decision with regard to my own fate;

Saigo stood up and said:

'Here is a man whom we must respect. There are many Tokugawa who have joined our cause through fear;

[p. 230]

but they retain hate in their hearts. Look, all of you, at this Watanabe, and forget him not, for he is a noble man and true to the death.' So saying, Saigo bowed to Watanabe, and then, turning to the guard, said:

'Take the prisoner to the Sambon matsu, [*1] and behead him as soon as the day dawns.'

Watanabe Tatsuzo was led forth and executed accordingly.

There is a cross-road on the way leading to Mariko, to the right of the Nitta Ferry, some five or six cho from the hill where is the Hommonji Temple, Ikegami, in Ebaragun, Tokio fu, where there is a little grave with a tombstone over it and the characters:

written thereon. They mean Tomb of Futetsu-shi, and it is here that Watanabe Tatsuzo is said to have been buried.

Footnotes

^223:1 Fukuga told me this story and vouches for its accuracy.

^230:1 Three Pines.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

Click to enlarge
42. O Kimi Kills Herself on the Island

  

XXXVII

  

THE KAKEMONO GHOST OF AKI PROVINCE [*1]

DOWN the Inland Sea between Umedaichi and Kure (now a great naval port) and in the province of Aki, there is a small village called Yaiyama, in which lived a painter of some note, Abe Tenko. Abe Tenko taught more than he painted, and relied for his living mostly on the small means to which he had succeeded at his father's death and on the aspiring artists who boarded in the village for the purpose of taking daily lessons from him. The island and rock scenery in the neighbourhood afforded continual study, and Tenko was never short of pupils. Among them was one scarcely more than a boy, being only seventeen years of age. His name was Sawara Kameju, and a most promising pupil he was. He had been sent to Tenko over a year before, when scarce sixteen years of age, and, for the reason that Tenko had been a friend of his father, Sawara was taken under the roof of the artist and treated as if he had been his son.

[p. 232]

Tenko had had a sister who went into the service of the Lord of Aki, by whom she had a daughter. Had the child been a son, it would have been adopted into the Aki family; but, being a daughter, it was, according to Japanese custom, sent back to its mother's family, with the result that Tenko took charge of the child, whose name was Kimi. The mother being dead, the child had lived with him for sixteen years. Our story opens with O Kimi grown into a pretty girl.

O Kimi was a most devoted adopted daughter to Tenko. She attended almost entirely to his household affairs, and Tenko looked upon her as if indeed she were his own daughter, instead of an illegitimate niece, trusting her in everything.

After the arrival of the young student O Kimi's heart gave her much trouble. She fell in love with him. Sawara admired O Kimi greatly; but of love he never said a word, being too much absorbed in his study. He looked upon Kimi as a sweet girl, taking his meals with her and enjoying her society. He would have fought for her, and he loved her; but he never gave himself time to think that she was not his sister, and that he might make love to her. So it came to pass at last that O Kimi one day, with the pains of love in her heart, availed herself of her guardian's absence at the temple, whither he had gone to paint something for the priests. O Kimi screwed up her courage and made love to Sawara. She told him that since he had come to the house her heart had known no peace. She loved him, and would like to marry him if he did not mind.

This simple and maidenlike request, accompanied by

[p. 233]

the offer of tea, was more than young Sawara was able to answer without acquiescence. After all, it did not much matter, thought he: 'Kimi is a most beautiful and charming girl, and I like her very much, and must marry some day.'

So Sawara told Kimi that he loved her and would be only too delighted to marry her when his studies were complete--say two or three years thence. Kimi was overjoyed, and on the return of the good Tenko from Korinji Temple informed her guardian of what had passed.

Sawara set to with renewed vigour, and worked diligently, improving very much in his style of painting; and after a year Tenko thought it would do him good to finish off his studies in Kyoto under an old friend of his own, a painter named Sumiyoshi Myokei. Thus it was that in the spring of the sixth year of Kioho--that is, in 1721--Sawara bade farewell to Tenko and his pretty niece O Kimi, and started forth to the capital. It was a sad parting. Sawara had grown to love Kimi very deeply, and he vowed that as soon as his name was made he would return and marry her.

In the olden days the Japanese were even more shockingly poor correspondents than they are now, and even lovers or engaged couples did not write to each other, as several of my tales may show.

After Sawara had been away for a year, it seemed that he should write and say at all events how he was getting on; but he did not do so. A second year passed, and still there was no news. In the meantime there had been several admirers of O Kimi's who had proposed to Tenko

[p. 234]

for her hand; but Tenko had invariably said that Kimi San was already engaged--until one day he heard from Myokei, the painter in Kyoto, who told him that Sawara was making splendid progress, and that he was most anxious that the youth should marry his daughter. He felt that he must ask his old friend Tenko first, and before speaking to Sawara.

Tenko, on the other hand, had an application from a rich merchant for O Kimi's hand. What was Tenko to do? Sawara showed no signs of returning; on the contrary, it seemed that Myokei was anxious to get him to marry into his family. That must be a good thing for Sawara, he thought. Myokei is a better teacher than I, and if Sawara marries his daughter he will take more interest than ever in my old pupil. Also, it is advisable that Kimi should marry that rich young merchant, if I can persuade her to do so; but it will be difficult, for she loves Sawara still. I am afraid he has forgotten her. A little strategy I will try, and tell her that Myokei has written to tell me that Sawara is going to marry his daughter; then, possibly, she may feel sufficiently vengeful to agree to marry the young merchant. Arguing thus to himself, he wrote to Myokei to say that he had his full consent to ask Sawara to be his son-in-law, and he wished him every success in the effort; and in the evening he spoke to Kimi.

'Kimi,' he said, 'to-day I have had news of Sawara through my friend Myokei.'

'Oh, do tell me what!' cried the excited Kimi. 'Is he coming back, and has he finished his education? How delighted I shall be to see him! We can be married in

[p. 235]

[paragraph continues] April, when the cherry blooms, and he can paint a picture of our first picnic.'

'I fear, Kimi, the news which I have does not talk of his coming back. On the contrary, I am asked by Myokei to allow Sawara to marry his daughter, and, as I think such a request could not have been made had Sawara been faithful to you, I have answered that I have no objection to the union. And now, as for yourself, I deeply regret to tell you this; but as your uncle and guardian I again wish to impress upon you the advisability of marrying Yorozuya, the young merchant, who is deeply in love with you and in every way a most desirable husband; indeed, I must insist upon it, for I think it most desirable.'

Poor O Kimi San broke into tears and deep sobs, and without answering a word went to her room, where Tenko thought it well to leave her alone for the night.

In the morning she had gone, none knew whither, there being no trace of her.

Up in Kyoto Sawara continued his studies, true and faithful to O Kimi. After receiving Tenko's letter approving of Myokei's asking Sawara to become his son-in-law, Myokei asked Sawara if he would so honour him. 'When you marry my daughter, we shall be a family of painters, and I think you will be one of the most celebrated ones that Japan ever had.'

'But, sir,' cried Sawara, 'I cannot do myself the honour of marrying your daughter, for I am already engaged--I have been for the last three years--to Kimi, Tenko's daughter. It is most strange that he should not have told you!'

[p. 236]

There was nothing for Myokei to say to this; but there was much for Sawara to think about. Foolish, perhaps he then thought, were the ways of Japanese in not corresponding more freely. He wrote to Kimi twice, accordingly, but no answer came. Then Myokei fell ill of a chill and died: so Sawara returned to his village home in Aki, where he was welcomed by Tenko, who was now, without O Kimi, lonely in his old age.

When Sawara heard that Kimi had gone away leaving neither address nor letter he was very angry, for he had not been told the reason.

'An ungrateful and bad girl,' said he to Tenko, 'and I have been lucky indeed in not marrying her!'

'Yes, yes,' said Tenko: 'you have been lucky; but you must not be too angry. Women are queer things, and, as the saying goes, when you see water running up hill and hens laying square eggs you may expect to see a truly honest-minded woman. But come now--I want to tell you that, as I am growing old and feeble, I wish to make you the master of my house and property here. You must take my name and marry!'

Feeling disgusted at O Kimi's conduct, Sawara readily consented. A pretty young girl, the daughter of a wealthy farmer, was found--Kiku (the Chrysanthemum);--and she and Sawara lived happily with old Tenko, keeping his house and minding his estate. Sawara painted in his spare time. Little by little he became quite famous. One day the Lord of Aki sent for him and said it was his wish that Sawara should paint the seven beautiful scenes of the Islands of Kabakarijima (six, probably); the pictures were to be mounted on gold screens.

[p. 237]

This was the first commission that Sawara had had from such a high official. He was very proud of it, and went off to the Upper and Lower Kabakari Islands, where he made rough sketches. He went also to the rocky islands of Shokokujima, and to the little uninhabited island of Daikokujima, where an adventure befell him.

Strolling along the shore, he met a girl, tanned by sun and wind. She wore only a red cotton cloth about her loins, and her hair fell upon her shoulders. She had been gathering shell-fish, and had a basket of them under her arm. Sawara thought it strange that he should meet a single woman in so wild a place, and more so still when she addressed him, saying, 'Surely you are Sawara Kameju--are you not?'

'Yes,' answered Sawara: 'I am; but it is very strange that you should know me. May I ask how you do so?'

'If you are Sawara, as I know you are, you should know me without asking, for I am no other than Kimi, to whom you were engaged!'

Sawara was astonished, and hardly knew what to say: so he asked her questions as to how she had come to this lonely island. O Kimi explained everything, and ended by saying, with a smile of happiness upon her face:

'And since, my dearest Sawara, I understand that what I was told is false, and that you did not marry Myokei's daughter, and that we have been faithful to each other, we can he married and happy after all. Oh, think how happy we shall be!'

'Alas, alas, my dearest Kimi, it cannot be! I was led to suppose that you had deserted our benefactor Tenko and given up all thought of me. Oh, the sadness of it

 

Click to enlarge
43. The Ghost of the 'Kakemono'

 

[p. 238]

all, the wickedness! I have been persuaded that you were faithless, and have been made to marry another!'

O Kimi made no answer, but began to run along the shore towards a little hut, which home she had made for herself. She ran fast, and Sawara ran after her, calling, Kimi, Kimi, stop and speak to me'; but Kimi did not stop. She gained her hut, and, seizing a knife, plunged it into her throat, and fell back bleeding to death. Sawara, greatly grieved, burst into tears. It was horrible to see the girl who might have been his bride lying dead at his feet all covered with blood, and having suffered so horrible a death at her own hands. Greatly impressed, he drew paper from his pocket and made a sketch of the body. Then he and his boatman buried O Kimi above the tide-mark near the primitive hut. Afterwards, at home, with a mournful heart, he painted a picture of the dead girl, and hung it in his room.

On the first night that it was hung Sawara had a dreadful dream. On awakening he found the figure on the kakemono seemed to be alive: the ghost of O Kimi stepped out of it and stood near his bed. Night after night the ghost appeared, until sleep and rest for Sawara were no longer possible. There was nothing to be done, thought he, but to send his wife back to her parents, which he did; and the kakemono he presented to the Korinji Temple, where the priests kept it with great care and daily prayed for the spirit of O Kimi San. After that Sawara saw the ghost no more.

The kakemono is called the Ghost Picture of Tenko II., and is said to be still kept in the Korinji Temple, where it was placed some 23o to 240 years ago.

Footnotes

^231:1 About two hundred and fifty years ago a strange legend was attached to a kakemono which was painted by an artist celebrity, Sawara Kameju by name, and, owing to the reasons given in the story, the kakemono was handed over to the safe-keeping of the head priest of the Korinji Temple.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 239]

Click to enlarge
44. Mamikiko Tastes the White Sake

  

XXXVIII

  

WHITE SAKE

Two thousand or more years ago Lake Biwa, in Omi Province, and Mount Fuji, in Suruga Province, came into being in one night. Though my story relates this as fact, you are fully entitled to say, should you feel so inclined, 'Wonderful indeed are the ways of Nature'; but do so respectfully, if you please, and without levity, for otherwise you will grossly offend and will not understand the ethical ideas of Japanese folklore stories.

Well, at the time of this extraordinary geographical event, there lived one Yurine, a man of poor means even for those days. He loved sake wine, and scarcely ever spent a day without drinking some of it. Yurine lived near the place which is now called Sudzukawa, a little to the north of the river known as Fujikawa.

On the day which followed Fuji San's appearance Yurine became ill, and was in consequence unable to drink his cup of sake. He became worse and worse, and, at last feeling that there could be no hope for him, decided to give himself the pleasure of drinking a cup before he died. Accordingly he called to himself his only son,

[p. 240]

[paragraph continues] Koyuri, a boy of fourteen years, and told him to go and fetch him a cup or two of the wine. Koyuri was sorely perplexed. He had no sake in the house, and there was not a single coin left wherewith to buy. This he did not like to tell his father, fearing that the unpleasant state of affairs might make him worse. So he took his gourd, and went wandering along the beach, wondering how he could get what his father wanted. While thus employed Koyuri heard a voice calling him by name. As he looked up towards the pines which fringed the beach, he saw a man and a woman sitting beneath an immense tree; their hair was a scarlet red, and so were their bodies. At first Koyuri was afraid,--he had never seen their like before,--but the voice was kindly, and the man was making signs to him to approach. Koyuri did so in fear and trembling, but with that coolness which characterises the Japanese boy.

As Koyuri approached the strange people he noticed that they were drinking sake from large flat cups known as 'sakadzuki,' and that on the sand beside them was an immense jar, from which they took the liquor; moreover, he noticed that the sake was whiter than any he had seen before.

Thinking always of his father, Koyuri unslung his gourd, reported his father's illness, and begged for sake. The red man took the gourd, and filled it. After expressing gratitude, Koyuri ran off delighted. 'Here, father, here!' said he as he reached his hut: 'I have got you the sake, the best I have ever seen, and I am sure it tastes as good as it looks; try it and tell me!'

The old man took the wine and drank greedily,

[p. 241]

expressing great satisfaction, and said that it was indeed the best he had ever tasted. Next day he wanted more. The boy found his two red friends, and again they filled the gourd. In short, Koyuri had his gourd filled for five days in succession, and his father had regained spirits and was almost well in consequence.

Now, there lived in the next hut to Yurine an unpleasant neighbour who also was fond of sake, but too poor to procure it. His name was Mamikiko. On hearing that Yurine had been drinking sake for the last five days he became furiously jealous, and, calling Koyuri, asked where and how he had procured it. The boy explained that he had got it from the strange people with red hair who had been living near the big pine tree for some days past.

'Give me your gourd to taste,' cried Mamikiko, snatching it roughly. 'Do you think that your father is the only man who is good enough for sake?' Putting the gourd to his lips, he began to drink; but he threw it down in disgust a second later, and spat out what was in his mouth. 'What filth is this?' he cried. 'To your father you give the most excellent sake, while to me you give foul water! What is the meaning of it?' He gave Koyuri a sound beating, and then told him to lead the way to the red people on the beach, saying, 'I will beat you again if I don't get some good sake; so you had better see to it!'

Koyuri led the way, weeping the while at the loss of his sake, which Mamikiko had thrown away, and fearing the anger of his red friends. In the usual place they found the strangers, who had both been drinking and

[p. 242]

were still doing so. Mamikiko was surprised at their appearance: he had seen nothing quite like them before. Their bodies were of the pink of cherry blossom shining in the sun, while their long red hair almost frightened him; both were naked except for a green girdle made of some curious seaweed.

'Well, boy Koyuri, what are you crying about, and why back so soon? Has your father drunk the sake already? If so he must be almost as fond of it as we.'

'No, no: my father has not drunk it; but Mamikiko, here, took it from me and drank some, spitting it out and saying it was not sake; the rest he threw away, and then made me bring him here. May I have some more for my father?' The red man refilled the gourd and told him not to mind, and seemed amused at Koyuri's account of Mamikiko spitting it out.

'I am as fond of sake as any one,' cried Mamikiko: 'will you give me some?'

'Oh, yes; help yourself,' said the red man; 'Help yourself.' Mamikiko filled the largest of the cups, and, putting it to his nose, smelt the fragrance, which was delicious; but as soon as he put it to his lips his face changed, and he had to spit again, for the taste was nauseating.

'What is the meaning of this?' he cried angrily; and the red man answered still more angrily:

'You do not seem to be aware of who I am. Well, I will tell you that I am a shojo of high degree, and I live deep in the bottom of the ocean near the Sea Dragon's Palace. Recently we heard that a sacred mountain had arisen on the edge of the sea, and, as it is a lucky omen, and a sign that the Empire of Japan will exist in perpetuity, I have

[p. 243]

come here to see it. While enjoying the magnificent scene from Suruga coast I met this good boy Koyuri, who asked for sake for his poor sick old father, and I gave him some. Now, this sake is not ordinary sake, but sacred, and those who drink it live for ever and retain their youth; moreover, it cures all diseases even in the aged. But you must know that any medicine is sometimes a poison, and thus it is that this sweet sacred white sake is good only in taste to the righteous, and bad-tasting and poisonous to the wicked. Thus I know that, as it tastes evil to you, you are an evil and wicked man, selfish and greedy.' And both the shojos laughed at Mamikiko, who, on hearing that the few drops which he must have swallowed would act as poison and soon kill him, began to cry with fear and to regret his conduct. He begged and implored forgiveness and that his life might be spared, and vowed that he would reform if only given a chance. The shojo, drawing some powder from a case, gave it to Mamikiko, and told him to swallow it in some sake; 'for,' said he, 'it is better to repent and reform even in your old age than not at all.'

Mamikiko drank it down this time, finding the wine sweet and delicious; it strengthened him and made him feel well, and he reformed and became a good man. He made friends again with Yurine and treated Koyuri well.

Some years later Mamikiko and Yurine built a hut at the southern base of Fuji San, where they brewed white sake from a recipe given them by the shojo, and they gave it to all who suffered from sake poisoning. Both Mamikiko and Yurine lived for 300 years.

In the Middle Ages a man who had heard this story

[p. 244]

brewed white sake at the foot of Mount Fuji; he made it with rice yeast, and people became very fond of it. Even to-day white sake is brewed somewhere at the foot of the mountain, and is well known as a special liquor belonging to Fuji. I myself drank it in 1907 without fear of living beyond my fifty-fifth year.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 245]

Click to enlarge
45. Kichijiro Finds Poor O Ima Blind

  

XXXIX

  

THE BLIND BEAUTY

NEARLY three hundred years ago (or, according to my story-teller, in the second year of Kwanei, which would be 1626, the period of Kwanei having begun in 1624 and ended in 1644) there lived at Maidzuru, in the province of Tango, a youth named Kichijiro.

Kichijiro had been born at the village of Tai, where his father had been a native; but on the death of the father he had come with his elder brother, Kichisuke, to Maidzuru. The brother was his only living relation except an uncle, and had taken care of him for four years, educating him from the age of eleven until fifteen; and Kichijiro was very grateful, and determined that now he had reached the age of fifteen he must no longer be a drag on his brother, but must begin to make a way in the world for himself.

After looking about for some weeks, Kichijiro found employment with Shiwoya Hachiyemon, a merchant in Maidzuru. He worked very hard, and soon gained his master's friendship; indeed, Hachiyemon thought very highly of his apprentice; he favoured him in many ways

[p. 246]

over older clerks, and finally entrusted him with the key of his safes, which contained documents and much money.

Now, Hachiyemon had a daughter of Kichijiro's age, of great beauty and promise, and she fell desperately in love with Kichijiro, who himself was at first unaware of this. The girl's name was Ima, O Ima San, and she was one of those delightful ruddy, happy-faced girls whom only Japan can produce--a mixture of yellow and red, with hair and eyebrows as black as a raven. Ima paid Kichijiro compliments now and then; but he was a boy who thought little of love. He intended to get on in the world, and marriage was a thing which had not yet entered into his mind.

After Kichijiro had been some six months in the employment of Hachiyemon he stood higher than ever in the master's estimation; but the other clerks did not like him. They were jealous. One was specially so. This was Kanshichi, who hated him not only because he was favoured by the merchant but also because he himself loved O Ima, who had given him many a rebuff when he had attempted to make love to her. So great did this secret hate become, at last Kanshichi vowed that he would be revenged upon Kichijiro, and if necessary upon his master Hachiyemon and his daughter O Ima as well; for he was a wicked and scheming man.

One day an opportunity occurred.

Kichijiro had so far secured confidence that the master had sent him off to Kasumi, in Tajima Province, there to negotiate the purchase of a junk. While he was away Kanshichi broke into the room where the safe was kept, and took therefrom two bags containing money in gold up

[p. 247]

to the value of 200 ryo. He effaced all signs of his action, and went quietly back to his work. Two or three days later Kichijiro returned, having successfully accomplished his mission, and, after reporting this to the master, set to his routine work again. On examining the safe, he found that the 200 ryo of gold were missing, and, he having reported this, the office and the household were thrown into a state of excitement.

After some hours of hunting for the money it was found in a koro (incense-burner) which belonged to Kichijiro, and no one was more surprised than he. It was Kanshichi who had found it, naturally, after having put it there himself; he did not accuse Kichijiro of having stolen the money--his plans were more deeply laid. The money having been found there, he knew that Kichijiro himself would have to say something. Of course Kichijiro said he was absolutely innocent, and that when he had left for Kasumi the money was safe--he had seen it just before leaving.

Hachiyemon was sorely distressed. He believed in the innocence of Kichijiro; but how was he to prove it? Seeing that his master did not believe Kichijiro guilty, Kanshichi decided that he must do something which would render it more or less impossible for Hachiyemon to do otherwise than to send his hated rival Kichijiro away. He went to the master and said:

'Sir, I, as your head clerk, must tell you that, though perhaps Kichijiro is innocent, things seem to prove that he is not, for how could the money have got into his koro? If he is not punished, the theft will reflect on all of us clerks, your faithful servants, and I myself should

[p. 248]

have to leave your service, for all the others would do so, and you would be unable to carry on your business. Therefore I venture to tell you, sir, that it would be advisable in your own interests to send poor Kichijiro, for whose misfortune I deeply grieve, away.'

Hachiyemon saw the force of this argument, and agreed. He sent for Kichijiro, to whom he said:

'Kichijiro, deeply as I regret it, I am obliged to send you away. I do not believe in your guilt, but I know that if I do not send you away all my clerks will leave me, and I shall be ruined. To show you that I believe in your innocence, I will tell you that my daughter Ima loves you, and that if you are willing, and after you can prove your innocence, nothing would give me greater pleasure than to have you back as my son-in--law. Go now. Try and think how you can prove your innocence. My best wishes go with you.'

Kichijiro was very sad. Now that he had to go, he found that he should more than miss the companionship of the sweet O Ima. With tears in his eyes, he vowed to the father that he would come back, prove his innocence, and marry O Ima; and with O Ima herself he had his first love scene. They vowed that neither should rest until the scheming thief had been discovered, and they were both reunited in such a way that nothing could part them.

Kichijiro went back to his brother Kichisuke at Tai village, to consult as to what it would be best for him to do to re-establish his reputation. After a few weeks, he was employed through his brother's interest and that of his only surviving uncle in Kyoto. There he worked

[p. 249]

hard and faithfully for four long years, bringing much credit to his firm, and earning much admiration from his uncle, who made him heir to considerable landed property, and gave him a share in his own business. Kichijiro found himself at the age of twenty quite a rich man.

In the meantime calamity had come on pretty O Ima. After Kichijiro had left Maidzuru, Kanshichi began to pester her with attentions. She would have none of him; she would not even speak to him; and so exasperated did he become at last that he used to waylay her. On one occasion he resorted to violence and tried to carry her away by force. Of this she complained to her father, who promptly dismissed him from his service.

This made villain Kanshichi angrier than ever. As the Japanese proverb says, 'Kawaisa amatte nikusa ga hyakubai,'--which means, 'Excessive love is hatred.' So it was with Kanshichi: his love turned to hatred. He thought of how he could be avenged on Hachiyemon and O Ima. The most simple means, he thought, would be to burn down their house, the business offices, and the stores of merchandise: that must bring ruin. So one night Kanshichi set about doing these things and accomplished them most successfully--with the exception that he himself was caught in the act and sentenced to a heavy punishment. That was the only satisfaction which was got by Hachiyemon, who was all but ruined; he sent away all his clerks and retired from business, for he was too old to begin again.

With just enough to keep life and body together, Hachiyemon and his pretty daughter lived in a little

[p. 250]

cheap cottage on the banks of the river, where it was Hachiyemon's only pleasure to fish for carp and jakko. For three years he did this, and then fell ill and died. Poor O Ima was left to herself, as lovely as ever, but mournful. The few friends she had tried to prevail on her to marry somebody--anybody, they said, sooner than live alone,--but to this advice the girl would not listen. 'It is better to live miserably alone,' she said, 'than to marry one for whom you do not care; I can love none but Kichijiro, though I shall not see him again.'

O Ima spoke the truth on that occasion, without knowing it, for, true as it is that it never rains but it pours, O Ima was to have more trouble. An eye sickness came to her, and in less than two months after her father's death the poor girl was blind, with no one to attend to her wants but an old nurse who had stuck to her through all her troubles. Ima had barely sufficient money to pay for rice.

It was just at this time that Kichijiro's success was assured: his uncle had given him a half interest in the business and made a will in which he left him his whole property. Kichijiro decided to go and report himself to his old master at Maidzuru and to claim the hand of O Ima his daughter. Having learned the sad story of downfall and ruin, and also of Ima's blindness, Kichijiro went to the girl's cottage. Poor O Ima came out and flung herself into his arms, weeping bitterly, and crying: 'Kichijiro, my beloved! this is indeed almost the hardest blow of all. The loss of my sight was as nothing before; but now that you have come back, I cannot see you, and how I long to do so you can but little imagine! It is

[p. 251]

indeed the saddest blow of all. You cannot now marry me.'

Kichijiro petted her, and said, 'Dearest Ima, you must not be too hasty in your thoughts. I have never ceased thinking of you; indeed, I have grown to love you desperately. I have property now in Kyoto; but should you prefer to do so, we will live here in this cottage. I am ready to do anything you wish. It is my desire to re-establish your father's old business, for the good of your family; but first and before even this we will be married and never part again. We will do that tomorrow. Then we will go together to Kyoto and see my uncle, and ask for his advice. He is always good and kind, and you will like him--he is sure to like you.'

Next day they started on their journey to Kyoto, and Kichijiro saw his brother and his uncle, neither of whom had any objection to Kichijiro's bride on account of her blindness. Indeed, the uncle was so much pleased at his nephew's fidelity that he gave him half of his capital there and then. Kichijiro built a new house and offices in Maidzuru, just where his first master Hachiyemon's place had been. He re-established the business completely, calling his firm the Second Shiwoya Hachiyemon, as is often done in Japan (which adds much to the confusion of Europeans who study Japanese Art, for pupils often take the names of their clever masters, calling themselves the Second, or even the Third or the Fourth).

In the garden of their Maidzuru house was an artificial mountain, and on this Kichijiro had erected a tombstone or memorial dedicated to Hachiyemon, his father-in-law. At the foot of the mountain he erected a memorial to

[p. 252]

[paragraph continues] Kanshichi. Thus he rewarded the evil wickedness of Kanshichi by kindness, but showed at the same time that evil-doers cannot expect high places. It is to be hoped that the spirits of the two dead men became reconciled.

They say in Maidzuru that the memorial tombs still stand.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 253]

Click to enlarge
46. Iidamachi Pond, Hayashi's House

  

XL

  

THE SECRET OF IIDAMACHI POND

IN the first year of Bunkiu, 1861-1864, there lived a man called Yehara Keisuke in Kasumigaseki, in the district of Kojimachi. He was a hatomoto--that is, a feudatory vassal of the Shogun--and a man to whom some respect was due; but apart from that, Yehara was much liked for his kindness of heart and general fairness in dealing with people. In Iidamachi lived another hatomoto, Hayashi Hayato. He had been married to Yehara's sister for five years. They were exceedingly happy; their daughter, four years old now, was the delight of their hearts. Their cottage was rather dilapidated; but it was Hayashi's own, with the pond in front of it, and two farms, the whole property comprising some two hundred acres, of which nearly half was under cultivation. Thus Hayashi was able to live without working much. In the summer he fished for carp; in the winter he wrote much, and was considered a bit of a poet.

At the time of this story, Hayashi, having planted his rice and sweet potatoes (sato-imo), had but little to do, and

[p. 254]

spent most of his time with his wife, fishing in his ponds, one of which contained large suppon (terrapin turtles) as well as koi (carp). Suddenly things went wrong.

Yehara was surprised one morning to receive a visit from his sister O Kome.

'I have come, dear brother,' she said, 'to beg you to help me to obtain a divorce or separation from my husband.'

'Divorce! Why should you want a divorce? Have you not always said you were happy with your husband, my dear friend Hayashi? For what sudden reason do you ask for a divorce? Remember you have been married for five years now, and that is sufficient to prove that your life has been happy, and that Hayashi has treated you well.'

At first O Kome would not give any reason why she wished to be separated from her husband; but at last she said:

'Brother, think not that Hayashi has been unkind. He is all that can be called kind, and we deeply love each other; but, as you know, Hayashi's family have owned the land, the farms on one of which latter we live, for some three hundred years. Nothing would induce him to change his place of abode, and I should never have wished him to do so until some twelve days ago.'

'What has happened within these twelve wonderful days?' asked Yehara.

'Dear brother, I can stand it no longer,' was his sister's answer. 'Up to twelve days ago all went well; but then a terrible thing happened. It was very dark and warm, and I was sitting outside our house looking at the clouds

[p. 255]

passing over the moon, and talking to my daughter. Suddenly there appeared, as if walking on the lilies of the pond, a white figure. Oh, so white, so wet, and so miserable to look at! It appeared to arise from the pond and float in the air, and then approached me slowly until it was within ten feet. As it came my child cried: "Why, mother, there comes O Sumi--do you know O Sumi?" I answered her that I did not, I think; but in truth I was so frightened I hardly know what I said. The figure was horrible to look at. It was that of a girl of eighteen or nineteen years, with hair dishevelled and hanging loose, over white and wet shoulders. Help me! help me!" cried the figure, and I was so frightened that I covered my eyes and screamed for my husband, who was inside. He came out and found me in a dead faint, with my child by my side, also in a state of terror. Hayashi had seen nothing. He carried us both in, shut the doors, and told me I must have been dreaming. "Perhaps," he sarcastically added, "you saw the kappa which is said to dwell in the pond, but which none of my family have seen for over one hundred years." That is all that my husband said on the subject. Next night, however, when in bed, my child seized me suddenly, crying in terror-stricken tones, "O Sumi--here is O Sumi--how horrible she looks! Mother, mother, do you see her?" I did see her. She stood dripping wet within three feet of my bed, the whiteness and the wetness and the dishevelled hair being what gave her the awful look which she bore. "Help me! Help me!" cried the figure, and then disappeared. After that I could not sleep; nor could I get my child to do so. On every night until now the ghost has come--O Sumi,

[p. 256]

as my child calls her. I should kill myself if I had to remain longer in that house, which has become a terror to myself and my child. My husband does not see the ghost, and only laughs at me; and that is why I see no way out of the difficulty but a separation.'

Yehara told his sister that on the following day he would call on Hayashi, and sent his sister back to her husband that night.

Next day, when Yehara called, Hayashi, after hearing what the visitor had to say, answered:

'It is very strange. I was born in this house over twenty years ago; but I have never seen the ghost which my wife refers to, and have never heard about it. Not the slightest allusion to it was ever made by my father or mother. I will make inquiries of all my neighbours and servants, and ascertain if they ever heard of the ghost, or even of any one coming to a sudden and untimely end. There must be something: it is impossible that my little child should know the name Sumi," she never having known any one bearing it.'

Inquiries were made; but nothing could be learned from the servants or from the neighbours. Hayashi reasoned that, the ghost being always wet, the mystery might be solved by drying up the pond--perhaps to find the remains of some murdered person, whose bones required decent burial and prayers said over them.

The pond was old and deep, covered with water plants, and had never been emptied within his memory. It was said to contain a kappa (mythical beast, half-turtle, half-man). In any case, there were many terrapin turtle, the capture of which would well repay the cost of the emptying.

[p. 257]

[paragraph continues] The bank of the pond was cut, and next day there remained only a pool in the deepest part; Hayashi decided to clear even this and dig into the mud below.

At this moment the grandmother of Hayashi arrived, an old woman of some eighty years, and said:

'You need go no farther. I can tell you all about the ghost. O Sumi does not rest, and it is quite true that her ghost appears. I am very sorry about it, now in my old age; for it is my fault--the sin is mine. Listen and I will tell you all.'

Every one stood astonished at these words, feeling that some secret was about to be revealed.

The old woman continued:

'When Hayashi Hayato, your grandfather, was alive, we had a beautiful servant girl, seventeen years of age, called O Sumi. Your grandfather became enamoured of this girl, and she of him. I was about thirty at that time, and was jealous, for my better looks had passed away. One day when your grandfather was out I took Sumi to the pond and gave her a severe beating. During the struggle she fell into the water and got entangled in the weeds; and there I left her, fully believing the water to be shallow and that she could get out. She did not succeed, and was drowned. Your grandfather found her dead on his return. In those days the police were not very particular with their inquiries. The girl was buried; but nothing was said to me, and the matter soon blew over. Fourteen days ago was the fiftieth anniversary of this tragedy. Perhaps that is the reason of Sumi's ghost appearing; for appear she must, or your child could not have known of her name. It must be as your child says,

[p. 258]

and that the first time she appeared Sumi communicated her name.'

The old woman was shaking with fear, and advised them all to say prayers at O Sumi's tomb. This was done, and the ghost has been seen no more. Hayashi said:

'Though I am a samurai, and have read many books, I never believed in ghosts; but now I do.'

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 259]

Click to enlarge
47. The Spirit of the One-Eyed Priest, Yenoki, Appears to Sonobe

  

XLI

  

THE SPIRIT OF YENOKI [*1]

THERE is a mountain in the province of Idsumi called Oki-yama (or Oji Yam a); it is connected with the Mumaru-Yama mountains. I will not vouch that I am accurate in spelling either. Suffice it to say that the story was told to me by Fukuga Sei, and translated by Mr. Ando, the Japanese translator of our Consulate at Kobe. Both of these give the mountain's name as Okiyama, and say that on the top of it from time immemorial there has been a shrine dedicated to Fudo-myo-o (Achala, in Sanskrit, which means 'immovable,' and is the god always represented as surrounded by fire and sitting uncomplainingly on as an example to others; he carries a sword in one hand, and a rope in the other, as a warning that punishment awaits those who are unable to overcome with honour the painful struggles of life).

Well, at the top of Oki-yama (high or big mountain) is this very old temple to Fudo, and many are the

[p. 260]

pilgrimages which are made there annually. The mountain itself is covered with forest, and there are some remarkable cryptomerias, camphor and pine trees.

Many years ago, in the days of which I speak, there were only a few priests living up at this temple. Among them was a middle-aged man, half-priest, half-caretaker, called Yenoki. For twenty years had Yenoki lived at the temple; yet during that time he had never cast eyes on the figure of Fudo, over which he was partly set to guard; it was kept shut in a shrine and never seen by any one but the head priest. One day Yenoki's curiosity got the better of him. Early in the morning the door of the shrine was not quite closed. Yenoki looked in, but saw nothing. On turning to the light again, he found that he had lost the use of the eye that had looked: he was stone-blind in the right eye.

Feeling that the divine punishment served him well, and that the gods must be angry, he set about purifying himself, and fasted for one hundred days. Yenoki was mistaken in his way of devotion and repentance, and did not pacify the gods; on the contrary, they turned him into a tengu (long-nosed devil who dwells in mountains, and is the great teacher of jujitsu).

But Yenoki continued to call himself a priest--'Ichigan Hoshi,' meaning the one-eyed priest--for a year, and then died; and it is said that his spirit passed into an enormous cryptomeria tree on the east side of the mountain. After that, when sailors passed the Chinu Sea (Osaka Bay), if there was a storm they used to pray to the one-eyed priest for help, and if a light was seen on the top of Oki-yama they had a sure sign

[p. 261]

that, no matter how rough the sea, their ship would not be lost.

It may be said, in fact, that after the death of the one-eyed priest more importance was attached to his spirit and to the tree into which it had taken refuge than to the temple itself. The tree was called the Lodging of the One-eyed Priest, and no one dared approach it--not even the woodcutters who were familiar with the mountains. It was a source of awe and an object of reverence.

At the foot of Oki-yama was a lonely village, separated from others by fully two ri (five miles), and there were only one hundred and thirty houses in it.

Every year the villagers used to celebrate the 'Bon' by engaging, after it was over, in the dance called 'Bon Odori.' Like most other things in Japan, the 'Bon' and the 'Bon Odori' were in extreme contrast. The Bon' was a ceremony arranged for the spirits of the dead, who are supposed to return to earth for three days annually, to visit their family shrines--something like our All Saints' Day, and in any case quite a serious religious performance. The 'Bon Odori' is a dance which varies considerably in different provinces. It is confined mostly to villages--for one cannot count the pretty geisha dances in Kyoto which are practically copies of it. It is a dance of boys and girls, one may say, and continues nearly all night on the village green. For the three or four nights that it lasts, opportunities for flirtations of the most violent kind are plentiful. There are no chaperons (so to speak), and (to put it vulgarly) every one 'goes on the bust'! Hitherto-virtuous maidens spend the night out as

[p. 262]

impromptu sweethearts; and, in the village of which this story is told, not only is it they who let themselves go, but even young brides also.

So it came to pass that the village at the foot of Oki-yama mountain--away so far from other villages--was a bad one morally. There was no restriction to what a girl might do or what she might not do during the nights of the 'Bon Odori.' Things went from bad to worse until, at the time of which I write, anarchy reigned during the festive days. At last it came to pass that after a particularly festive 'Bon,' on a beautiful moonlight night in August, the well-beloved and charming daughter of Kurahashi Yozaemon, O Kimi, aged eighteen years, who had promised her lover Kurosuke that she would meet him secretly that evening, was on her way to do so. After passing the last house in her mountain village she came to a thick copse, and standing at the edge of it was a man whom O Kimi at first took to be her lover. On approaching she found that it was not Kurosuke, but a very handsome youth of twenty-three years. He did not speak to her; in fact, he kept a little away. If she advanced, he receded. So handsome was the youth, O Kimi felt that she loved him. 'Oh how my heart beats for him!' said she. 'After all, why should I not give up Kurosuke? He is not good-looking like this man, whom I love already before I have even spoken to him. I hate Kurosuke, now that I see this man.'

As she said this she saw the figure smiling and beckoning, and, being a wicked girl, loose in her morals, she followed him and was seen no more. Her family were

[p. 263]

much exercised in their minds. A week passed, and O Kimi San did not return.

A few days later Tamae, the sixteen-year-old daughter of Kinsaku, who was secretly in love with the son of the village Headman, was awaiting him in the temple grounds, standing the while by the stone figure of Jizodo (Sanskrit, Kshitigarbha, Patron of Women and Children). Suddenly there stood near Tamae a handsome youth of twenty-three years, as in the case of O Kimi; she was greatly struck by the youth's beauty, so much so that when he took her by the hand and led her off she made no effort to resist, and she also disappeared.

And thus it was that nine girls of amorous nature disappeared from this small village. Everywhere for thirty miles round people talked and wondered, and said unkind things.

In Oki-yama village itself the elder people said:

'Yes: it must be that our children's immodesty since the 'Bon Odori' has angered Yenoki San: perhaps it is he himself who appears in the form of this handsome youth and carries off our daughters.'

Nearly all agreed in a few days that they owed their losses to the Spirit of the Yenoki Tree; and as soon as this notion had taken root the whole of the villagers locked and barred themselves in their houses both day and night. Their farms became neglected; wood was not being cut on the mountain; business was at a standstill. The rumour of this state of affairs spread, and the Lord of Kishiwada, becoming uneasy, summoned Sonobe Hayama, the most celebrated swordsman in that part of Japan.

[p. 264]

'Sonobe, you are the bravest man I know of, and the best fighter. It is for you to go and inspect the tree where lodges the spirit of Yenoki. You must use your own discretion. I cannot advise as to what it is best that you should do. I leave it to you to dispose of the mystery of the disappearances of the nine girls.'

'My lord,' said Sonobe, 'my life is at your lordship's call. I shall either clear the mystery or die.'

After this interview with his master Sonobe went home. He put himself through a course of cleansing. He fasted and bathed for a week, and then repaired to Oki-yama.

This was in the month of October, when to me things always look their best. Sonobe ascended the mountain, and went first to the temple, which he reached at three o'clock in the afternoon, after a hard climb. Here he said prayers before the god Fudo for fully half an hour. Then he set out to cross the short valley which led up to the Oki-yama mountain, and to the tree which held the spirit of the one-eyed priest, Yenoki.

It was a long and steep climb, with no paths, for the mountain was avoided as much as possible by even the most adventurous of woodcutters, none of whom ever dreamed of going up as far as the Yenoki tree. Sonobe was in good training and a bold warrior. The woods were dense; there was a chilling damp, which came from the spray of a high waterfall. The solitude was intense, and once or twice Sonobe put his hand on the hilt of his sword, thinking that he heard some one following in the gloom; but there was no one, and by five o'clock Sonobe had reached the tree and addressed it thus:

'Oh, honourable and aged tree, that has braved

[p. 265]

centuries of storm, thou hast become the home of Yenoki's spirit. In truth there is much honour in having so stately a lodging, and therefore he cannot have been so bad a man. I have come from the Lord of Kishiwada to upbraid him, however, and to ask what means it that Yenoki's spirit should appear as a handsome youth for the purpose of robbing poor people of their daughters. This must not continue; else you, as the lodging of Yenoki's spirit, will be cut down, so that it may escape to another part of the country.'

At that moment a warm wind blew on the face of Sonobe, and dark clouds appeared overhead, rendering the forest dark; rain began to fall, and the rumblings of earthquake were heard.

Suddenly the figure of an old priest appeared in ghostly form, wrinkled and thin, transparent and clammy, nerve-shattering; but Sonobe had no fear.

'You have been sent by the Lord of Kishiwada,' said the ghost. 'I admire your courage for coming. So cowardly and sinful are most men, they fear to come near where my spirit has taken refuge. I can assure you that I do no evil to the good. So bad had morals become in the village, it was time to give a lesson. The villagers' customs defied the gods. It is true that I, hoping to improve these people and make them godly, assumed the form of a youth, and carried away nine of the worst of them. They are quite well. They deeply regret their sins, and will reform their village. Every day I have given them lectures. You will find them on the "Mino toge," or second summit of this mountain, tied to trees. Go there and release them, and afterwards tell the Lord of

[p. 266]

[paragraph continues] Kishiwada what the spirit of Yenoki, the one-eyed priest, has done, and that it is always ready to help him to improve his people. Farewell!'

No sooner had the last word been spoken than the spirit vanished. Sonobe, who felt somewhat dazed by what the spirit had said, started off nevertheless to the 'Mino toge'; and there, sure enough, were the nine girls, tied each to a tree, as the spirit had said. He cut their bonds, gave them a lecture, took them back to the village, and reported to the Lord of Kishiwada.

Since then the people have feared more than ever the spirit of the one-eyed priest. They have become completely reformed, an example to the surrounding villages. The nine houses or families whose daughters behaved so badly contribute annually the rice eaten by the priests of Fudo-myo-o Temple. It is spoken of as 'the nine-families rice of Oki.'

Footnotes

^259:1 Fukuga Sei said that this was an old story told him by his nurse, who was a native of the village of Oki-yama; also, that a solid gold Buddha, eighteen inches in height, had been stolen from the temple three years ago.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 267]

Click to enlarge
48. XLII. The Spirit of the Lotus Lily

  

XLII

  

THE SPIRIT OF THE LOTUS LILY

FOR some time I have been hunting for a tale about the lotus lily. My friend Fukuga has at last found one which is said to date back some two hundred years. It applies to a castle that was then situated in what was known as Kinai, now incorporated into what may be known as the Kyoto district. Probably it refers to one of the castles in that neighbourhood, though I myself know of only one, which is now called Nijo Castle.

Fukuga (who does not speak English) and my interpreter made it very difficult for me to say that the story does not really belong to a castle in the province of Idzumi, for after starting it in Kyoto they suddenly brought me to Idzumi, making the hero of it the Lord of Koriyama. In any case, I was first told that disease and sickness broke out in Kinai (Kyoto). Thousands of people died of it. It spread to Idzumi, where the feudal Lord of Koriyama lived, and attacked him also. Doctors were called from all parts; but it was no use. The disease spread, and, to the dismay of all,

[p. 268]

not only the Lord of Koriyama but also his wife and child were stricken.

There was a panic terror in the country--not that the people feared for themselves, but because they were in dread that they might lose their lord and his wife and child. The Lord Koriyama was much beloved. People flocked to the castle. They camped round its high walls, and in its empty moats, which were dry, there having been no war for some time.

One day, during the illness of this great family, Tada Samon, the highest official in the castle (next to the Lord Koriyama himself), was sitting in his room, thinking what was best to be done on the various questions that were awaiting the Daimio's recovery. While he was thus engaged, a servant announced that there was a visitor at the outer gate who requested an interview, saying that he thought he could cure the three sufferers.

Tada Samon would see the caller, whom the servant shortly after fetched.

The visitor turned out to be a yamabushi (mountain recluse) in appearance, and on entering the room bowed low to Samon, saying

'Sir, it is an evil business--this illness of our lord and master--and it has been brought about by an evil spirit, who has entered the castle because you have put up no defence against impure and evil spirits. This castle is the centre of administration for the whole of the surrounding country, and it was unwise to allow it to remain un-fortified against impure and evil spirits. The saints of old [*1] have always told us to plant the lotus lily, not only

[p. 269]

in the one inner ditch surrounding a castle, but also in both ditches or in as many as there be, and, moreover, to plant them all around the ditches. Surely, sir, you know that the lotus, being the most emblematic flower in our religion, must be the most pure and sacred; for this reason it drives away uncleanness, which cannot cross it. Be assured, sir, that if your lord had not neglected the northern ditches of his castle, but had kept them filled with water, clean, and had planted the sacred lotus, no such evil spirit would have come as the present sent by Heaven to warn him. If I am allowed to do so, I shall enter the castle to-day and pray that the evil spirit of sickness leave; and I ask that I may be allowed to plant lotuses in the northern moats. Thus only can the Lord of Koriyama and his family be saved.'

Samon nodded in answer, for he now remembered that the northern moats had neither lotus nor water, and that this was partly his fault--a matter of economy in connection with the estates. He interviewed his master, who was more sick than ever. He called all the Court officials. It was decided that the yamabushi should have his way. He was told to carry out his ideas as he thought best. There was plenty of money, and there were hundreds of hands ready to help him--anything to save the master.

The yamabushi washed his body, and prayed that the evil spirit of sickness should leave the castle. Subsequently he superintended the cleansing and repairing of the northern moats, directing the people to fill them with water and plant lotuses. Then he disappeared mysteriously--vanished almost before the men's eyes. Wonderingly,

[p. 270]

but with more energy than ever, the men worked to carry out the orders. In less than twenty-four hours the moats had been cleaned, repaired, filled, and planted.

As was to be expected, the Lord Koriyama, his wife, and son became rapidly better. In a week all were able to be up, and in a fortnight they were as well as ever they had been.

Thanksgivings were held, and there were great rejoicings all over Idzumi. Later, people flocked to see the splendidly-kept moats of lotuses, and the villagers went so far as to rename among themselves the castle, calling it the Lotus Castle.

Some years passed before anything strange happened. The Lord Koriyama had died from natural causes, and had been succeeded by his son, who had neglected the lotus roots. A young samurai was passing along one of the moats. This was at the end of August, when the flowers of the lotus are strong and high. The samurai suddenly saw two beautiful boys, about six or seven years of age, playing at the edge of the moat.

'Boys,' said he, 'it is not safe to play so near the edge of this moat. Come along with me.'

He was about to take them by the hand and lead them off to a safer place, when they sprang into the air a little way, smiling at him the while, and fell into the water, where they disappeared with a great splash that covered him with spray.

So astonished was the samurai, he hardly knew what to think, for they did not reappear. He made sure they must be two kappas (mythical animals), and with this idea in his mind he ran to the castle and gave information.

[p. 271]

[paragraph continues] The high officials held a meeting, and arranged to have the moats dragged and cleaned; they felt that this should have been done when the young lord had succeeded his father.

The moats were dragged accordingly from end to end; but no kappa was found. They came to the conclusion that the samurai had been indulging in fancies, and he was chaffed in consequence.

Some few weeks later another samurai, Murata Ippai, was returning in the evening from visiting his sweetheart, and his road led along the outer moat. The lotus blossoms were luxuriant; and Ippai sauntered slowly on, admiring them and thinking of his lady-love, when suddenly he espied a dozen or more of the beautiful little boys playing near the water's edge. They had no clothing on, and were splashing one another with water.

'Ah!' reflected the samurai, 'these, surely, are the kappas, of which we were told before. Having taken the form of human beings, they think to deceive me! A samurai is not frightened by such as they, and they will find it difficult to escape the keen edge of my sword.'

Ippai cast off his clogs, and, drawing his sword, proceeded stealthily to approach the supposed kappas. He approached until he was within some twenty yards; then he remained hidden behind a bush, and stood for a minute to observe.

The children continued their play. They seemed to be perfectly natural children, except that they were all extremely beautiful, and from them was wafted a peculiar scent, almost powerful, but sweet, and resembling that of

[p. 272]

the lotus lily. Ippai was puzzled, and was almost inclined to sheathe his sword on seeing how innocent and unsuspecting the children looked; but he thought that he would not be acting up to the determination of a samurai if he changed his mind. Gripping his sword with renewed vigour, therefore, he dashed out from his hiding-place and slashed right and left among the supposed kappas.

Ippai was convinced . that he had done much slaughter, for he had felt his sword strike over and over again, and had heard the dull thuds of things falling; but when he looked about to see what he had killed there arose a peculiar vapour of all colours which almost blinded him by its brilliance. It fell in a watery spray all round him.

Ippai determined to wait until the morning, for he could not, as a samurai, leave such an adventure unfinished; nor, indeed, would he have liked to recount it to his friends unless he had seen the thing clean through.

It was a long and dreary wait; but Ippai was equal to it and never closed his eyes during the night.

When morning dawned he found nothing but the stalks of lotus lilies sticking up out of the water in his vicinity.

'But my sword struck more than lotus stalks,' thought he. 'If I have not killed the kappas which I saw myself in human form, they must have been the spirits of the lotus. What terrible sin have I committed? It was by the spirits of the lotus that our Lord of Koriyama and his family were saved from death! Alas, what have I done--I, a samurai, whose every drop of blood belongs to his master? I have drawn my sword on my master's most

[p. 273]

faithful friends! I must appease the spirits by disembowelling myself.'

Ippai said a prayer, and then, sitting on a stone by the side of the fallen lotus flowers, did harakiri.

The flowers continued to bloom; but after this no more lotus spirits were seen.

Footnotes

^268:1 Rakkan.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 274]

Click to enlarge
49. The Fishermen are Astonished at the Extraordinary Light

  

XLIII

  

THE TEMPLE OF THE AWABI

IN Noto Province there is a small fishing-village called Nanao. It is at the extreme northern end of the mainland. There is nothing opposite until one reaches either Korea or the Siberian coast--except the small rocky islands which are everywhere in Japan, surrounding as it were by an outer fringe the land proper of Japan itself.

Nanao contains not more than five hundred souls. Many years ago the place was devastated by an earthquake and a terrific storm, which between them destroyed nearly the whole village and killed half of the people.

On the morning after this terrible visitation, it was seen that the geographical situation had changed. Opposite Nanao, some two miles from the land, had arisen a rocky island about a mile in circumference. The sea was muddy and yellow. The people surviving were so overcome and awed that none ventured into a boat for nearly a month afterwards; indeed, most of the boats had been destroyed. Being Japanese, they took things philosophically. Every one helped some other, and within a month the village looked much as it had looked before; smaller, and less

[p. 275]

populated, perhaps, but managing itself unassisted by the outside world. Indeed, all the neighbouring villages had suffered much in the same way, and after the manner of ants had put things right again.

The fishermen of Nanao arranged that their first fishing expedition should be taken together, two days before the 'Bon.' They would first go and inspect the new island, and then continue out to sea for a few miles, to find if there were still as many tai fish on their favourite ground as there used to be.

It would be a day of intense interest, and the villages of some fifty miles of coast had all decided to make their ventures simultaneously, each village trying its own grounds, of course, but all starting at the same time, with a view of eventually reporting to each other the condition of things with regard to fish, for mutual assistance is a strong characteristic in the Japanese when trouble overcomes them.

At the appointed time two days before the festival the fishermen started from Nanao. There were thirteen boats. They visited first the new island, which proved to be simply a large rock. There were many rock fish, such as wrasse and sea-perch, about it; but beyond that there was nothing remarkable. It had not had time to gather many shell-fish on its surface, and there was but little edible seaweed as yet. So the thirteen boats went farther to sea, to discover what had occurred to their old and excellent tai grounds.

These were found to produce just about what they used to produce in the days before the earthquake; but the fishermen were not able to stay long enough to

[p. 276]

make a thorough test. They had meant to be away all night; but at dusk the sky gave every appearance of a storm: so they pulled up their anchors and made for home.

As they came close to the new island they were surprised to see, on one side of it, the water for the space of 240 feet square lit up with a strange light. The light seemed to come from the bottom of the sea, and in spite of the darkness the water was transparent. The fishermen, very much astonished, stopped to gaze down into the blue waters. They could see fish swimming about in thousands; but the depth was too great for them to see the bottom, and so they gave rein to all kinds of superstitious ideas as to the cause of the light, and talked from one boat to the other about it. A few minutes afterwards they had shipped their immense paddling oars and all was quiet. Then they heard rumbling noises at the bottom of the sea, and this filled them with consternation--they feared another eruption. The oars were put out again, and to say that they went fast would in no way convey an idea of the pace that the men made their boats travel over the two miles between the mainland and the island.

Their homes were reached well before the storm came on; but the storm lasted for fully two days, and the fishermen were unable to leave the shore.

As the sea calmed down and the villagers were looking out, on the third day cause for astonishment came. Shooting out of the sea near the island rock were rays that seemed to come from a sun in the bottom of the sea. All the village congregated on the beach to see this extraordinary spectacle, which was discussed far into the night.

[p. 277]

[paragraph continues] Not even the old priest could throw any light on the subject. Consequently, the fishermen became more and more scared, and few of them were ready to venture to sea next day; though it was the time for the magnificent sawara (king mackerel), only one boat left the shore, and that belonged to Master Kansuke, a fisherman of some fifty years of age, who, with his son Matakichi, a youth of eighteen and a most faithful son, was always to the fore when anything out of the common had to be done.

Kansuke had been the acknowledged bold fisherman of Nanao, the leader in all things since most could remember, and his faithful and devoted son had followed him from the age of twelve through many perils; so that no one was astonished to see their boat leave alone.

They went first to the tai grounds and fished there during the night, catching some thirty odd tai between them, the average weight of which would be four pounds. Towards break of day another storm showed on the horizon. Kansuke pulled up his anchor and started for home, hoping to take in a hobo line which he had dropped overboard near the rocky island on his way out--a line holding some two hundred hooks. They had reached the island and hauled in nearly the whole line when the rising sea caused Kansuke to lose his balance and fall overboard.

Usually the old man would soon have found it an easy matter to scramble back into the boat. On this occasion, however, his head did not appear above water; and so his son jumped in to rescue his father. He dived into water which almost dazzled him, for bright rays were

[p. 278]

shooting through it. He could see nothing of his father, but felt that he could not leave him. As the mysterious rays rising from the bottom might have something to do with the accident, he made up his mind to follow them: they must, he thought, be reflections from the eye of some monster.

It was a deep dive, and for many minutes Matakichi was under water. At last he reached the bottom, and here he found an enormous colony of the awabi (ear-shells). The space covered by them was fully 200 square feet, and in the middle of all was one of gigantic size, the like of which he had never heard of. From the holes at the top through which the feelers pass shot the bright rays which illuminated the sea,--rays which are said by the Japanese divers to show the presence of a pearl. The pearl in this shell, thought Matakichi, must be one of enormous size--as large as a baby's head. From all the awabi shells on the patch he could see that lights were coming, which denoted that they contained pearls; but wherever he looked Matakichi could see nothing of his father. He thought his father must have been drowned, and if so, that the best thing for him to do would be to regain the surface and repair to the village to report his father's death, and also his wonderful discovery, which would be of such value to the people of Nanao. Having after much difficulty reached the surface, he, to his dismay, found the boat broken by the sea, which was now high. Matakichi was lucky, however. He saw a bit of floating wreckage, which he seized; and as sea, wind, and current helped him, strong swimmer as he was, it was not more than half an hour before he was ashore, relating to the

[p. 279]

villagers the adventures of the day, his discoveries, and the loss of his dear father.

The fishermen could hardly credit the news that what they had taken to be supernatural lights were caused by ear-shells, for the much-valued ear-shell was extremely rare about their district; but Matakichi was a youth of such trustworthiness that even the most sceptical believed him in the end, and had it not been for the loss of Kansuke there would have been great rejoicing in the village that evening.

Having told the villagers the news, Matakichi repaired to the old priest's house at the end of the village, and told him also.

'And now that my beloved father is dead,' said he, 'I myself beg that you will make me one of your disciples, so that I may pray daily for my father's spirit.'

The old priest followed Matakichi's wish and said, 'Not only shall I be glad to have so brave and filial a youth as yourself as a disciple, but also I myself will pray with you for your father's spirit, and on the twenty-first day from his death we will take boats and pray over the spot at which he was drowned.'

Accordingly, on the morning of the twenty-first day after the drowning of poor Kansuke, his son and the priest were anchored over the place where he had been lost, and prayers for the spirit of the dead were said.

That same night the priest awoke at midnight; he felt ill at ease, and thought much of the spiritual affairs of his flock.

Suddenly he saw an old man standing near the head of his couch, who, bowing courteously, said:

[p. 280]

'I am the spirit of the great ear-shell lying on the bottom of the sea near Rocky Island. My age is over woo years. Some days ago a fisherman fell from his boat into the sea, and I killed and ate him. This morning I heard your reverence praying over the place where I lay, with the son of the man I ate. Your sacred prayers have taught me shame, and I sorrow for the thing I have done. By way of atonement I have ordered my followers to scatter themselves, while I have determined to kill myself, so that the pearls that are in my shell may be given to Matakichi, the son of the man I ate. All I ask is that you should pray for my spirit's welfare. Farewell!'

Saying which, the ghost of the ear-shell vanished. Early next morning, when Matakichi opened his shutters to dust the front of his door, he found thereat what he took at first to be a large rock covered with seaweed, and even with pink coral. On closer examination Matakichi found it to be the immense ear-shell which he had seen at the bottom of the sea off Rocky Island. He rushed off to the temple to tell the priest, who told Matakichi of his visitation during the night.

The shell and the body contained therein were carried to the temple with every respect and much ceremony. Prayers were said over it, and, though the shell and the immense pearl were kept in the temple, the body was buried in a tomb next to Kansuke's, with a monument erected over it, and another over Kansuke's grave. Matakichi changed his name to that of Nichige, and lived happily.

There have been no ear-shells seen near Nanao since,

[p. 281]

but on the rocky island is erected a shrine to the spirit of the ear-shell.

NOTE.--A 3000-yen pearl which I know of was sold for 12 cents by a fisherman from the west. It came from a temple, belongs now to Mikomoto, and is this size.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 282]

Click to enlarge
50. Jimpachi's Miserable Death

  

XLIV

  

HUMAN FIREFLIES

IN Funakami mura, Omi Province, lived an old farmer called Kanshiro. The like of him for honesty, charity, and piety had never been known--no, not even among the priesthood. Annually Kanshiro made pilgrimages to various parts of the country to say his prayers and do his duty towards the various deities, never thinking of his old age or of his infirmities. He was not strong, and suffered almost always from dysentery during the hot weather; consequently, he usually made his pilgrimages in cooler times.

In the eighth year of Kwansei, however, Kanshiro felt that he could not live another year, and, feeling that he should not like to miss making another pilgrimage to the great shrines at Ise, he resolved to take all risks and go in August, the hottest month.

The people in Funakami village subscribed one hundred yen for the venerable man, so that he might have the honour and credit of presenting a decent sum to the great shrines.

On a certain day, therefore, Kanshiro started alone,

[p. 283]

with the money hung in a bag about his neck. He had walked from sunrise to sunset for two days, when on the third in great heat he arrived at the village of Myojo, feeling nearly dead with weakness, for he had another attack of his old complaint.

Kanshiro felt that he could not continue his journey while this lasted, especially as he considered himself in an unclean condition, unfit to carry the holy money which had been entrusted to him by his friends in Funakami. He went, accordingly, to the cheapest inn he could find, and confided both his story and the hundred yen to the landlord, saying:

'Sir, I am an old man, sick with dysentery. If you will take care of me for a day or two I shall be better. Keep also until I am well this sacred money, for it would not do for me to defile it by carrying it with me while I am unwell.'

Jimpachi, the innkeeper, bowed, and gave every assurance that Kanshiro's wish should be followed.

'Fear nothing,' said he: 'I will place the money in its bag in a safe place, and myself attend upon you until you are well, for such good men as you are rare.'

For five days the poor old man was very sick indeed; but with his indomitable pluck he recovered, and on the sixth day decided to start again.

It was a fine day. Kanshiro paid his bill, thanked the landlord for his kindness, and was handed over his moneybag at the door. He did not look into the bag, because there were many coolies and pilgrims about. He did not wish these strangers to see that he carried much money. Instead of hanging it about his neck, as he had done

[p. 284]

before, he put the bag into his sack of clothing and food, and started off.

Towards midday Kanshiro stopped to rest and eat his cold rice under a pine tree. On examining his bag he found the hundred yen gone, and stones of the same weight placed in it instead. The poor man was greatly disconcerted. He did not even wait to eat his rice, but started back to the inn, which he reached at dusk. He explained as best he could the facts to Jimpachi, the innkeeper.

At first this worthy listened to the story with some sympathy; but when Kanshiro begged him to return the money he flew into a rage.

'You old rascal!' said he. 'A nice story you are telling to try and blackmail me! I'll give you a lesson that you will not forget.' And with that he struck the old man a severe blow on the chest, and then, seizing a stick, beat him unmercifully; the coolies joined in and thrashed him until he was nearly dead.

Poor old fellow! What could he do? Alone as he was, he crawled away half-dead; but he got to the sacred Ise shrines three days later, and after saying his prayers started back to Funakami. Here he arrived seriously ill. On telling his story, some believed him; but others did not. So overcome with grief was he, he sold his small property to refund the money, and with the rest he continued his pilgrimages to various temples and shrines. At last all his money was gone; but even then he continued his pilgrimages, begging food as he went.

Three years later he again visited Myojo village on his way to Ise, and here he learned that his enemy had since

[p. 285]

made a good deal of money, and now lived in quite a good house. Kanshiro went and found him, and said: 'Three years ago you stole the money entrusted to me. I sold my property to refund the people what they had given me to take to Ise. I have been a beggar and a wanderer ever since. Think not that I shall not be avenged. I shall be. You are young; I am old. Vengeance will overtake you soon.'

Jimpachi still protested innocence and began to get angry, saying:

'You disreputable old blackguard, if you want a meal of rice say so; but do not dare to threaten me.'

At this moment the watchman on his rounds took Kanshiro for a real beggar, and, seizing him by the arm, dragged him to the end of the village, and ordered him not to re-enter it, on pain of arrest; and there the poor old man died of anger and weakness.

The good priest of the neighbouring temple took the body, and buried it with respect, saying prayers.

Jimpachi in the meantime, afflicted with a guilty conscience, became sick, until after a few days he was unable to leave his bed. After he had lost all power of movement a curious thing occurred. Thousands and thousands of fireflies came out of Kanshiro's tomb and flew to the bedroom of Jimpachi. They surrounded his mosquito-curtain and tried to force their way in. The top of the curtain was pressed down with them; the air was foul with them; the glimmer dazzled the sick man's eyes. No rest was possible.

The villagers came in to try and kill them; but they could make no impression, for the string of flies from

[p. 286]

[paragraph continues] Kanshiro's tomb continued as fast as others were killed. The fireflies went nowhere else than to Jimpachi's room, and there they only surrounded his bed.

One or two villagers, seeing this, said:

'It must be true that Jimpachi stole the money from the old man, and that this is his spirit's revenge.'

Then every one feared to kill the flies. Thicker and thicker they grew until they did at last make a hole in the mosquito-net, and then they settled all over Jimpachi. They got in his mouth, his nose, his ears, and his eyes. He kicked and screamed and lived thus in agony for twenty days, and after his death the flies disappeared completely.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 287]

Click to enlarge
51. Kikuo Prays at the Grave of his Feudal Lord

  

XLV

  

THE CHRYSANTHEMUM HERMIT

MANY years ago there lived at the foot of the Mountains of Nambu, in Adachi gun, Saitama Prefecture, an old man named Kikuo, which means Chrysanthemum-Old-Man.

Kikuo was a faithful retainer of Tsugaru; he was then called Sawada Hayato. Kikuo was a man of great bodily strength and fine appearance, and had much to do with the efficiency of the small fighting force which protected the feudal lord, the castle, and the estates.

Nevertheless, an evil day came. The feudal lord's small force was overthrown; the estates and castle were lost. The lord and his faithful retainer, with the few survivors, escaped to the mountains, where they continued to think that a day might come when they would be able to have their revenge.

During the enforced idleness Kikuo, knowing his lord's love of flowers (especially of the chrysanthemum), made his mind up to devote all his spare time to making chrysanthemum beds. This, he thought, would lessen the pain of defeat and exile.

[p. 288]

The feudal lord was greatly pleased; but his cares and anxieties were not abated. He sickened and died in great poverty, much to the sorrow of Kikuo and the rest of his followers. Kikuo wept night and day over the humble and lonely grave; but he busied himself again to please the spirit of his lord by planting chrysanthemums round the tomb and tending them daily. By and by the border of flowers was thirty yards broad--to the wonder of all who saw. It was because of this that Hayato got the name of Chrysanthemum-Old-Man.

The chrysanthemum is in China a holy flower. Ancient history tells of a man called Hoso (great grandson of the Emperor Juikai) who lived to the age of 800 years without showing the slightest sign of decay. This was attributed to his drinking the dew of the chrysanthemum. Besides his devotion to flowers, Kikuo delighted in children; from the village he called them to his poor hut, and as there was no schoolmaster he taught them to write, to read, and jujitsu. The children loved him, and the good villagers revered him as if he were a kind of god.

In about his eighty-second year Kikuo caught cold, and the fever which came with it gave him great pain.

During the daytime his pupils attended to his wants; but at night the old man was alone in his cottage.

One autumn night he awoke and found standing about his veranda some beautiful children. They did not look quite like any children he knew. They were too beautiful and noble-looking to belong to the poor of the village.

'Kikuo Sama,' cried two of them, 'do not fear us,

[p. 289]

though we are not real children. We are the spirits of the chrysanthemum which you love so much, and of which you have taken such care. We have come to tell you how sorry we are to see you so ill, although we have heard that in China there once lived a man called Hoso who lived for 800 years by drinking the dew which falls from the flowers. We have tried all we can to prolong your life; but we find that the Heavens do not allow that you should live to a much greater age than you have already reached. In thirty more days you will die. Make ready, therefore, to depart.'

Saying this, they all wept bitterly.

'Good-bye, then,' said Kikuo. 'I have no further hopes of living. Let my death be easy. In the next world I may be able to serve my old lord and master. The only thing that makes me sad to leave this world is you: I must for ever regret to leave my chrysanthemums!' Saying this, he smiled at them in affection.

'You have been very kind to us,' said the Kiku spirits, 'and we love you for it. Man rejoices at birth, and feels sad at death; yet now you shed no tears. You say you do not mind dying except for leaving us. If you die we shall not survive, for it would be useless misery. Believe us when we say that we shall die with you.'

As the spirits of the chrysanthemums finished speaking a puff of wind came about the house, and they disappeared. As the day dawned the old man grew worse, and, strange to say, all the chrysanthemums began to fade--even those which were just beginning to bloom;--the leaves crumpled up and dried.

As the spirits had foretold, at the end of the thirtieth

[p. 290]

day the old man died. The Kiku flowers died then. Not one was left in the whole district. The villagers could not account for it. They buried the old man near his lord, and, thinking to honour and please him, planted, time after time, chrysanthemums near his grave; but all faded and died as soon as they were planted.

The two little graves were at last given up, and they remain in their solitude, with wild grasses only growing about them.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 291]

Click to enlarge
52. 'Aya Hime,' or Princess Aya, is Saved in her Fall by the 'Botan Spirit,' Peony Spirit

  

XLVI

  

THE PRINCESS PEONY

MANY years ago at Gamogun, in the province of Omi, was a castle called Adzuchi-no-shiro. It was a magnificent old place, surrounded by walls and a moat filled with lotus lilies. The feudal lord was a very brave and wealthy man, Yuki Naizen-no-jo. His wife had been dead for some years. He had no son; but he had a beautiful daughter aged eighteen, who (for some reason which is not quite clear to me) was given the title of Princess. For a considerable period there had been peace and quiet in the land; the feudal lords were on the best of terms, and every one was happy. Amid these circumstances Lord Naizen-no-jo perceived that there was a good opportunity to find a husband for his daughter Princess Aya; and after a time the second son of the Lord of Ako, of Harima Province, was selected, to the satisfaction of both fathers, the affair having little to do with the principals. Lord Ako's second son had viewed his bride with approval, and she him. One may say that young people are bound to approve each other when

[p. 292]

it is the parents' wish that they be united. Many suicides result from this.

Princess Aya made her mind up to try and love her prospective husband. She saw nothing of him; but she thought of him, and talked of him.

One evening when Princess Aya was walking in the magnificent gardens by the moonlight, accompanied by her maids-in-waiting, she wandered down through her favourite peony bed to the pond where she loved to gaze at her reflection on the nights of the full moon, to listen to frogs, and to watch the fireflies.

When nearing the pond her foot slipped, and she would have fallen into the water had it not been that a young man appeared as if by magic and caught her. He disappeared as soon as he had put her on her feet again. The maids-of-honour saw her slip; they saw a glimmer of light, and that was all; but Princess Aya had seen more. She had seen the handsomest young man she could imagine. 'Twenty-one years old,' she said to O Sadayo San, her favourite maid, 'he must have been--a samurai of the highest order. His dress was covered with my favourite peonies, and his swords were richly mounted. Oh that I could have seen him a minute longer, to thank him for saving me from the water! Who can he be? And how could he have got into our gardens, through all the guards?'

So spoke the Princess to her maids, directing them at the same time that they were to say a word to no one, for fear that her father should hear, find the young man, and behead him for trespass.

After this evening Princess Aya fell sick. She could

[p. 293]

not eat or sleep, and turned pale. The day for her marriage with the young Lord of Ako came and went without the event; she was far too sick for that. The best of the doctors had been sent from Kyoto, which was then the capital; but none of them had been able to do anything, and the maid grew thinner and thinner. As a last resource, the Lord Naizen-no-jo, her father, sent for her most confidential maid and friend, O Sadayo, and demanded if she could give any reason for his daughter's mysterious sickness. Had she a secret lover? Had she a particular dislike for her betrothed?

'Sir,' said O Sadayo, 'I do not like to tell secrets; but here it seems my duty to your lordship's daughter as well as to your lordship. Some three weeks ago, when the moon was at its full, we were walking in the peony beds down near the pond where the Princess loves to be. She stumbled and nearly fell into the water, when a strange thing happened. In an instant a most beautiful young samurai appeared and held her up, thus preventing her from falling into the pond. We could all see the glimmer of him; but your daughter and I saw him most distinctly. Before your daughter could thank him he had disappeared. None of us could understand how it was possible for a man to get into the gardens of the Princess, for the gates of the castle are guarded on all sides, and the Princess's garden is so much better guarded than the rest that it seems truly incredible that a man could get in. We maids were asked to say nothing for fear of your lordship's anger. Since that evening it is that our beloved Princess Aya has been sick, sir. It is sickness of the heart. She is deeply in love with the young samurai she saw for

[p. 294]

so brief a space. Indeed, my lord, there never was such a handsome man in the world before, and if we cannot find him the young Princess, I fear, will die.'

'How is it possible for a man to get into the grounds?' said Lord Yuki Naizen-no-jo. 'People say foxes and badgers assume the figures of men sometimes; but even so it is impossible for such supernatural beings to enter my castle grounds, guarded as it is at every opening.'

That evening the poor Princess was more wearily unhappy than ever before. Thinking to enliven her a little, the maids sent for a celebrated player on the biwa, called Yashaskita Kengyo. The weather being hot, they were sitting on the gallery (engawa); and while the musician was playing 'Dannoura' there appeared suddenly from behind the peonies the same handsome young samurai. He was visible to all this time--even to the peonies embroidered on his dress.

'There he is! there he is!' they cried; at which he instantly disappeared again. The Princess was highly excited, and seemed more lively than she had been for days; the old Daimio grew more puzzled than ever when he heard of it.

Next night, while two of the maids were playing for their mistress--O Yae San the flute, and O Yakumo the koto--the figure of the young man appeared again. A thorough search having been made during the day in the immense peony beds with absolutely no result, not even the sign of a footmark, the thing was increasingly strange.

A consultation was held, and it was decided by the lord of the castle to invite a veteran officer of great strength and renown, Maki Hiogo, to capture the youth

[p. 295]

should he appear that evening. Maki Hiogo readily consented, and at the appointed time, dressed in black and consequently invisible, concealed himself among the peonies.

Music seemed to have a fascination for the young samurai. It was while music was being played that he had made his appearances. Consequently, O Yae and O Yakumo resumed their concert, while all gazed eagerly towards the peony beds. As the ladies played a piece called 'Sofuren,' there, sure enough, arose the figure of a young samurai, dressed magnificently in clothes which were covered with embroidered peonies. Every one gazed at him, and wondered why Maki Hiogo did not jump up and catch him. The fact was that Maki Hiogo was so much astonished by the noble bearing of the youth that at first he did not like to touch him. Recovering himself, and thinking of his duty to his lord, he stealthily approached the young man, and, seizing him round the waist, held him tight. After a few seconds Maki Hiogo felt a kind of wet steam falling on his face; by degrees it made him faint; and he fell to the ground, still grasping the young samurai, for he had made up his mind that he would secure him.

Every one had seen the scuffle, and some of the guards came hurrying to the place. Just as they reached the spot Maki Hiogo came to his senses, and shouted

'Come, gentlemen! I have caught him. Come and see!' But on looking at what he held in his arms he discovered it to be only a large peony!

By this time the Lord Naizen-no-jo had arrived at the spot where Maki Hiogo lay, and so had the Princess Aya

[p. 296]

and her maids. All were astounded and mystified except the Daimio himself, who said:

'Ah! it is as I said. No fox or badger spirit could pass our guards and get into this garden. It is the spirit of the peony flower that took the form of a prince.' Turning to his daughter and her maids, he said: 'You must take this as a compliment, and pay great respect to the peony, and show the one caught by Maki Hiogo kindness as well by taking care of it.'

The Princess Aya carried the flower back to her room, where she put it in a vase of water and placed it near her pillow. She felt as if she had her sweetheart with her. Day by day she got better. She tended the peony herself, and, strange to say, the flower seemed to get stronger and stronger, instead of fading. At last the Princess recovered. She became radiantly beautiful, while the peony continued to remain in perfect bloom, showing no sign of dying.

The Princess Aya being now perfectly well, her father could no longer put off the wedding. Consequently, some days later, the Lord of Ako and his family arrived at the Castle, and his second son was married to the Princess.

As soon as the wedding was over the peony was found still in its vase--but dead and withered. The villagers always after this, instead of speaking of the Princess Aya, or Aya Hime, called her Botan Hime or Peony Princess.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 297]

Click to enlarge
53. The Girl brings the Kakemono to Kihachi's Shop in the Middle of the Night

  

XLVII

  

THE MEMORIAL CHERRY TREE [*1]

IN the compound or enclosure of the temple called Bukoji, at Takatsuji (high cross street), formerly called Yabugashita, which means 'under the bush,' in Kyoto, a curio-dealer had his little shop. His name was Kihachi.

Kihachi had not much to sell; but what little he had was usually good. Consequently, his was a place that the better people looked into when they came to pray--to see, if not to buy;--for they knew full well if there was a good thing to be bought, Kihachi bought it. It was a small and ancient kind of Christie's, in fact, except that things were not sold by auction. One day, the day on which this story starts, Kihachi was sitting in his shop ready either to gossip or to sell, when in walked a young knight or court noble--'Kuge,' the Japanese called him in those days; and very different was such an one from a knight of a feudal lord or of a Daimio, who was usually a blusterer. This particular knight had been to the temple to pray.

[p. 298]

'You have many pretty and interesting things here,' said he. 'May I come in and look at them until this shower of rain has passed? My name is Sakata, and I belong to the court.'

'Come in, come in,' said Kihachi, 'by all means. Some of my things are pretty, and all are undoubtedly good; but the gentry part with little at present. One wants to live two lives of a hundred years each in my trade--one hundred of distress, revolution, and trouble, wherein one may collect the things cheap; and the next hundred of peace, wherein one may sell them and enjoy the proceeds. My business is rotten and unprofitable; yet, in spite of that, I love the things I buy, and often look at them long before I put them up for sale. Where, sir, are you bound for? I see that you are going to travel--by the clothes you wear and carry.'

'That's true,' answered Sakata: 'you are very shrewd. I am going to travel as far as Toba, in Yamato, to see my dearest friend, who has been taken suddenly and mysteriously ill. It is feared he may not live until I get there!'

'At Toba!' answered the old curio-dealer. 'Pardon me if I ask the name of your friend?'

'Certainly,' said Sakata. 'My friend's name is Matsui.'

'Then,' said the curio-dealer, 'he is the gentleman who is said to have killed the ghost or spirit of the old cherry tree near Toba, growing in the grounds of the temple in which he lives at present with the priests. The people say that this cherry tree is so old that the spirit left it. It appeared in the form of a beautiful woman, and Matsui, either fearing or not liking it,

[p. 299]

killed it, with the result, they say, that from that very evening, which was about ten days ago, your friend Matsui has been sick; and I may add that when the spirit was killed the tree withered and died.'

Sakata, thanking Kihachi for this information, went on his way, and eventually found his friend Matsui being carefully nursed by the priest of the Shonen Temple, Toba, with whom he was closely connected.

Soon after the young knight had left the old curio-dealer Kihachi in his shop it began to snow, and so it continued, and appeared likely to continue for some time. Kihachi, therefore, put up his shutters and retired to bed, as is often very sensibly done in Japan; and he no doubt retired with many old wood-carvings to rub and give an ancient appearance to during the period of darkness.

Not very late in the evening there was a knock at the shutters. Kihachi, not wishing to get out of his warm bed, shouted: 'Who are you? Come back in the morning. I do not feel well enough to get up to-night.'

'But you must--you must get up! I am sent to sell you a good kakemono,' [*1] called the voice of a young girl, so sweetly and entreatingly that the old curio-dealer got up, and after much fumbling with his numbed fingers opened the door.

Snow had fallen thickly; but now it was clear moonlight, and Kihachi saw standing before him a beautiful girl of fifteen, barefooted, and holding in her hands a kakemono half-unfolded.

'See,' said she, 'I have been sent to sell you this!' She was the daughter of Matsui of Toba, she said.

[p. 300]

The old man called her in, and saw that the picture was that of a beautiful woman, standing up. It was well done, and the old man took a fancy to it.

'I will give you one rio for it,' said he; and to his astonishment the young girl accepted his offer eagerly--so much so that he thought that perhaps she had stolen it. Being a curio-dealer, he said nothing on that point, but paid her the money. She ran away with haste.

'Yes: she has stolen it--stolen it, undoubtedly,' muttered the old man. 'But what am I supposed to know about that? The kakemono is worth fully 50 rio if it is worth a cent, and not often do such chances come to me.'

So delighted was Kihachi with his purchase, he lit his lamp, hung the picture in his kakemono corner, arid sat watching it. It was indeed a beautiful woman well painted, and worth more even than the so rio he at first thought. But, by all the saints, it seems to change! Yes: it is no longer a beautiful woman. The face has changed to that of a fearful and horrible figure. The face of the woman has become haggard. It is covered with blood. The eyes open and shut, and the mouth gasps. Kihachi feels blood dropping on his head; it comes from a wound in the woman's shoulder. To shut out so horrid a sight, he put his head under the bed-clothes and remained thus, sleeplessly, until dawn.

When he opened his eyes, the kakemono was the same as when he had bought it: a beautiful woman. He supposed that his delight in having made a good bargain must have made him dream so he thought nothing more about the horror.

Kihachi, however, was mistaken. The kakemono again

[p. 301]

kept him awake all night, showing the same bloody face, and occasionally even shrieking. Kihachi got no sleep, and perceived that instead of a cheap bargain he had got a very expensive one; for he felt that he must go to Toba and return it to Matsui, and he knew that he could claim no expenses.

After fully two days of travel, Kihachi reached the Shonen Temple, near Toba, where he asked to see Matsui. He was ushered ceremoniously into his room. The invalid was better; but on being handed the kakemono with the figure of a lady painted on it he turned pale, tore it to fragments, and threw it into the temple fire ('irori' [*1]); after which he jumped in with his daughter himself, and both were burned to death.

Kihachi was sick for many days after this sight. The story soon spread over the whole surrounding country.

Prince Nijo, Governor of Kyoto, had a thorough inquiry made into the circumstances of the case; and it was found beyond doubt that the trouble to Matsui and his family came through his having killed the spirit of the old cherry tree. The spirit, to punish him and show that there was invisible life in old and dead things and often of the best, appeared to Matsui as a beautiful woman being killed; the spirit went into his beautiful picture and haunted him.

Prince Nijo had a fine young cherry tree planted on the spot of the old to commemorate the event, and it is called the 'Memorial Cherry Tree' to this day.

Footnotes

^297:1 This story begins on the 57th of February in the second year of Kenkyu. As the first year of Kenkyu was in 1190 and the last in 1599, the precise date is February 17, 1192.

^299:1 Picture.

^301:1 The story says 'furnace'; but, unless cremation went on in those days, it must have been the 'irori' (open floor fire) or else (if a Shinto temple) an open-air bonfire, which is lit on certain days.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 302]

Click to enlarge
54. Jirohei Clings to the Cherry Tree Even in Death

  

XLVIII

  

THE 'JIROHEI' CHERRY TREE, KYOTO

THE Japanese say that ghosts in inanimate nature generally have more liveliness than ghosts of the dead. There is an old proverb which says something to the effect that 'the ghosts of trees love not the willow'; by which, I suppose, is meant that they do not assimilate. In Japanese pictures of ghosts there is nearly always a willow tree. Whether Hokusai, the ancient painter, or Okyo Maruyama, a famous painter of Kyoto of more recent date, was responsible for the pictures with ghosts and willow trees, I do not know; but certainly Maruyama painted many ghosts under willow trees--the first from his wife, who lay sick.

Exactly what this has to do with the following story I cannot see; but my story-teller began with it.

In the northern part of Kyoto is a Shinto temple called Hirano. It is celebrated for the fine cherry trees that grow there. Among them is an old dead tree which is called 'Jirohei,' and is much cared for; but the story attached to it is little known, and has not been told, I believe, to a European before.

[p. 303]

During the cherry blossom season many people go to view the trees, especially at night.

Close to the Jirohei cherry tree, many years ago, was a large and prosperous tea-house, once owned by Jirohei, who had started in quite a small way. So rapidly did he make money, he attributed his success to the virtue of the old cherry tree, which he accordingly venerated. Jirohei paid the greatest respect to the tree, attending to its wants. He prevented boys from climbing it and breaking its branches. The tree prospered, and so did he.

One morning a samurai (of the blood-and-thunder kind) walked up to the Hirano Temple, and sat down at Jirohei's tea-house, to take a long look at the cherry blossom. He was a powerful, dark-skinned, evil-faced man about five feet eight in height.

'Are you the landlord of this tea-house?' asked he.

'Yes, sir,' Jirohei answered meekly: 'I am. What can I bring you, sir?'

'Nothing: I thank you,' said the samurai. 'What a fine tree you have here opposite your tea-house!'

'Yes, sir: it is to the fineness of the tree that I owe my prosperity. Thank you, sir, for expressing your appreciation of it.'

'I want a branch off the tree,' quoth the samurai, 'for a geisha.'

'Deeply as I regret it, I am obliged to refuse your request. I must refuse everybody. The temple priests gave orders to this effect before they let me erect this place. No matter who it may be that asks, I must refuse. Flowers may not even be picked off the tree, though they may be gathered when they fall. Please, sir, remember

[p. 304]

that there is an old proverb which tells us to cut the plum tree for our vases, but not the cherry!'

'You seem to be an unpleasantly argumentative person for your station in life,' said the samurai. 'When I say that I want a thing I mean to have it: so you had better go and cut it.'

'However much you may be determined, I must refuse,' said Jirohei, quietly and politely.

'And, however much you may refuse, the more determined am I to have it. I as a samurai said I should have it. Do you think that you can turn me from my purpose? If you have not the politeness to get it, I will take it by force.' Suiting his action to his words, the samurai drew a sword about three feet long, and was about to cut off the best branch of all. Jirohei clung to the sleeve of his sword arm, crying:

'I have asked you to leave the tree alone; but you would not. Please take my life instead.'

'You are an insolent and annoying fool: I gladly follow your request'; and saying this the samurai stabbed Jirohei slightly, to make him let go the sleeve. Jirohei did let go; but he ran to the tree, where in a further struggle over the branch, which was cut in spite of Jirohei's defence, he was stabbed again, this time fatally. The samurai, seeing that the man must die, got away as quickly as possible, leaving the cut branch in full bloom on the ground.

Hearing the noise, the servants came out of the house, followed by Jirohei's poor old wife.

It was seen that Jirohei himself was dead; but he clung to the tree as firmly as in life, and it was fully an hour before they were able to get him away.

[p. 305]

From this time things went badly with the tea-house. Very few people came, and such as did come were poor and spent but little money. Besides, from the day of the murder of Jirohei the tree had begun to fade and die; in less than a year it was absolutely dead. The tea-house had to be closed for want of funds to keep it open. The old wife of Jirohei had hanged herself on the dead tree a few days after her husband had been killed.

People said that ghosts had been seen about the tree, and were afraid to go there at night. Even neighbouring tea-houses suffered, and so did the temple, which for a time became unpopular.

The samurai who had been the cause of all this kept his secret, telling no one but his own father what he had done; and he expressed to his father his intention of going to the temple to verify the statements about the ghosts. Thus on the third day of March in the third year of Keio (that is, forty-two years ago) he started one night alone and well armed, in spite of his father's attempts to stop him. He went straight to the old dead tree, and hid himself behind a stone lantern.

To his astonishment, at midnight the dead tree suddenly came out into full bloom, and looked just as it had been when he cut the branch and killed Jirohei.

On seeing this he fiercely attacked the tree with his keen-edged sword. He attacked it with mad fury, cutting and slashing; and he heard a fearful scream which seemed to him to come from inside the tree.

After half an hour he became exhausted, but resolved to wait until daybreak, to see what damage he had wrought. When day dawned, the samurai found his father lying on

[p. 306]

the ground, hacked to pieces, and of course dead. Doubtless the father had followed to try and see that no harm came to the son.

The samurai was stricken with grief and shame. Nothing was left but to go and pray to the gods for forgiveness, and to offer his life to them, which he did by disembowelling himself.

From that day the ghost appeared no more, and people came as before to view the cherry-bloom by night as well as by day; so they do even now. No one has ever been able to say whether the ghost which appeared was the ghost of Jirohei, or that of his wife, or that of the cherry tree which had died when its limb had been severed.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 307]

Click to enlarge
55. Kyuzaemon Sees the 'Yuki Onna.'

  

XLIX

  

THE SNOW GHOST

PERHAPS there are not many, even in Japan, who have heard of the 'Yuki Onna' (Snow Ghost). It is little spoken of except in the higher mountains, which are continually snowclad in the winter. Those who have read Lafcadio Hearn's books will remember a story of the Yuki Onna, made much of on account of its beautiful telling, but in reality not better than the following.

Up in the northern province of Echigo, opposite Sado Island on the Japan Sea, snow falls heavily. Sometimes there is as much as twenty feet of it on the ground, and many are the people who have been buried in the snows and never found until the spring. Not many years ago three companies of soldiers, with the exception of three or four men, were destroyed in Aowomori; and it was many weeks before they were dug out, dead of course.

Mysterious disappearances naturally give rise to fancies in a fanciful people, and from time immemorial the Snow Ghost has been one with the people of the North; while those of the South say that those of the North take so much sake that they see snow-covered trees as women.

[p. 308]

[paragraph continues] Be that as it may, I must explain what a farmer called Kyuzaemon saw.

In the village of Hoi, which consisted only of eleven houses, very poor ones at that, lived Kyuzaemon. He was poor, and doubly unfortunate in having lost both his son and his wife. He led a lonely life.

In the afternoon of the 19th of January of the third year of Tem-po--that is, 1833--a tremendous snowstorm came on. Kyuzaemon closed the shutters, and made himself as comfortable as he could. Towards eleven o'clock at night he was awakened by a rapping at his door; it was a peculiar rap, and came at regular intervals. Kyuzaemon sat up in bed, looked towards the door, and did not know what to think of this. The rapping came again, and with it the gentle voice of a girl. Thinking that it might be one of his neighbour's children wanting help, Kyuzaemon jumped out of bed; but when he got to the door he feared to open it. Voice and rapping coming again just as he reached it, he sprang back with a cry: 'Who are you? What do you want?'

'Open the door! Open the door!' came the voice from outside.

'Open the door! Is that likely until I know who you are and what you are doing out so late and on such a night?'

'But you must let me in. How can I proceed farther in this deep snow? I do not ask for food, but only for shelter.'

'I am very sorry; but I have no quilts or bedding. I can't possibly let you stay in my house.'

'I don't want quilts or bedding,--only shelter,' pleaded the voice.

[p. 309]

'I can't let you in, anyway,' shouted Kyuzaemon. 'It is too late and against the rules and the law.'

Saying which, Kyuzaemon rebarred his door with a strong piece of wood, never once having ventured to open a crack in the shutters to see who his visitor might be. As he turned towards his bed, with a shudder he beheld the figure of a woman standing beside it, clad in white, with her hair down her back. She had not the appearance of a ghost; her face was pretty, and she seemed to be about twenty-five years of age. Kyuzaemon, taken by surprise and very much alarmed, called out:

'Who and what are you, and how did you get in? Where did you leave your geta.' [*1]

'I can come in anywhere when I choose,' said the figure, 'and I am the woman you would not let in. I require no clogs; for I whirl along over the snow, sometimes even flying through the air. I am on my way to visit the next village; but the wind is against me. That is why I wanted you to let me rest here. If you will do so I shall start as soon as the wind goes down; in any case I shall be gone by the morning.'

'I should not so much mind letting you rest if you were an ordinary woman. I should, in fact, be glad; but I fear spirits greatly, as my forefathers have done,' said Kyuzaemon.

'Be not afraid. You have a butsudan?' [*2] said the figure.

'Yes: I have a butsudan,' said Kyuzaemon; 'but what can you want to do with that?'

[p. 310]

'You say you are afraid of the spirits, of the effect that I may have upon you. I wish to pay my respects to your ancestors' tablets and assure their spirits that no ill shall befall you through me. Will you open and light the butsudan?'

'Yes,' said Kyuzaemon, with fear and trembling: 'I will open the butsudan, and light the lamp. Please pray for me as well, for I am an unfortunate and unlucky man; but you must tell me in return who and what spirit you are.'

'You want to know much; but I will tell you,' said the spirit. 'I believe you are a good man. My name was Oyasu. I am the daughter of Yazaemon, who lives in the next village. My father, as perhaps you may have heard, is a farmer, and he adopted into his family, and as a husband for his daughter, Isaburo. Isaburo is a good man; but on the death of his wife, last year, he forsook his father-in--law and went back to his old home. It is principally for that reason that I am about to seek and remonstrate with him now.'

'Am I to understand,' said Kyuzaemon, 'that the daughter who was married to Isaburo was the one who perished in the snow last year? If so, you must be the spirit of Oyasu or Isaburo's wife?'

'Yes: that is right,' said the spirit. 'I was Oyasu, the wife of Isaburo, who perished now a year ago in the great snowstorm, of which to-morrow will be the anniversary.'

Kyuzaemon, with trembling hands, lit the lamp in the little butsudan, mumbling 'Namu Amida Butsu; Namu Amida Butsu' with a fervour which he had never felt before. When this was done he saw the figure of the

[p. 311]

[paragraph continues] Yuki Onna (Snow Spirit) advance; but there was no sound of footsteps as she glided to the altar.

Kyuzaemon retired to bed, where he promptly fell asleep; but shortly afterwards he was disturbed by the voice of the woman bidding him farewell. Before he had time to sit up she disappeared, leaving no sign; the fire still burned in the butsudan.

Kyuzaemon got up at daybreak, and went to the next village to see Isaburo, whom he found living with his father-in-law, Yazaemon.

'Yes,' said Isaburo: 'it was wrong of me to leave my late wife's father when she died, and I am not surprised that on cold nights when it snows I have been visited continually by my wife's spirit as a reproof. Early this morning I saw her again, and I resolved to return. I have only been here two hours as it is.'

On comparing notes Kyuzaemon and Isaburo found that directly the spirit of Oyasu had left the house of Kyuzaemon she appeared to Isaburo, at about half-an-hour after midnight, and stayed with him until he had promised to return to her father's house and help him to live in his old age.

That is roughly my story of the Yuki Onna. All those who die by the snow and cold become spirits of snow, appearing when there is snow; just as the spirits of those who are drowned in the sea only appear in stormy seas.

Even to the present day, in the north, priests say prayers to appease the spirits of those who have died by snow, and to prevent them from haunting people who are connected with them.

Footnotes

^309:1 Clogs.

^309:2 Family altar, in which the figures of various gods are set, and also the family mortuary tablets.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 312]

Click to enlarge
56. Rokugo Sees a Ghostly Spirit

  

L

  

THE SNOW TOMB [*1]

MANY years ago there lived a young man of the samurai class who was much famed for his skill in fencing in what was called the style of Yagyu. So adept was he, he earned by teaching, under his master, no less than thirty barrels of rice and two 'rations'--which, I am told, vary from one to five sho--a month. As one sho is .666 feet square, our young samurai, Rokugo Yakeiji, was well off.

The seat of his success was at Minami-wari-gesui, Hongo Yedo. His teacher was Sudo Jirozaemon, and the school was at Ishiwaraku.

Rokugo was in no way proud of his skill. It was the modesty of the youth, coupled with cleverness, that had prompted the teacher to make his pupil an assistant-master. The school was one of the best in Tokio, and there were over 10o pupils.

One January the pupils were assembled to celebrate the New Year, and on this the seventh day of it were

[p. 313]

drinking nanakusa--a kind of sloppy rice in which seven grasses and green vegetables are mixed, said to keep off all diseases for the year. The pupils were engaged in ghost stories, each trying to tell a more alarming one than his neighbour, until the hair of many was practically on end, and it was late in the evening. It was the custom to keep the 7th of January in this way, and they took their turns by drawing numbers. One hundred candles were placed in a shed at the end of the garden, and each teller of a story took his turn at bringing one away, until they had all told a story; this was to upset, if possible, the bragging of the pupil who said he did not believe in ghosts and feared nothing.

At last it came to the turn of Rokugo. After fetching his candle from the end of the garden, he spoke as follows:

'My friends, listen to my story. It is not very dreadful; but it is true. Some three years ago, when I was seventeen, my father sent me to Gifu, in Mino Province. I reached on the way a place called Nakimura about ten o'clock in the evening. Outside the village, on some wild uncultivated land, I saw a curious fireball. It moved here and there without noise, came quite close to me and then went away again, moving generally as if looking for something; it went round and round over the same ground time after time. It was generally five feet off the ground; but sometimes it went lower. I will not say that I was frightened, because subsequently I went to the Miyoshiya inn, and to bed, without mentioning what I had seen to any one; but I can assure you all that I was very glad to be in the house. Next morning

[p. 314]

my curiosity got the better of me. I told the landlord what I had seen, and he recounted to me a story. He said: "About 200 years ago a great battle was fought here, and the general who was defeated was himself killed. When his body was recovered, early in the action, it was found to be headless. The soldiers thought that the head must have been stolen by the enemy. One, more anxious than the rest to find his master's head, continued to search while the action went on. While searching he himself was killed. Since that evening, 200 years ago, the fireball has been burning after ten o'clock. The people from that time till now have called it Kubi sagashi no hi." [*1] As the master of the inn finished relating this story, my friends, I felt an unpleasant sensation in the heart. It was the first thing of a ghostly kind that I had seen.'

The pupils agreed that the story was strange. Rokugo pushed his toes into his 'geta' (clogs), and started to fetch his candle from the end of the garden. He had not proceeded far into the garden before he heard the voice of a woman. It was not very dark, as there was snow on the ground; but Rokugo could see no woman. He had got as far as the candles when he heard the voice again, and, turning suddenly, saw a beautiful woman of some eighteen summers. Her clothes were fine. The obi (belt) was tied in the tateyanojiri (shape of the arrow standing erect, as an arrow in a quiver). The dress was all of the pine-and-bamboo pattern, and her hair was done in the shimada style. Rokugo stood looking at her with wonder and admiration. A minute's reflection

[p. 315]

showed him that it could be no girl, and that her beauty had almost made him forget that he was a samurai.

'No: it is no real woman: it is a ghost. What an opportunity for me to distinguish myself before all my friends!'

Saying which, he drew his sword, tempered by the famous Moriye Shinkai, and with one downward cut severed head, body, and all, into halves.

He ran, seized a candle, and took it back to the room where the pupils were awaiting him; there he told the story, and begged them to come and see the ghost. All the young men looked at one another, none of them being partial to ghosts in what you may call real life. None cared to venture; but by and by Yamamoto Jonosuke, with better courage than the rest, said, 'I will go,' and dashed off. As soon as the other pupils saw this, they also, gathering pluck, went forth into the garden.

When they came to the spot where the dead ghost was supposed to lie, they found only the remains of a snow man which they themselves had made during the day; and this was cut in half from head to foot, just as Rokugo had described. They all laughed. Several of the young samurai were angry, for they thought that Rokugo had been making fools of them; but when they returned to the house they soon saw that Rokugo had not been trifling. They found him sitting with an air of great haughtiness, and thinking that his pupils would now indeed see how able a swordsman he was.

However, they looked at Rokugo scornfully, and addressed him thus:

[p. 316]

'Indeed, we have received remarkable evidence of your ability. Even the small boy who throws a stone at a dog would have had the courage to do what you did!'

Rokugo became angry, and called them insolent. He lost his temper to such an extent that for a moment his hand flew to his sword hilt, and he even threatened to kill one or two of them.

The samurai apologised for their rudeness, but added: 'Your ghost was only the snow man we made ourselves this morning. That is why we tell you that a child need not fear to attack it.'

At this information Rokugo was confounded, and he in his turn apologised for his temper; nevertheless, he said he could not understand how it was possible for him to mistake a snow man for a female ghost. Puzzled and ashamed, he begged his friends not to say any more about the matter, but keep it to themselves; thereupon he bade them farewell and left the house.

It was no longer snowing; but the snow lay thick upon the ground. Rokugo had had a good deal of sake, and his gait was not over-steady as he made his way home to Warigesui.

When he passed near the gates of the Korinji Temple he noticed a woman coming faster than he could understand through the temple grounds. He leaned against the fence to watch her. Her hair was dishevelled, and she was all out of order. Soon a man came running behind her with a butcher's knife in his hand, and shouted as he caught her:

'You wicked woman! You have been unfaithful to

[p. 317]

your poor husband, and I will kill you for it, for I am his friend.'

Stabbing her five or six times, he did so, and then moved away. Rukugo, resuming his way homewards, thought what a good friend must be the man who had killed the unfaithful wife. A bad woman justly rewarded with death, thought he.

Rokugo had not gone very far, however, when, to his utter astonishment, he met face to face the woman whom he had just seen killed. She was looking at him with angry eyes, and she said:

'How can a brave samurai watch so cruel a murder as you have just seen, enjoying the sight?'

Rokugo was much astonished.

'Do not talk to me as if I were your husband,' said he, 'for I am not. I was pleased to see you killed for being unfaithful. Indeed, if you are the ghost of the woman I shall kill you myself! 'Before he could draw his sword the ghost had vanished.

Rokugo continued his way, and on nearing his house he met a woman, who came up to him with horrible face and clenched teeth, as if in agony.

He had had enough troubles with women that evening. They must be foxes who had assumed the forms of women, thought he, as he continued to gaze at this last one.

At that moment he recollected that he had heard of a fact about fox-women. It was that fire coming from the bodies of foxes and badgers is always so bright that even on the darkest night you can tell the colour of their hair, or even the figures woven in the stuffs they wear, when

[p. 318]

assuming the forms of men or women; it is clearly visible at one ken (six feet). Remembering this, Rokugo approached a little closer to the woman; and, sure enough, he could see the pattern of her dress, shown up as if fire were underneath. The hair, too, seemed to have fire under it.

Knowing now that it was a fox he had to do with, Rokugo drew his best sword, the famous one made by Moriye, and proceeded to attack carefully, for he knew he should have to hit the fox and not the spirit of the fox in the woman's form. (It is said that whenever a fox or a badger transforms itself into human shape the real presence stands beside the apparition. If the apparition appears on the left side, the presence of the animal himself is on the right.)

Rokugo made his attack accordingly, killing the fox and consequently the apparition.

He ran to his house, and called up his relations, who came flocking out with lanterns. Near a myrtle tree which was almost two hundred years old, they found the body--not of fox or badger, but--of an otter. The animal was carried home. Next day invitations were issued to all the pupils at the fencing-school to come and see it, and a great feast was given. Rokugo had wiped away a great disgrace. The pupils erected a tomb for the beast; it is known as 'Yukidzuka' (The Snow Tomb), and is still to be seen in the Korinji Temple at Warigesui Honjo, in Tokio.

Footnotes

^312:1 Told to me by Fukuchi, in connection with the fire-lights in foxes. Carefully translated by Mr. Watanabe, of the Prefectural Government.

^314:1 The head-seeking fire.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 319]

Click to enlarge
57. The Spirit of the Tree Appears to Kotaro and the Old Man

  

LI

  

THE DRAGON-SHAPED PLUM TREE

IN the year 1716 of the Kyoho Era--191 years ago--there lived at Momoyama Fushimi, an old gardener, Hambei, who was loved and respected for his kindliness of nature and his great honesty. Though a poor man, Hambei had saved enough to live on; and he had inherited a house and garden from his father. Consequently, he was happy. His favourite pastime was tending the garden and an extraordinarily fine plum tree known in Japan as of the furyo kind (which means 'lying dragon'). Such trees are of great value, and much sought after for the arrangement of gardens. Curiously enough, though one may see many beautiful ones, trees growing on mountains or on wild islands, they are very rarely touched except near the larger commercial centres. Indeed, the Japanese have almost a veneration for some of these fantastic furyo-shaped trees, and leave them alone, whether they be pines or plums.

The tree in question Hambei loved so much that no offer people could make would induce him to part with it. So notoriously beautiful were the tints and curves of this

[p. 320]

old stunted tree, large sums had many times been offered for it. Hambei loved it not only for its beauty but also because it had belonged to his father and grandfather. Now in his old age, with his wife in her dotage and his children gone, it was his chief companion. In the autumn he tended it in its untidiness of dead and dying leaves. He felt sorry and sympathetic for it in its cold and bare state in November and December; but in January he was happily employed in watching the buds which would blossom in February. When they did bloom it was his custom to let the people come at certain hours daily to see the tree and listen to stories of historical facts, and also to stories of romance, regarding the plum tree, of which the Japanese mind is ever full. When this again was over Hambei pruned and tied the tree. In the hot season he lingered under it smoking his pipe, and was often rewarded for his care by two or three dozen delicious plums, which he valued and loved as much almost as if they had been his own offspring.

Thus, year after year, the tree had become so much Hambei's companion that a king's ransom would not have bought it from him.

Alas! no man is destined to be let alone in this world. Some one is sure, sooner or later, to covet his property. It came to pass that a high official at the Emperor's court heard of Hambei's furyo tree and wanted it for his own garden. This dainagon sent his steward, Kotaro Naruse, to see Hambei with a view to purchase, never for a moment doubting that the old gardener would readily sell if the sum offered were sufficient.

Kotaro Naruse arrived at Momoyama Fushimi, and

[p. 321]

was received with due ceremony. After drinking a cup of tea, he announced that he had been sent to inspect and make arrangements to take the furyo plum tree for the dainagon.

Hambei was perplexed. What excuse for refusal should he make to so high a personage? He made a fumbling and rather stupid remark, of which the clever steward soon took advantage.

'On no account,' said Hambei, 'can I sell the old tree. I have refused many offers for it already.'

'I never said that I was sent to buy the tree for money,' said Kotaro. 'I said that I had come to make arrangements by which the dainagon could have it conveyed carefully to his palace, where he proposes to welcome it with ceremony and treat it with the greatest kindness. It is like taking a bride to the palace for the dainagon. Oh, what an honour for the plum tree, to be united by marriage with one of such illustrious lineage! You should indeed be proud of such a union for your tree! Please be counselled by me and grant the dainagon's wish!'

What was Hambei now to say? Such a lowly-born person, asked by a gallant samurai to grant a favour to no less a person than the dainagon!

'Sir,' he answered, 'your request in behalf of the dainagon has been so courteously made that I am completely prevented from refusing. You must, however, tell the dainagon that the tree is a present, for I cannot sell it.'

Kotaro was greatly pleased with the success of his manoeuvres, and, drawing from his clothes a bag, said:

[p. 322]

[paragraph continues] 'Please, as is customary on making a gift, accept this small one in return.'

To the gardener's great astonishment, the bag contained gold. He returned it to Kotaro, saying that it was impossible to accept the gift; but on again being pressed by the smooth-tongued samurai he retracted.

The moment Kotaro had left, Hambei regretted this. He felt as if he had sold his own flesh and blood--as if he had sold his daughter--to the dainagon.

That evening he could not sleep. Towards midnight his wife rushed into his room, and, pulling him by the sleeve, shouted:

'You wicked old man! You villainous old rascal! At your age too! Where did you get that girl? I have caught you! Don't tell me lies! You are going to beat me now--I see by your eyes. I am not surprised if you avenge yourself in this way--you must feel an old fool!'

Hambei thought his wife had gone off her head for good this time. He had seen no girl.

'What is the matter with you, obaa San?' [*1] he asked. I have seen no girl, and do not know what you are talking about.'

'Don't tell me lies! I saw her! I saw her myself when I went down to get a cup of water!'

'Saw, saw--what do you mean?' said Hambei. 'I think you have gone mad, talking of seeing girls!'

'I did see her! I saw her weeping outside the door. And a beautiful girl she was, you old sinner,--only seventeen or eighteen years of age.'

[p. 323]

Hambei got out of bed, to see for himself whether his wife had spoken the truth or had gone truly mad.

On reaching the door he heard sobbing, and, on opening, beheld a beautiful girl.

'Who are you, and why here?' asked Hambei.

'I am the Spirit of the Plum Tree, which for so many years you have tended and loved, as did, your father before you. I have heard--and grieve greatly at it--that an arrangement has been made whereby I am to be removed to the dainagon's gardens. It may seem good fortune to belong to a noble family, and an honour to be taken into it. I cannot complain; yet I grieve at being moved from where I have been so long, and from you, who have so carefully tended to my wants. Can you not let me remain here a little longer--as long as I live? I pray you, do!'

'I have made a promise to send you off on Saturday to the dainagon in Kyoto; but I cannot refuse your plea, for I love to have you here. Be easy in your mind, and I will see what can be done,' said Hambei.

The spirit dried its tears, smiled at Hambei, and disappeared as it were into the stem of the tree, while Hambei's wife stood looking on in wonder, not at all reassured that there was not some trick on her husband's part.

At last the fatal Saturday on which the tree was to be removed arrived, and Kotaro came with many men and a cart. Hambei told him what had happened--of the tree's spirit and of what it had implored of him.

'Here! take the money, please,' said the old man. Tell the story to the dainagon as I tell it to you, and surely he will have mercy.'

[p. 324]

Kotaro was angry, and said:

'How has this change come about? Have you been drinking too much sake, or are you trying to fool me? You must be careful, I warn you; else you shall find yourself headless. Even supposing the spirit of the tree did appear to you in the form of a girl, did it say that it would be sorry to leave your poor garden for a place of honour in that of the dainagon? You are a fool, and an insulting fool--how dare you return the dainagon's present? How could I explain such an insult to him, and what would he think of me? As you are not keeping your word, I will take the tree by force, or kill you in place of it.'

Kotaro was greatly enraged. He kicked Hambei down the steps, and, drawing his sword, was about to cut off his head, when suddenly there was a little puff of wind scented with plum blossom, and then there stood in front of Kotaro the beautiful girl, the Spirit of the Plum Tree!

'Get out of my way, or you will get hurt,' shouted Kotaro.

'No: I will not go away. You had better kill me, the spirit that has brought such trouble, instead of killing a poor innocent old man,' said the spirit.

'I don't believe in the spirits of plum trees,' said Kotaro. 'That you are a spirit is evident; but you are only that of an old fox. So I will comply with your request, and at all events kill you first.'

No sooner had he said this than he made a cut with his sword, and he distinctly felt that he cut through a body. The girl disappeared, and all that fell was a branch of the plum tree and most of the flowers that were blooming.

[p. 325]

Kotaro now realised that what the gardener had told him was true, and made apologies accordingly.

'I will carry this branch to the dainagon,' said he, 'and see if he will listen to the story.'

Thus was Hambei's life saved by the spirit of the tree.

The dainagon heard the story, and was so moved that he sent the old gardener a kind message, and told him to keep the tree and the money, as an expression of his sorrow for the trouble which he had brought about.

Alas, however, the tree withered and died soon after Kotaro's cruel blow and in spite of Hambei's care. The dead stump was venerated for many years.

Footnotes

^322:1 Old woman.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 326]

Click to enlarge
58. Ukon Shows Sayemon that he has Already Sacrificed Himself

  

LII

  

THE CHESSBOARD CHERRY TREE [*1]

IN olden times, long before the misfortunes of Europeanisation came to Japan, there lived at Kasamatsu, in Nakasatani, near Shichikwai mura Shinji gun, Hitachi Province, a hotheaded old Daimio, Oda Sayemon. His castle stood on the top of a pine-clad hill about three miles from what is now known as Kamitachi station on the Nippon Railway. Sayemon was noted for his bravery as a soldier, for his abominable play at go (or goban), and for his bad temper and violence when he lost, which was invariably.

His most intimate friends among his retainers had tried hard to reform his manners after losing at go; but it was hopeless. All those who won from him he struck in the face with a heavy iron fan, such as was carried by warriors in those days; and he would just as readily have drawn his sword and cut his best friend's head off as be interfered with on those occasions. To be invited to

[p. 327]

play go with their lord was what all his bold samurai dreaded most. At last it was agreed among them that sooner than suffer the gross indignity of being struck by him when they won they would let him win. After all, it did not much matter, there being no money on the game. Thus Sayemon's game grew worse and worse, for he never learned anything; yet in his conceit he thought he was better than everybody.

On the 3rd of March, in honour of his little daughter O Chio, he gave a dinner-party to his retainers. The 3rd of March is the Dolls' Day (Hina-no-sekku)--the day upon which girls bring out their dolls. People go from house to house to see them, and the little owners offer you sweet white sake in a doll's cup with much ceremony. Sayemon, no doubt, chose this day of feasting as a compliment to his daughter--for he gave sweet white sake after their food, to be drunk to the health of the dolls, instead of men's sake, which the guests would have liked much better. Sayemon himself absolutely disliked sweet sake. So as soon as the feast was over he called Saito Ukon, one of his oldest and most faithful warriors, to come and play go with him, leaving the others to drink. Ukon, curiously enough, had not played with his lord before, and he was delighted that he had been chosen. He had made up his mind to die that evening after giving his master a proper lesson.

In a luxuriously decorated room there was placed a goban (chessboard) with two go-cases containing the men, which are made of white and black stones. The white stones are usually taken by the superior player and the black by the inferior. Without any apology or explanation,

[p. 328]

[paragraph continues] Ukon took the case containing the white stones, and began to place them as if he were without question the superior player.

Sayemon's temper began to work up; but he did not show it. So many games of go had his retainers allowed him to win lately, he was fully confident that he should win again, and that Ukon would have in addition to apologise for presuming to take the white stones.

The game ended in a win for Ukon.

'I must have another game,' said Sayemon. 'I was careless in that one. I will soon show you how I can beat you when I try.'

Again Sayemon was beaten--this time not without losing his temper, for his face turned red, his eyes looked devilish, and with a bullying voice full of passion he roared for a third game.

This also Ukon won. Sayemon's wrath knew no bounds. Seizing his iron fan, he was about to smite Ukon a violent blow in the face. His opponent caught him by the wrist, and said:

'My Lord, what ideas have you about games? Your Lordship seems to think curiously about them! It is the better player who wins; while the inferior must fail. If you fail to beat me at go, it is because you are the inferior player. Is this manner of your Lordship's in taking defeat from a superior up to the form of bushido in a samurai, as we are taught it? Be counselled by me, your faithful retainer, and be not so hasty with your anger--it ill befits one in your Lordship's high position.' And, with a look full of reproof at Sayemon, Ukon bowed almost to the ground.

[p. 329]

'You insolent rascal!' roared Sayemon. 'How dare you speak to me like that? Don't move! Stand as you are, with your head bowed, so that I may take it off.'

'Your sword is to kill your enemies, not your retainers and friends,' said Ukon. 'Sheathe your sword, my Lord. You need not trouble yourself to kill me, for I have already done seppuku [*1] in order to offer you the advice which I have given, and to save all others. See here, my Lord!' Ukon opened his clothes and exhibited an immense cut across his stomach.

Sayemon stood for a minute taken aback, and while he thus stood Ukon spoke to him once more, telling him how he must control his temper and treat his subjects better.

On hearing this advice again Sayemon's passion returned. Seizing his sword, he rushed upon Ukon, and, crying, 'Not even by your dying spirit will I allow myself to be advised,' made a furious cut at Ukon's head. He missed, and cut the go-board in two instead. Then, seeing that Ukon was dying rapidly, Sayemon dropped beside him, crying bitterly and saying:

'Much do I regret to see you thus die, oh faithful Ukon! In losing you I lose my oldest and most faithful retainer. You have served me faithfully and fought most gallantly in all my battles. Pardon me, I beg of you! I will take your advice. It was surely a sign by the gods that they were displeased at my conduct when they made me miss your head with my sword and cut the go-board.'

Ukon was pleased to find his lord at last repentant. He said:

[p. 330]

'I shall not even in death forget the relation between master and servant, and my spirit shall be with you and watch over your welfare as long as you live.'

Then Ukon breathed his last.

Sayemon was so much moved by the faithfulness of Ukon that he caused him to be buried in his own garden, and he buried the broken go-board with him. From that time on the Lord Sayemon's conduct was completely reformed. He was good and kind to all his subjects, and all his people were happy.

A few months after Ukon's death, a cherry tree sprang out of his grave. In three years the tree grew to be a fine one and bloomed luxuriantly.

On the 3rd of March in the third year, the anniversary of Ukon's death, Sayemon was surprised to find it suddenly in bloom. He was looking at it, and thinking of watering it himself, as usual on that day, when he suddenly saw a faint figure standing by the stem of the tree. Just as he said, 'You are, I know, the spirit of faithful Saito Ukon,' the figure disappeared. Sayemon ran to the tree, to pour water over the roots, when he noticed that the bark of some feet of the stem had all cracked up to the size and shape of the squares of a go-board! He was much impressed. For years afterwards--until, in fact, Sayemon's death--the ghost of Ukon appeared on each 3rd of March.

A fence was built round the tree, which was held sacred; and even to the present, they say, the tree is to be seen.

Footnotes

^326:1 This story (with the exception of the ghost) I believe to be true, for the 'seppuku' of Saito Ukon is just the kind of reasoning that would have been held out in the days of the story, and is even to-day possible in many cases. See a case--quoted by Professor Chamberlain--of the servant to an Englishman at Yokohama, and note the number of cases in the recent war.

^329:1 'Disembowelled myself.'

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 331]

  

LIII

  

THE PRECIOUS SWORD 'NATORI NO HOTO'

IDE KAMMOTSU was a vassal of the Lord of Nakura town, in Kishu. His ancestors had all been brave warriors, and he had greatly distinguished himself in a battle at Shizugatake, which took its name from a mountain in the province of Omi. The great Hideyoshi had successfully fought in the same place so far back as in the eleventh year of the Tensho Era 1573-1592--that is, 1584--with Shibata Katsuiye. Ide Kammotsu's ancestors were loyal men. One of them as a warrior had a reputation second to none. He had cut the heads off no fewer than forty-eight men with one sword. In due time this weapon came to Ide Kammotsu, and was kept by him as a most valuable family treasure. Rather early in life Kammotsu found himself a widower. His young wife left a son, called Fujiwaka. By and by Kammotsu, feeling lonely, married a lady whose name was Sadako. Sadako later bore a son, who was called Goroh. Twelve or fourteen years after that, Kammotsu himself died, leaving the two

[p. 332]

sons in charge of Sadako. Fujiwaka was at that time nineteen years of age.

Sadako became jealous of Fujiwaka, knowing him, as the elder son, to be the heir to Kammotsu's property. She tried by every means to put her own son Goroh first.

In the meantime a little romance was secretly going on between a beautiful girl called Tae, daughter of Iwasa Shiro, and young Fujiwaka. They had fallen in love with each other, were holding secret meetings to their hearts' content, and vowing promises of marriage. At last they were found out, and Sadako made their conduct a pretext for driving Fujiwaka out of the house and depriving him of all rights in the family property.

Attached to the establishment was a faithful old nurse, Matsue, who had brought up Fujiwaka from his infancy. She was grieved at the injustice which had been done; but little did she think of the loss of money or of property in comparison with the loss of the sword, the miraculous sword, of which the outcast son was the proper owner. She thought night and day of how she might get the heirloom for young Fujiwaka.

After many days she came to the conclusion that she must steal the sword from the Ihai (shrine--or rather a wooden tablet in the interior of the shrine, bearing the posthumous name of an ancestor, which represents the spirit of that ancestor).

One day, when her mistress and the others were absent, Matsue stole the sword. No sooner had she done so than it became apparent that it would be some months perhaps before she should be able to put it into the hands of the rightful owner. For of Fujiwaka nothing had been heard

[p. 333]

since his stepmother had driven him out. Fearing that she might be accused, the faithful Matsue dug a hole in the garden near the ayumiya--a little house, such as is kept in every Japanese gentleman's garden for performing the Tea Ceremony in,--and there she put the sword, meaning to keep it hidden until such time as she should be able to present it to Fujiwaka.

Sadako, having occasion to go to the butsudan the day after, missed the sword; and, knowing O Matsue to have been the only servant left in the house at the time, taxed her with the theft of the sword.

Matsue denied the theft, thinking that in the cause of justice it was right of her to do so; but it was not easy to persuade Sadako, who had Matsue confined in an outhouse and gave orders that neither rice nor water was to be given her until she confessed. No one was allowed to go near Matsue except Sadako herself, who kept the key of the shed, which she visited only once every four or five days.

About the tenth day poor Matsue died from starvation. She had stuck faithfully to her resolution that she would keep the sword and deliver it some day to her young master, the lawful heir. No one knew of Matsue's death. The evening on which she had died found Sadako seated in an old shed in a remote part of the garden, and trying to cool herself, for it was very hot.

After she had sat for about half-an-hour she suddenly saw the figure of an emaciated woman with dishevelled hair. The figure appeared from behind a stone lantern, glided along towards the place where Sadako was seated, and looked full into Sadako's face.

[p. 334]

Sadako immediately recognised Matsue, and upbraided her loudly for breaking out of her prison.

'Go back, you thieving woman!' said she. 'I have not half finished with you yet. How dare you leave the place where you were locked up and come to confront me?'

The figure gave no answer, but glided slowly along to the spot where the sword had been buried, and dug it up.

Sadako watched carefully, and, being no coward, rushed at the figure of Matsue, intending to seize the sword. Figure and sword suddenly disappeared.

Sadako then ran at top speed to the shed where Matsue had been imprisoned, and flung the door open with violence. Before her lay Matsue dead, evidently having been so for two or three days; her body was thin and emaciated. '

Sadako perceived that it must have been the ghost of O Matsue that she had seen, and mumbled 'Namu Amida Butsu; Namu Amida Butsu,' the Buddhist prayer asking for protection or mercy.

After having been driven from his family home, Ide Fujiwaka had wandered to many places, begging his food. At last he got some small employment, and was able to support himself at a very cheap inn at Umamachi Asakusa Temple.

One midnight he awoke and found standing at the foot of his bed the emaciated figure of his old nurse, bearing in her hands the precious sword, the heirloom valued beyond all others. It was wrapped in scarlet and gold brocade, as it had been before, and it was laid reverentially by the figure of O Matsue at Fujiwaka's feet.

[p. 335]

'Oh, my dear nurse,' said he, 'how glad am I------' Before he had closed his sentence the figure had disappeared.

My story-teller did not say what became of Sadako or of her son.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 336]

Click to enlarge
59. Harada and Gundayu Fencing

  

LIV

  

THE WHITE SERPENT GOD

HARADA KURANDO was one of the leading vassals of the Lord of Tsugaru. He was a remarkable swordsman, and gave lessons in fencing. Next in seniority to Harada among the vassals was one Gundayu, who also taught fencing; but he was no match for the famous Harada, and consequently was somewhat jealous.

One day, to encourage the art of fencing amongst his vassals, the Daimio summoned all his people and ordered them to give an exhibition in his presence.

After the younger vassals had performed, the Daimio gave an order that Harada Kurando and Hira Gundayu should have a match. To the winner, he said, he would present a gold image of the Goddess of Kwannon.

Both men fenced their best. There was great excitement. Gundayu had never done so well before; but Harada was too good. He won the match, receiving the gold image of Kwannon from the hands of the Daimio amid loud cheering.

Gundayu left the scene of the encounter, boiling over with jealousy and vowing vengeance. Four of his most

[p. 337]

faithful companions left with him, and said they would help him to waylay and assault Harada that very evening. Having arranged this cowardly plan, they proceeded to hide on the road which Harada must traverse on his return home.

For three hours they lay there with evil intentions. At last in the moonlight they saw Harada come staggering along, for, as was natural on such an occasion, he had, with friends, been indulging in sake freely.

Gundayu and his four companions sprang out at him, Gundayu shouting, 'Now you will have to fight me to the death.'

Harada tried to draw his sword, but was slow, his head whirling. Gundayu did not wait, but cut him to the ground, killing him. The five villains then hunted through his clothes, found the golden image of Kwannon, and ran off, never again to appear on the domains of the Lord of Tsugaru.

When the body of Harada was found there was great grief.

Yonosuke, Harada's son, a boy of sixteen, vowed to avenge his father's death, and obtained from the Daimio special permission to kill Gundayu as and when he chose; the disappearance of Gundayu was sufficient evidence that he had been the murderer.

Yonosuke set out that day on his hunt for Gundayu. He wandered about the country for five long years without getting the slightest clue; but at the end of that time, by the guidance of Buddha, he located his enemy at Gifu, where he was acting as fencing-master to the feudal lord of that place.

[p. 338]

Yonosuke found that it would be difficult to get at Gundayu in an ordinary way, for he hardly ever left the castle. He decided, therefore, to change his name to that of Ippai, and to apply for a place in Gundayu's house as a chugen (a samurai's private attendant).

In this Ippai (as we shall now call him) was particularly lucky, for, as Gundayu was in want of such an attendant, he got the place.

On the 24th of June a great celebration was held at the house of Gundayu, it being the fifth anniversary of his service to the clan. He put his stolen golden image of Kwannon on the tokonoma (the part of a Japanese room, raised five inches above the floor, where pictures and flowers are placed), and a dinner, with sake, was set before it. A dinner was given by Gundayu to his friends, all of whom drank so deeply that they fell asleep.

Next day the image of Kwannon had disappeared. It was not to be found. A few days later Ippai became ill, and, owing to poverty, was unable to buy proper medicine; he went from bad to worse. His fellow-servants were kind to him; but they could do nothing that improved his condition. Ippai did not seem to care; he lay in his bed and seemed almost pleased to be getting weaker and weaker. All he asked was that a branch of his favourite omoto (rhodea japonica) should be kept in a vase before his bed, so that he might see it continually; and this simple request was naturally complied with.

In the autumn Ippai passed quietly away and was buried. After the funeral, when the servants were cleaning out the room in which he had died, it was noticed with astonishment that a small white snake was curled

[p. 339]

round the vase containing the omoto. They tried to remove it; but it coiled itself tighter. At last they threw the vase into the pond, not caring to have such a thing about them.

To their astonishment, the water had no effect on the snake, which continued to cling to the vase. Feeling that there was something uncanny about the snake, they wanted to get it farther away. So they cast a net, brought the vase and snake to shore again, and threw them into a stream. Even that made but little difference, the snake slightly changing its position so as to keep the branch of omoto from falling out of the vase.

By this time there was consternation among the servants, and the news spread to the different houses within the castle gates. Some samurai came down to the stream to see, and found the white snake still firmly coiled about the vase and branch. One of the samurai drew his sword and made a slash at the snake, which let go and escaped; but the vase was broken, and, to the alarm of all, the image of the Kwannon fell out into the stream, together with a stamped permit from the Feudal Lord of Tsugaru to kill a certain man, whose name was left blank.

The samurai who had broken the vase and found the lost treasure seemed particularly pleased, and hastened to tell Gundayu the good news; but, instead of being pleased, that person showed signs of fear. He became deadly pale when he heard the story of the death of Ippai and of the extraordinary appearance of the mysterious white snake. He trembled. He realised that Ippai was no less a person than Yonosuke, son of Harada, whose appearance after the murder he had always feared.

[p. 340]

True to the spirit of a samurai, however, Gundayu 'pulled himself together,' and professed great pleasure to the person who had brought the image of Kwannon. Moreover, to celebrate the occasion, he gave a great feast that evening. Curiously enough, the samurai who had broken the vase and recovered the image became suddenly ill, and was unable to attend.

After he had dismissed his guests, at about 10 P.M., Gundayu retired to his bed. In the middle of the night he awoke with what he took to be a terrible nightmare. There was a choking sensation at his throat; he squirmed and twisted; gurgling noises proceeded from his mouth to such an extent that he aroused his wife, who in terror struck a light. She saw a white snake coiled tightly round her husband's throat; his face was purple, and his eyeballs stood out two inches from his face.

She called for help; but it was too late. As the young samurai came rushing in, their fencing-master was black in the face and dead.

Next day there was a close investigation. Messengers were despatched to the Lord of Tsugaru to inquire as to the history of the murdered Harada Kurando, father of Yonosuke, or 'Ippai,' and as to that of Gundayu, who had been in his employ for five years. Having ascertained the truth, the Lord of Gifu, moved by the zeal of Yonosuke in discharging his filial duties, returned the golden image of Kwannon to the bereaved family of Harada; and in commemoration he worshipped the dead snake at a shrine erected at the foot of Kodayama Mountain. The spirit is still known as Hakuja no Myojin, The White Serpent God.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 341]

Click to enlarge
60. What Saotome and Tamajo Found

  

LV

  

A FESTIVAL OF THE AWABI FISH

MANAZURU-MINATO is situated on a small promontory of the same name. It faces the Sagama Bay, famed for beauty; at its back are mountains rising gradually and overtopped in the distance by the majestic Fuji; to the north on clear days the sandy shores of Kozu and Oiso, twenty-five miles off, seem to be almost within arm's reach. Some people have compared the beauties of Manazuru-zaki from cape to river with the place in China called 'Sekiheki' by the celebrated poet of that country, Sotoba, who wrote 'Sekiheki no Fu,' the Ode to Sekiheki.

Many years ago Minamoto-no-Yoritomo, after his defeat at the battle of Ishibashiyama, fled to Manazuru-minato, and stayed there for a few days while waiting for favourable weather to cross to the opposite side, the province of Awa. One can still see, I am told, the cave in which he hid, which retains its old name, 'Shitoto-iwa.' The scenery on the coast is magnificent. The rocks rise sheer out of the sea and enclose a perfect little bay on the inside of Manazuru Zaki (Cape). There the fishermen erected a quiet little shrine, 'Kibune Jinja,' where they

[p. 342]

worshipped the goddess who guards the fishing of their coast. They had but little to complain of in the Bay of Manazuru. The waters were deep, and always well-stocked with fish such as tai; in due season came the sawara (giant mackerel) and all the smaller, migratory fishes, including the sardine and the anchovy. The fishermen had naught to complain of until about forty years ago, when a strange thing happened.

On the 24th of June, a person from some inland place arrived for a few days' sea-bathing. He was no swimmer, and he was drowned the first day. His body was never recovered, though the fishermen did all they could to find it. From this event onwards for a full two years the abundance of fish in the bay grew less and less, until it became difficult to catch enough to eat. The situation was serious in the extreme.

Some of the elder fishermen attributed the change to the stranger who had been drowned.

'It is his unrecovered body,' they said, 'that has made our sacred waters change. The uncleanness has offended Gu gun O Hime, our goddess. It will never do to go on as we are. We must hold a special festival at the temple of Kibune Jinja.'

Accordingly, the head priest, Iwata, was approached. He was pleased with the idea, and a certain day was fixed upon.

On the appointed evening hundreds of fishermen gathered together with torches in one hand and Shirayu or Gohei [*1] papers fastened on a bamboo in the other.

[p. 343]

[paragraph continues] They formed into procession and advanced towards the shrine from various directions, beating gongs. At the temple the priest read from the sacred books, and prayed to the goddess that had watched over them and their fisheries not to desert them because their waters had been polluted by a dead body. They would search for it by every means in their power and cleanse the bay.

Suddenly, while the priest was praying, a light, the brilliance of which nearly blinded the fishermen, flashed out of the water. The priest stopped for a moment; a rumbling noise was heard at the bottom of the sea; and then there arose to the surface a goddess of surpassing beauty (probably Kwannon Gioran). She looked at the ceremony which was being held on shore for a full hour, and then disappeared with another flash, leaving the sound of roaring waves.

The priest and the elder fishermen considered matters, and came to the conclusion that what they had seen was indeed their goddess, and that she had been pleased at their ceremony. Also, they thought the dead body must still be at the bottom of the bay, directly under the spot whence the flashes of light and the goddess herself had appeared. It was arranged that two young virgins who could dive should be sent down at the spot to see, and two were accordingly chosen--Saotome and Tamajo. Wrapped in white skirts, these maidens were taken in a boat to where the flashes and the goddess had appeared. The girls dived, reached the bottom, and searched for the body of the man drowned two years before. Instead of finding it, they saw only a small but dazzling light. Curiosity led them to the spot, and there they found

[p. 344]

hundreds upon hundreds of awabi (ear-shells) fastened upon a rock six feet in height and twenty-five or thirty in length. Whenever the fish moved they were obliged to raise their shells, and it was the glitter of the pearls inside that had attracted the damsels. This rock must have been the tomb of the drowned, or else the home of the goddess.

Saotome and Tamajo returned to the surface, each having taken from the rock a large shell to show the priest. As they came to the shore cheers were given in their honour, and the priest and the fishermen crowded round them.

On learning about the awabi shells, which they had never before heard of as being in the bay, they came to the conclusion that it was not uncleanness that kept the fish away. The lights thrown from the brilliant nacreous shells, and pearls inside them, must be the cause. Many times have we heard of the awabi flying. They must have flown here at some time within two years. The fishermen resolved to remove them. It was evident that the goddess had appeared in the light so as to show what it was that kept the fish away.

No time was lost. Many hundreds of men and women went down and cleared the place; and the fish began to. return to Manazuru-minato.

At the suggestion of the priest, Iwata, there is held on every 24th of June a matsuri (festival). The fishermen light torches and go to the shrine for worship all the night through. This is called the 'Awabi Festival' of Kibune.

[p. 345]

NOTE.--The story was told to me by a man who knows nothing of shell-fish. He told the story as of the osari, a kind of cockle-shell dug out of the sand at low tide. It is impossible that this story could have referred to other shell-fish than haliotis (the ear-shell), or the awabi, or the regular pearl oyster.

Diving women have seen the 'flight' of haliotis and described it to me. If one feels disposed to leave a rock, they all feel the same impulse and go. Thus it is that large old haliotis sometimes appear on a rock some fifteen fathoms deep when not one was there the day before; and they go with equal quickness. For a thousand years or more the same rocks have been haunted. And divers keep their finds at the bottom of the sea a great secret--at least, so I observe at Toshi.

Footnotes

^342:1 Gohei papers are a Shinto emblem, representing gifts of cloth to the deity, usually the god Kami. Some say Gohei represent, in their curious cutting, the Kami beating dora, a gong used in worship.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 346]

Click to enlarge
61. The Spirit of the Willow Tree Appears to Gobei

  

LVI

  

THE SPIRIT OF A WILLOW TREE SAVES FAMILY HONOUR

LONG ago there lived in Yamada village, Sarashina Gun, Shinano Province, one of the richest men in the northern part of Japan. For many generations the family had been rich, and at last the fortune descended in the eighty-third generation to Gobei Yuasa. The family had no title; but the people treated them almost with the respect due to a princely house. Even the boys in the street, who are not given to bestowing either compliments or titles of respect, bowed ceremoniously when they met Gobei Yuasa. Gobei was the soul of good-nature, sympathetic to all in trouble.

The riches which Gobei had inherited were mainly money and land, about which he worried himself very little; it would have been difficult to find a man who knew less and cared less about his affairs than Gobei. He spent his money freely, and when he came to think of accounts his easy nature let them all slide. His great pleasures were painting kakemono pictures, talking to his friends, and eating good things. He ordered his steward

[p. 347]

not to worry him with unsatisfactory accounts of crops or any other disagreeable subjects. 'The destiny of man and his fate is arranged in Heaven,' said he. Gobei was quite celebrated as a painter, and could have made a considerable amount of money by selling his kakemonos; but no--that would not be doing credit to his ancestors and his name.

One day, while things were going from bad to worse, and Gobei was seated in his room painting, a friend came to gossip. He told Gobei that the village people were beginning to talk seriously about a spirit that had been seen by no fewer than three of them. At first they had laughed at the man who saw the ghost; the second man who saw it they were inclined not to take quite seriously; but now it had been seen by one of the village elders, and so there could be no doubt about it.

'Where do they see it?' asked Gobei.

'They say that it appears under your old willow tree between eleven and twelve o'clock at night--the tree that hangs some of its boughs out of your garden into the street.'

'That is odd,' remarked Gobei. 'I can remember hearing of no murder under that tree, nor even spirit connection with any of my ancestors; but there must be something if three of our villagers have seen it. Yet, again, where there is an old willow tree some one is sure to say, sooner or later, that he has seen a ghost. If there is a spirit there, I wonder whose it is? I should like to paint the ghost if I could see it, so as to leave it to my descendants as the last ominous sign on the road which has led to the family's ruin. That I shall make an effort

[p. 348]

to do. This very evening I will sit up to watch for the thing.'

Never had Gobei been seized with such energy before. He dismissed his friend, and went to bed at four o'clock in the afternoon, so as to allow himself to be up at ten o'clock. At that hour his servant awoke him; but even then he could not be got up before eleven. By twelve o'clock, midnight, Gobei was at last out in his garden, hidden in bushes facing the willow. It was a bright night, and there was no sign of any ghost until after one o'clock, when clouds passed over the moon. Just when Gobei was thinking of going back to bed, he beheld, arising from the ground under the willow, a thin column of white smoke, which gradually assumed the form of a charming girl.

Gobei stared in astonishment and admiration. He had never thought that a ghost could be such a vision of beauty. Rather had he expected to see a white, wild-eyed, dishevelled old woman with protruding bones, the spectacle of whom would freeze his marrow and make his teeth clatter.

Gradually the beautiful figure approached Gobei, and hung its head, as if it wished to address him.

'Who and what are you?' cried Gobei. 'You seem too beautiful, to my mind, to be the spirit of one who is dead. If you are indeed spectral, do tell me, if you may, whose spirit you are and why you appear under this willow tree!'

'I am not the spirit or ghost of man, as you say,' answered the spirit, 'but the spirit of this willow tree.'

'Then why do you leave the tree now, as they tell

[p. 349]

me you have done several times within the last ten days?'

'I am, as I say, the spirit of this willow, which was planted here in the twenty-first generation of your family. That is now about six centuries ago. I was planted to mark the place where your wise ancestor buried a treasure--twenty feet below the ground, and fifteen from my stem, facing east. There is a vast sum of gold in a strong iron chest hidden there. The money was buried to save your house when it was about to fall. Never hitherto has there been danger; but now, in your time, ruin has come, and it is for me to step forth and tell you how by the foresight of your ancestor you have been saved from disgracing the family name by bankruptcy. Pray dig the strong box up and save the name of your house. Begin as soon as you can, and be careful in future.'

Then she vanished.

Gobei returned to his house, scarcely believing it possible that such good luck had come to him as the spirit of the willow tree planted by his wise ancestor had said. He did not go to bed, however. He summoned a few of his most faithful servants, and at daybreak began digging. What excitement there was when at nineteen feet they struck the top of an iron chest! Gobei jumped with delight; and it may almost be said that his servants did the same, for to see their honoured master's name fall into the disgrace of bankruptcy would have caused many of them to disembowel themselves.

They tore and dug with all their might, until they had the huge and weighty case out of the hole. They broke off the top with pickaxes, and then Gobei saw a

[p. 350]

collection of old sacks. He seized one of these; but the age of it was too great. It burst, and sent rolling out over a hundred immense old-fashioned oblong gold coins of ancient times, which must have been worth L30 each. Gobei Yuasa's hand shook. He could hardly realise as true the good fortune which had come to him. Bag after bag was pulled out, each containing a small fortune, until finally the bottom of the box was reached. Here was found a letter some six hundred years of age, saying:

'He of my descendants who is obliged to make use of the treasure to save our family reputation will read aloud and make known that this treasure has been buried by me, Fuji Yuasa, in the twenty-first generation of our family, so that in time of need or danger a future generation will be able to fall back upon it and save the family name. He whose great misfortune necessitates the use of the treasure must say: "Greatly do I repent the folly that has brought the affairs of our family so low, and necessitated the assistance of an early ancestor. I can only repay such by diligent attention to my household affairs, and also show high appreciation and give kindness to the willow tree which has so long been watching and guarding my ancestor's treasure. These things I vow to do. I shall reform entirely."'

Gobei Yuasa read this out to his servants and to his friends. He became a man of energy. His lands and farms were properly taken care of, and the Yuasa family regained its influential position.

Gobei painted a kakemono of the spirit of the willow tree as he had seen her, and this he kept in his own room during the rest of his life. It is the famous painting, in

[p. 351]

the Yuasa Gardens to-day, which is called 'The Willow Ghost,' and perhaps it is the model from which most of the willow-tree-ghost paintings have sprung.

Gobei fenced in the famous willow tree, and attended to it himself; as did those who followed him.

Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan, by Richard Gordon Smith, [1918], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 352]

Click to enlarge
62. Chogoro and his Men Fail to Move the Kusunoki Tree

  

LVII

  

THE CAMPHOR TREE TOMB

FIVE ri (ten miles) from Shirakawa, in the province of Iwaki, there is a village called Yabuki-mura. Close by is a grove some 400 feet square. The trees used to include a monster camphor nearly 150 feet in height, of untold age, and venerated by villagers and strangers alike as one of the greatest trees in Japan. A shrine was erected to it in the grove, which was known as the Nekoma-myojin forest; and a faithful old man, Hamada Tsushima, lived there, caring for the tree, the shrine, and the whole grove.

One day the tree was felled; but, instead of withering or dying, it continued to grow, and it is still flourishing, though lying on the ground. Poor Hamada Tsushima disembowelled himself when the sacred tree had been cut down. Perhaps it is because his spirit entered the sacred tree that the tree will not die. Here is the story:--

On the 17th of January in the third and last year of the Meireki period--that is, 1658--a great fire broke out in the Homyo-ji Temple, in the Maruyama Hongo district of Yedo, now Tokio. The fire spread with such rapidity that not only was that particular district burned,

[p. 353]

but also a full eighth of Yedo itself was destroyed. Many of the Daimios' houses and palaces were consumed. The Lord Date Tsunamune of Sendai, one of the three greatest Daimios (who were Satsuma, Kaga, Sendai), had the whole of his seven palaces and houses destroyed by the fire; the other Daimios or feudal lords lost only one or two.

Lord Date Tsunamune resolved to build the finest palace that could be designed. It was to be at Shinzenza, in Shiba. He ordered that no time should be lost, and directed one of his high officials, Harada Kai Naonori, to see to the matter.

Harada, accordingly, sent for the greatest house-building contractor of the day, one Kinokuniya Bunzaemon, and to him he said:

'You are aware that the fire has destroyed the whole of the town mansions of Lord Date Tsunamune. I am directed to see that the finest palace should be immediately built, second to none except the Shogun's. I have sent for you as the largest contractor in Yedo. What can you do? Just make some suggestions and give me your opinion.'

'Certainly, my Lord, I can make plenty of suggestions; but to build such a palace will cost an enormous amount of money, especially now after this fire, for there is a great scarcity of large timber in the land.'

'Never mind expenses,' said Harada. 'Those I shall pay as you like and when you like; I will even advance money if you want it.'

'Oh, then,' answered the delighted contractor, 'I will start immediately. What would you think of having a

[p. 354]

palace like that of Kinkakuji in Kyoto, which was built by the Shogun Ashikaga? What I should build would be a finer mansion than that of the present Shogun--let alone those of any Daimio. The whole of the hagi [*1] to be made out of the rarest woods; the tokobashira [*2] to be of the nanten, and ceilings of unjointed camphor-tree boards, should we be able to find a tree of sufficient size. I can find nearly everything, except the last, in my own stocks; the camphor trees are difficult. There are but few; they are mostly sacred, and dangerous to interfere with or obtain. I know of one in the forest of Nekoma-myojin, in Iwaki Province. If I can get that tree, I should indeed be able to make an unjointed ceiling, and that would completely put other palaces and mansions in the second rank.'

'Well, well, I must leave all this to you,' said Harada. 'You know that no expense need be spared so long as you produce speedily what is required by Lord Date Tsunamune.'

The contractor bowed low, saying that he should set to and do his best; and he left, no doubt, delighted at so open a contract, which would enable him to fill his pockets. He set about making inquiries in every direction, and became convinced that the only camphor tree that would suit his purpose was the one before referred to--owing chiefly to its great breadth. Kinokuniya knew also that the part of the district wherein lay this tree belonged to or was under the management of Fujieda Geki, now in the Honjo district of Yedo acting as a Shogun's retainer, well off (receiving 1200 koku of rice a year), but not

[p. 355]

over scrupulous about money, of which he was always in need.

Contractor Kinokuniya soon learned all about the man, and then went to call.

'Your name is Kinokuniya Bunzaemon, I believe. What, may I ask, do you wish to see me about?' said Fujieda.

'Sir,' said the contractor, bowing low, 'it is as you say. My name is Kinokuniya Bunzaemon, and I am a wood contractor of whom perhaps your Lordship has heard, for I have built and supplied the wood for many mansions and palaces. I come here craving assistance in the way of permission to cut trees in a small forest called Nekoma-myojin, near the village called Yabukimura, in the Sendai district.'

The contractor did not tell Fujieda Geki, the Shogun's retainer or agent, that he was to build a mansion for the Daimio Date Tsunamune, and that the wood which he wanted to cut was within that Daimio's domains. For he knew full well that the Lord Date would never give him permission to cut a holy tree. It was an excellent idea to take the Daimio's trees by the help of the Shogun's agent, and charge for them fully afterwards. So he continued:

'I can assure you, sir, this recent fire has cleared the whole market of wood. If you will assist me to get what I want I will build you a new house for nothing, and by way of showing my appreciation I ask you to accept this small gift of yen zoo, which is only a little beginning.'

'You need not trouble with these small details,' said the delighted agent, pocketing the money, 'but do as

[p. 356]

you wish. I will send for the four local managers and head-men of the district wherein you wish to cut the trees, and I will let you know when they arrive in Yedo. With them you will be able to settle the matter.'

The interview was over. The contractor was on the high road, he felt, to getting the trees he required, and the money-wanting agent was equally well pleased that so slight an effort on his part should have been the means of enriching him by yen 200, with the promise of more and a new house.

About ten days later four men, the heads of villages, arrived in Yedo, and presented themselves to Fujieda, who sent for the timber contractor, telling the four, whose names were Mosuke, Magozaemon, Yohei, and Jinyemon, that he was pleased to see them and to note how loyal they had been in their attendance on the Shogun, for that he, the Shogun, had had his palace burned down in the recent fire, and desired to have one immediately built, the great and only difficulty being the timber. 'I am told by our great contractor, to whom I shall introduce you presently, that the only timber fit for rebuilding the Shogun's palace lies in your district. I myself know nothing about these details, and I shall leave you gentlemen to settle these matters with Kinokuniya, the contractor, so soon as he arrives. I have sent for him. In the meantime consider yourselves welcome, and please accept of the meal I have arranged in the next room for you. Come along and let us enjoy it.'

Fujieda led the four countrymen into the next room, and ate with them at the meal, during which time Kinokuniya the contractor arrived, and was promptly

[p. 357]

ushered into their presence. The meal was nearly at an end.

Fujieda introduced the contractor, who in his turn said:

'Gentlemen, we cannot discuss these matters here in the house of Lord Fujieda the Shogun's agent. Now that we know one another, let me invite you to supper; at that I can explain to you exactly what I want in the way of trees out of your district. Of course, you know my family are subjects of your feudal lords, and that we are therefore all the same.'

The four countrymen were delighted at so much hospitality. Two meals in an evening was an extraordinary dissipation for them, and that in Yedo! My word, what would they not be able to tell their wives on their return to the villages?

Kinokuniya led the four countrymen off to a restaurant called Kampanaro, in Ryogoku, where he treated them with the greatest hospitality. After the meal he said:

'Gentlemen, I hope you will allow me to hew timber from the forest in your village, for it is impossible for me otherwise to attempt any further building on a large scale.'

'Very well, you may hew,' said Mosuke, who was the senior of the four. 'Since the cutting of the trees in Nekoma-myojin forest is as it were a necessity for our lord, they must be cut; it is, in fact, I take it, an order from our lord that the trees shall be cut; but I must remind you that there is one tree in the grove which cannot be cut amid any circumstances whatever, and that is an enormous and sacred camphor tree which is very much

[p. 358]

revered in our district, and to which a shrine is erected. That tree we cannot consent to have cut.'

'Very well,' said the contractor. 'Just write me a little permit, giving me permission to cut any trees except the big camphor, and our business will be finished.'

Kinokuniya had by this time in the evening taken his measure of the countrymen--so shrewdly as to know that they were probably unable to write.

'Certainly,' said Mosuke. 'Just you write out a little agreement, Jinyemon.'

'No: I would rather you wrote it, Mago,' said Jinyemon.

'And I should like Yohei to write it,' said Mago.

'But I can't write at all,' said Yohei, turning to Jinyemon again.

'Well, never mind, never mind,' said Kinokuniya. 'Will you gentlemen sign the document if I write it?'

Why, of course, they all assented. That was the best way of all. They would put their stamps to the document. This they did, and after a lively evening departed pleased with themselves generally.

Kinokuniya, on the other hand, went home fully contented with his evening's business. Had he not in his pocket the permit to cut the trees, and had he not written it himself, so as to suit his own purpose? He chuckled at the thought of how neatly he had managed the business.

Next morning Kinokuniya sent off his foreman, Chogoro, accompanied by ten or a dozen men. It took them three days to reach the village called Yabuki-mura, near the Nekoma-myojin grove; they arrived on the

[p. 359]

morning of the fourth day, and proceeded to erect a scaffold round the camphor tree, so that they might the better use their axes. As they began chopping off the lower branches, Hamada Tsushima, the keeper of the shrine, came running to them.

'Here, here! What are you doing? Cutting down the sacred camphor? Curse you! Stop, I tell you! Do you hear me? Stop at once!'

Chogoro answered:

'You need not stop my men in their work. They are doing what they have been ordered to do, and with a full right to do it. I am cutting down the tree at the order of my master Kinokuniya, the timber contractor, who has permission to cut the tree from the four head-men sent to Yedo from this district.'

'I know all that,' said the caretaker; 'but your permission is to cut down any tree except the sacred camphor.'

'There you are wrong, as this letter will show you,' said Chogoro; 'read it yourself.' And the caretaker, in great dismay, read as follows:--

To Kinokuniya Bunzaemon,

    Timber Contractor, Yedo.

In hewing trees to build a new mansion for our lord, all the camphor trees must be spared except the large one said to be sacred in the Nekoma-myojin grove. In witness whereof we set our names.

              JINYEMON; MAGOZAEMON; MOSUKE; YOHEI.
               Representing the local County Officials.

The caretaker, beside himself with grief and astonishment, sent for the four men mentioned. On their arrival each declared that he had given permission to cut anything

[p. 360]

except the big camphor; but Chogoro said that he could not believe them, and in any case he would go by the written document. Then he ordered his men to continue their work on the big camphor.

Hamada Tsushima, the caretaker, did harakiri, disembowelling himself there and then; but not before telling Chogoro that his spirit would go into the camphor tree, to take care of it, and to wreak vengeance on the wicked Kinokuniya.

At last the efforts of the men brought the stately tree down with a crash; but then they found themselves unable to move it. Pull as they might, it would not budge. Each time they tried the branches seemed to become alive; faces and eyes became painful with the hits they got from them. Pluckily they continued their efforts; but it was no use. Things got worse. Several of the men were caught and nearly crushed to death between the branches; four had broken limbs from blows given in the same way. At this moment a horseman rode up and shouted:

'My name is Matsumaye Tetsunosuke. I am one of the Lord of Sendai's retainers. The board of councillors in Sendai have refused to allow this camphor tree to be touched. You have cut it, unfortunately. It must now remain where it is. Our feudal lord of Sendai, Lord Date Tsunamune, will be furious. Kinokuniya the contractor planned an evil scheme, and will be duly punished; while as for the Shogun's agent, Fujieda Geki, he also must be reported. You yourselves return to Yedo. We cannot blame you for obeying orders. But first give me that forged permit signed by the four local fools, who, it is trusted, will destroy themselves.'

[p. 361]

Chogoro and his men returned to Yedo. A few days later the contractor was taken ill, and a shampooer was sent to his room. A little later Kinokuniya was found dead; the shampooer had disappeared, though it was impossible for him to have got away without being seen! It is said that the spirit of Hamada Tsushima, the caretaker, had taken the form of the shampooer, in order to kill the contractor. Chogoro became so uneasy in his mind that he returned to the camphor tree, where he spent all his savings in erecting a new shrine and putting in a caretaker. This is known as the Kusunoki Dzuka (The Camphor Tree Tomb). The tree lies there, my story-teller tells me, at the present day.

 

 

 

 

THE END

 

Footnotes

^354:1 Shelves.

^354:2 Kakumono corner-post.

 

    


===== BOOK: av.txt =====


    Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Hymns of the Atharvaveda

  

translated by

  

Ralph T.H. Griffith

  

[1895-6]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, April 2007, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a1]

  

BOOK I

  

HYMN I

  

A prayer to Vachaspati for divine illumination and help.

[0100101]Now may Vachaspati assign to me the strength and powers of
   Those
   Who, wearing every shape and form, the triple seven, are
    wandering round.
 [0100102]Come thou again, Vachaspati, come with divine intelligence.
   Vasoshpati, repose thou here. In me be Knowledge, yea, in me.
 [0100103]Here, even here, spread sheltering arms like the two bow-ends
    strained with cord.
   This let Vachaspati confirm. In me be Knowledge, yea, in me.
 [0100104]Vachaspati hath been invoked: may he invite us in reply.
   May we adhere to Sacred Lore. Never may I be reft thereof.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a2]

  

HYMN II

  

A charm against dysentery

[0100201]We know the father of the shaft, Parjanya, liberal nourisher,
   Know well his mother: Prithivi, Earth with her manifold
    designs.
 [0100202]Do thou, O Bowstring, bend thyself around us: make my body
    stone.
   Firm in thy strength drive far away malignities and hateful
    things.
 [0100203]When, closely clinging round the wood, the bowstring sings
    triumph to the swift and whizzing arrow,
   Indra, ward off from us the shaft, the missile.
 [0100204]As in its flight the arrow's point hangs between earth and
    firmament,
   So stand this Munja grass between ailment and dysenteric ill!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a3]

  

HYMN III

  

A charm against constipation and suppression of urine

[0100301]We know the father of the shaft, Parjanya strong with hundred
    powers:
   By this may I bring health unto thy body: let the channels pour
    their burthen freely as of old.
 [0100302]We know the father of the shaft, Mitra, the Lord of hundred
    powers:
   By this, etc.
 [0100303]We know the father of the shaft, Varuna, strong with hundred
    powers: [p. a4]
   By this, etc.
 [0100304]We know the father of the shaft, the Moon endowed with
    hundred powers:
   By this, etc.
 [0100305]We know the father of the shaft, the Sun endowed with hundred
    powers:
   By this may I bring health unto thy body: let the channels pour
    their burthen freely as of old.
 [0100306]Whate'er hath gathered, as it flowed, in bowels, bladder, or in
    groins,
   Thus let the conduit, free from check, pour all its burthen as of
    old.
 [0100307]I lay the passage open as one cleaves the dam that bars the
    lake:
   Thus let, etc.
 [0100308]Now hath the portal been unclosed as, of the sea that holds the
    flood:
   Thus let, etc.
 [0100309]Even as the arrow flies away when loosened from the archer's
    bow,
   Thus let the burthen be discharged from channels that are checked
    no more.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a5]

  

HYMN IV

  

To the waters, for the prosperity of cattle

[0100401]Along their paths the Mothers go, sisters of priestly
    ministrants,
   Blending their water with the mead.
 [0100402]May yonder Waters near the Sun, or those wherewith the Sun is
    joined,
   Send forth this sacrifice of ours.
 [0100403]I call the Waters, Goddesses, hitherward where our cattle
    drink:
   The streams must share the sacrifice.
 [0100404]Amrit is in the Waters, in the Waters balm.
   Yea, through our praises of the Floods, O horses, be ye fleet and
    strong, and, O ye kine, be full of strength.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

  

To the waters, for strength and power

[0100501]Ye, Waters, truly bring us bliss: so help ye us to strength and
    power [p. a6]
   That we may look on great delight.
 [0100502]Here grant to us a share of dew, that most auspicious dew of
    yours,
   Like mothers in their longing love.
 [0100503]For you we fain would go to him to whose abode ye send us
    forth,
   And, Waters, give us procreant strength.
 [0100504]I pray the Floods to send us balm, those who bear rule o'er
    precious things,
   And have supreme control of men.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

To the waters, for health and wealth

[0100601]The Waters be to us for drink, Goddesses, for our aid and
    bliss: [p. a7]
   Let them stream health and wealth to us.
 [0100602]Within the Waters--Soma thus hath told me--dwell all balms
    that heal,
   And Agni, he who blesseth all.
 [0100603]O Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm,
   So that I long may see the Sun.
 [0100604]The Waters bless us, all that rise in desert lands or marshy
    pools!
   Bless us the Waters dug from earth, bless us the Waters brought
    in jars, bless us the Waters of the Rains!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

  

To Indra and Agni, for the detection and destruction of evil spirits

[0100701]Bring the Kimidin hither, bring the Yatudhana self-declared
   For Agni, God, thou, lauded, hast become the Dasyu's
    slaughterer.
 [0100702]O Jatavedas, Lord Supreme, controller of our bodies, taste
   The butter, Agni, taste the oil: make thou the Yatudhanas
    mourn.
 [0100703]Let Yatudhanas mourn, let all greedy Kimidins weep and
    wail:
   And, Agni, Indra, may ye both accept this sacrifice of ours. [p. a8]
 [0100704]May Agni seize upon them first, may strong-armed Indra drive
    them forth:
   Let every wicked sorcerer come hither and say, Here am I.
 [0100705]Let us behold thy strength, O Jatavedas. Viewer of men, tell us
    the Yatudhanas.
   Burnt by thy heat and making declaration let all approach this
    sacrifice before thee.
 [0100706]O Jatavedas, seize, on them: for our advantage art thou born:
   Agni, be thou our messenger and make the Yatudhanas wail.
 [0100707]O Agni, bring thou hitherward the Yatudhanas bound and
    chained.
   And afterward let Indra tear their heads off with his thunder-
    bolt.
 
 

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

  

To Indra, Brihaspati, Soma and Agni, for the destruction of sorcerers

[0100801]This sacrifice shall bring the Yatudhanas as the flood brings
    foam: [p. a9]
   Here let the doer of this deed woman or man, acknowledge it.
 [0100802]This one hath come confessing all: do ye receive him
    eagerly.
   Master him thou, Brihaspati; Agni and Soma, pierce him
    through.
 [0100803]O Soma-drinker, strike and bring the Yatudhana's progeny:
   Make the confessing sinner's eyes fall from his head, both right
    and left.
 [0100804]As thou, O Agni Jatavedas, knowest the races of these secret
    greedy beings,
   So strengthened by the power of prayer, O Agni, crushing them
    down a hundred times destroy them.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

  

Benediction on a King at his inauguration

[0100901]May Indra, Pushan, Varuria, Mitra, Agni, benignant Gods,
    maintain this man in riches.
   May the Adityas and the Vive Devas set and support him in
    supremest lustre. [p. a10]
 [0100902]May light, O Gods, be under his dominion, Agni, the Sun, all;
    that is bright and golden.
   Prostrate beneath our feet his foes and rivals. Uplift him to the.
    loftiest cope of heaven.
 [0100903]Through that most mighty prayer, O Jatavedas, wherewith thou.
    broughtest milk to strengthen Indra,
   Even therewith exalt this man, O Agni, and give him highest rank
    among his kinsmen.
 [0100904]I have assumed their sacrifice, O Agni, their hopes, their glory,.
    and their riches' fulness.
   Prostrate beneath our feet his foes and rivals. Uplift him to the-
    loftiest cope of heaven.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a11]

  

HYMN X

  

Absolution of a sinner after intercession with Varuna

[0101001]This Lord is the Gods' ruler; for the wishes of Varuna the King
    must be accomplished.
   Therefore, triumphant with the prayer I utter, I rescue this man
    from the Fierce One's anger.
 [0101002]Homage be paid, King Varuna, to thine anger; for thou, dread
   God, detectest every falsehood.
   I send a thousand others forth together: let this thy servant live
    a hundred autumns.
 [0101003]Whatever falsehood thou hast told, much evil spoken with the
    tongue,
   I liberate thee from the noose of Varuna the righteous King.
 [0101004]I free thee from Vaisvanara, from the great surging flood of sin.
   Call thou thy brothers, Awful One! and pay attention to our
    prayer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XI

  

A charm to be used at child-birth

[0101101]Vashat to thee. O Pushan At this birth let Aryaman the Sage
    perform as Hotar-priest, [p. a12]
   As one who bears in season let this dame be ready to bring forth
    her child.
 [0101102]Four are the regions of the sky, and four the regions of the
    earth:
   The Gods have brought the babe; let them prepare the woman
    for the birth.
 [0101103]Puerpera (infatem) detegat: nos uterum aperimus. Lexa teipsam,
    puerpera. Tu, parturiens! emitte eum non carni, non adipi,
    non medullae adhaerntem.
 [0101104]Descendat viscosa placenta, cani, comedenda placenta; decidat
    placenta.
 [0101105]Diffindo tuum urinae ductum, diffindo vaginam, diffindo inguina.
    Matrem natumque divido, puerum a placenta divido: decidat
    placenta.
 [0101106]Sicut ventus, sicut mens, sicut alites volant, sic, decem mensium
    puer, cum placenta descende: descendat placenta.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XII

  

A prayer to Lightning, against fever, headache, and cough

[0101201]Born from the womb, brought forth from wind and from the
    cloud, the first red bull comes onward thundering with the
    rain.
   Our bodies may he spare who, cleaving, goes straight on; he who,
    a single force, divides himself in three.
 [0101202]Bending to thee who clingest to each limb with heat, fain would
    we worship thee with offered sacrifice,
   Worship with sacrifice the bends and curves of thee who with a
    vigorous grasp hast seized on this one's limbs.
 [0101203]Do thou release this man from headache, free him from cough
    which has entered into all his limbs and joints.
   May he, the child of cloud, the offspring of the wind, the whiz-
    zing lighting, strike the mountains and the trees.
 [0101204]Well be it with my upper frame, well be it with my lower parts.
   With my four limbs let it be well. Let all my body be in health.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a13]

  

HYMN XIII

  

A prayer to Lightning, for happiness

[0101301]Homage to thee, the Lightning's flash, homage to thee, the
   Thunder's roar!
   Homage to thee, the Stone which thou hurlest against the
    undevout!
 [0101302]Homage to thee, Child of the Flood whence thou collectest fer-
    vent heat!
   Be gracious to our bodies, give our children happiness and
    joy.
 [0101303]Yea, homage be to thee, O Offspring of the Flood! Homage we
    pay to thee, the dart and fiery flame:
   For well we know thy secret and sublimest home, where thou as
    central point art buried in the sea.
 [0101304]Thou, Arrow, which the host of Gods created, making it strong
    and mighty for the shooting,
   Be gracious, lauded thus, to our assembly. To thee, that Arrow,.
    be our homage, Goddess!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a14]

  

HYMN XIV

  

A woman's incantation against a rival

[0101401]As from the tree a wreath, have I assumed her fortune and her
    fame:
   Among her kinsfolk long may she dwell, like a mountain broadly-
    based.
 [0101402]King Yama, let this maiden be surrendered as a wife to thee:
   Bound let her be meanwhile within, her mother's, brother's,
    father's house.
 [0101403]Queen of thy race is she, O King: to thee do we deliver her.
   Long with her kinsfolk may she sit, until her hair be white with
    age.
 [0101404]With Asita's and Kasyapa's and Gaya's incantation, thus
   As sisters pack within a chest, I bind and tie thy fortune up.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a15]

  

HYMN XV

  

A prayer for the prosperity of an institutor of sacrifice

[0101501]Let the streams, flow together, let the winds and birds assembled
    come.
   Let this my sacrifice delight them always. I offer it with duly mixt
    oblation.
 [0101502]Come to my call, Blent Offerings, come ye very nigh. And,
    singers, do ye strengthen and increase this man.
   Hither come every animal: with this man let all wealth abide.
 [0101503]All river founts that blend their streams for ever inexhaustible--
   With all these confluent streams of mine we make abundant
    riches flow.
 [0101504]All streams of melted butter, and all streams of water and of
    milk
   With all these confluent streams of mine we make abundant
    riches flow.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a16]

  

HYMN XVI

  

A prayer and charm against demons

[0101601]May potent Agni who destroys the demons bless and shelter us.
   From greedy fiends who rise in troops at night-time when the
    moon is dark.
 [0101602]Varuna's benison hath blessed the lead, and Agni strengthens it.
   Indra hath given me the lead: this verily repels the fiends.
 [0101603]This overcomes Vishkandha, -this drives the voracious fiends
    away:
   By means of this have I, o'erthrown all the Pisachi's demon
    brood.
 [0101604]If thou destroy a cow of ours, a human being, or a steed,
   We pierce thee with this piece of lead so that thou mayst not slay
    our men.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a17]

  

HYMN XVII

  

A charm to be used at venesection

[0101701]Those maidens there, the veins, who run their course in robes of
    ruddy hue,
   Must now stand quiet, reft of power, like sisters who are brother-
    less.
 [0101702]Stay still, thou upper vein, stay still, thou lower, stay, thou
    midmost one,
   The smallest one of all stands still: let the great vessel e'en be
    still.
 [0101703]Among a thousand vessels charged with blood, among a thousand
    veins,
   Even these the middlemost stand still and their extremities have
    rest.
 [0101704]A mighty rampart built of sand hath circled and encompassed
    you:
   Be still, and quietly take rest.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVIII

  

A charm to avert evil spirits of misfortune and to secure prosperity

[0101801]We drive away the Spotted Hag, Misfortune, and Malignity:
   All blessings to our children then! We chase Malignity
    away.
 [0101802]Let Savitar, Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman drive away Stinginess
    from both the hands and feet:
   May Favour, granting us her bounties, drive her off. The Gods
    created Favour for our happiness.
 [0101803]Each fearful sign upon thy body, in thyself, each inauspicious
    mark seen in thy hair, thy face,
   All this we drive away and banish with our speech. May Savitar
    the God graciously further thee. [p. a18]
 [0101804]Antelope-foot, and Bullock-tooth, Cow-terrifier, Vapour-form,
   The Licker, and the Spotted Hag, all these we drive away from
    us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIX

  

A prayer for protection from arrows and for the punishment of enemies

[0101901]Let not the piercers find us, nor let those who wound discover
    us.
   O Indra, make the arrows fall, turned, far from us, to every
    side.
 [0101902]Turned from us let the arrows fall, those shot and those that will
    be shot.
   Shafts of the Gods and shafts of men, strike and transfix mine
    enemies:
 [0101903]Whoever treateth us as foes, be he our own or strange to us, a
    kinsman or a foreigner,
   May Rudra with his arrows pierce and slay these enemies of
    mine. [p. a19]
 [0101904]The rival and non-rival, he who in his hatred curses us
   May all the deities injure him! My nearest, closest mail is
    prayer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XX

  

A prayer to Soma, the Maruts, Mitra, and Varuna, for protection

[0102001]May it glide harmless by in this our sacrifice, O Soma, God!
   Maruts, be gracious unto us.
   Let not disaster, let not malison find us out; let not abominable
    guiles discover us.
 [0102002]Mitra and Varuna, ye twain, turn carefully away from us
   The deadly dart that flies to-day, the missile of the wicked
    ones.
 [0102003]Ward off from this side and from that, O Varuna, the deadly
    dart:
   Give us thy great protection, turn the lethal weapon far away.
 [0102004]A mighty Ruler thus art thou, unconquered, vanquisher of
    foes,
   Even thou whose friend is never slain, whose friend is never over-
    come.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a20]

  

HYMN XXI

  

A prayer to Indra for protection

[0102101]Lord of the clans, giver of bliss, fiend-slayer, mighty o'er the
    foe,
   May Indra, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull, who brings us
    peace.
 [0102102]Indra, subdue our enemies, lay low the men who fight with
    us:
   Down into nether darkness send the man who shows us enmity:
 [0102103]Strike down the fiend, strike down the foes, break thou asunder
   Vritra's jaws.
   O Indra, Vritra-slayer, quell the wrath of the assailing foe.
 [0102104]Turn thou the foeman's thought away, his dart who fain would
    conquer us:
   Grant us thy great protection; keep his deadly weapon far
    away.
 
 

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXII

  

A charm against jaundice

[0102201]As the Sun rises, let thy sore disease and yellowness depart. [p. a21]
   We compass and surround thee with the colour of a ruddy ox.
 [0102102]With ruddy hues we compass thee that thou mayst live a leng-
    thened life:
   So that this man be free from harm, and cast his yellow tint
    away.
 [0102103]Devatyas that are red of hue, yea, and the ruddy-coloured
    kine,
   Each several form, each several force--with these we compass
    thee about.
 [0102104]To parrots and to starlings we transfer thy sickly yellowness:
   Now in the yellow-coloured birds we lay this yellowness of
    thine.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIII

  

A charm against leprosy

[0102301]O Plant, thou sprangest up at night, dusky, dark-coloured,
    black in hue! [p. a22]
   So, Rajani, re-colour thou these ashy spots, this leprosy.
 [0102302]Expel the leprosy, remove from him the spots and ashy hue:
   Let thine own colour come to thee; drive far away the specks of
    white.
 [0102303]Dark is the place of thy repose, dark is the place thou dwellest
    in:
   Dusky and dark, O Plant, art thou: remove from him each
    speck and spot.
 [0102304]I with my spell have chased away the pallid sign of leprosy,
   Caused by infection, on the skin, sprung from the body, from the
    bones.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIV

  

A charm against leprosy

[0102401]First, before all, the strong-winged Bird was born;; thou wast
    the gall thereof.
   Conquered in fight, the Asuri took then the shape and form of
    plants.
 [0102402]The Asuri made, first of all, this medicine for leprosy, this
    banisher of leprosy.
   She banished leprosy, and gave one general colour to the skin.
 [0102403]One-coloured, is thy mother's name, One-coloured is thy father
    called:
   One-colour-maker, Plant! art thou: give thou one colour to this
    man. [p. a23]
 [0102404]Sama who gives one general hue was formed and fashioned from
    the earth:
   Further this work efficiently. Restore the colours that were his.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXV

  

A prayer to fever, as a charm against his attacks

[0102501]When Agni blazed when he had pierced the Waters, whereat the
   Law-observers paid him homage,
   There, men assever, was thy loftiest birthplace: O Fever, yield-
    ing to our prayer avoid us.
 [0102502]If thou be fiery glow, or inflammation, or if thy birthplace call
    for chips of fuel,
   Rack is thy name, God of the sickly yellow! O Fever, yielding
    to our prayer avoid us.
 [0102503]Be thou distress, or agonizing torment, be thou the son King
   Varuna hath begotten,
   Rack isthy name, God of the sickly yellow! O Fever, yielding to
    our prayer avoid us.
 [0102504]I offer homage to the chilly Fever, to his fierce burning glow I
    offer homage. [p. a24]
   Be adoration paid to Fever coming each other day, the third, of
    two days running.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVI

  

A prayer for protection, guidance, and prosperity

[0102601]Let that Destructive Weapon be far distant from us, O ye Gods;
    far be the Stone ye wont to hurl.
 [0102602]Our friend be that Celestial Grace, Indra and Bhaga be our friends,
    and Savitar with splendid Wealth. [p. a25]
 [0102603]Thou, Offspring of the waterflood, ye Maruts, with your sun-
    bright skins, give us protection reaching far.
 [0102604]Further us rightly, favour ye our bodies with your gracious love.
   Give thou our children happiness.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVII

  

A charm to obtain invisibility

[0102701]There on the bank those Vipers lie, thrice-seven, having cast
    their skins:
   Now we with their discarded sloughs bind close and cover up the
    eyes of the malicious highway thief.
 [0102702]Far let her go, cutting her way, brandishing, as it were, a club:
   Diverted be the new-born's mind: ne'er are the wicked
    prosperous.
 [0102703]Not many have had power enough; the feeble ones have not
    prevailed,
   Like scattered fragments of a reed: ne'er are the wicked pros-
    perous.
 [0102704]Go forward, feet, press quickly on, bring to the house of him
    who pays.
   Unconquered and unplundered, let Indranf, foremost, lead the
    way.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a26]

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

A prayer to Agni for the destruction of evil spirits

[0102801]God Agni hath come forth to us, fiend-slayer, chaser of disease,
   Burning the Yatudhanas up, Kimidins, and deceitful ones.
 [0102802]Consume the Yatudhanas, God! meet the Kimidins with thy
    flame:
   Burn up the Yatudhanis as they face thee, thou whose path is
    black!
 [0102803]She who hath cursed us with a curse, or hath conceived a
    murderous sin;
   Or seized our son to take his blood, let her devour the child
    she bare.
 [0102804]Let her, the Yatudhani eat son, sister, and her daughter's.
    child.
   Now let the twain by turns destroy the wild-haired Yatudhanis-
    and crush down Arayis to the earth!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  

A charm to secure the supremacy of a dethroned King

[0102901]With that victorious Amulet which strengthened Indra's power-
    and might [p. a27]
   Do thou, O Brahmanaspati, increase our strength for kingly
    sway.
 [0102902]Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities,
   Withstand the man who menaces, and him who seeks to injure-
    us.
 [0102903]Soma and Savitar the God have strengthened and exalted thee:
   All elements have aided thee, to make thee general conqueror.
 [0102904]Slayer of rivals, vanquisher, may that victorious Amulet
   Be bound on me for regal sway and conquest of mine enemies.
 [0102905]Yon Sun hath mounted up on high, and this my word hath
    mounted up
   That I may smite my foes and be slayer of rivals, rivalless.
 [0102906]Destroyer of my rivals, strong, victorious, with royal sway,
   May I be ruler of these men, and King and sovran of the folk.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXX

  

A benediction on a King at his consecration

[0103001]Guard and protect this man, all Gods and Vasus. Over him keep-
    ye watch and ward, Adityas.
   Let not death reach him from the hands of brothers from hands
    of aliens, or of human beings.
 [0103002]Listen, one-minded, to the word I, utter, the sons, O Gods,
    among you, and the fathers!
   I trust this man to all of you: preserve him happily, and to
    length of days conduct him.
 [0103003]All Gods who dwell on earth or in the heavens, in air, within.
    the plants, the beasts, the waters,
   Grant this man life to full old age, and let him escape the
    hundred other ways of dying. [p. a28]
 [0103004]You, claiming Anuyajas or Prayajas, sharers, or not consumers,
    of oblation,
   You, to whom heaven's five regions are apportioned, I make
    companions at his sacred sessions.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXI

  

A prayer for protection and general prosperity

[0103101]Here will we serve with sacrifice the great Controllers of the
    world,
   The four immortal Warders who protect the regions of the sky.
 [0103102]Ye, Guardians of the regions, Gods who keep the quarters of
    the heavens,
   Rescue and free us from the bonds of Nirriti, from grief and
    woe!
 [0103103]I, free from stiffness, serve thee with oblation, not lame I sacri-
    fice with oil and fatness.
   Let the strong Warder God, who keeps the regions bring to us
    hither safety and well-being.
 [0103104]Well be it with our mother and our father, well be it with our
    cows, and beasts, and people.
   Ours be all happy fortune, grace, and favour. Long, very long
    may we behold the sunlight.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a29]

  

HYMN XXXII

  

In praise of Heaven and Earth

[0103201]Ye people, hear and mark this well: he will pronounce a mighty
    prayer:
   That which gives breathing to the Plants is not on earth nor in,
    the heaven.
 [0103202]Their station, as of those who rest when weary, is in midmost air:
   The base whereon this world is built, the sages know or know
    it not.
 [0103203]What the two trembling hemispheres and ground produced and
    fashioned forth.
   This All, is ever fresh to-day, even as the currents of the sea.
 [0103204]This All hath compassed round the one, and on the other lies
    at rest.
   To Earth and all-possessing Heaven mine adoration have I paid.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a30]

  

HYMN XXXIII

  

To the Waters, for health and happiness

[0103301]May they, the golden-hued, the bright, the splendid, they wherein
   Savitar was born and Agni,
   They who took Agni as a germ, fair-coloured, the Waters, bring
    felicity and bless us!
 [0103302]They in the midst whereof King Varuna moveth, viewing men's
    righteous and unrighteous dealing.
   They who took Agni as a germ, fair-coloured,--those Waters bring
    felicity and bless us!
 [0103303]Whom the Gods make their beverage in heaven, they who wax
    manifold in air's mid-region,
   They who took Agni as a germ, fair-coloured,--those Waters bring
    felicity and bless us!
 [0103304]Ye Waters, with auspicious eye behold me: touch ye my skin
    with your auspicious body.
   May they, the bright and pure, distilling fatness, those Waters,
    bring felicity and bless us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIV

  

A young man's love-charm

[0103400]1. From honey sprang this Plant to life; with honey now we dig
    thee up.
   Make us as sweet as honey, for from honey hast thou been pro-
    duced.
 [0103402]My tongue hath honey at the tip, and sweetest honey at the root: [p. a31]
   Thou yieldest to my wish and will, and shalt be mine and only
    mine.
 [0103403]My coming in is honey-sweet and honey-sweet, my going forth:
   My voice and words are sweet: I fain would be like honey in
    my look.
 [0103404]Sweeter am I than honey, yet more full of sweets than licorice:
   So mayst thou love me as a branch full of all sweets, and only me.
 [0103405]Around thee have I girt a zone of sugar-cane to banish hate.
   That thou mayst be in love with me, my darling never to depart.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXV

  

A charm to ensure long life and glory to the wearer of an amulet

[0103501]This Ornament of Gold which Daksha's children bound, with
    benevolent thoughts, on Satanika,
   This do I bind on thee for life, for glory, for long life lasting
    through a hundred autumns.
 [0103502]This man no fiends may conquer, no Pisachas, for this is might
    of Gods, their primal offspring.
   Whoever wears the Gold of Daksha's children hath a long
    lengthened life among the living.
 [0103503]The light, the power, the lustre of the Waters, the strength of
   Trees, and all their forceful vigour,
   We lay on him as powers abide in Indra: so let him wear this
   Gold and show his valour.
 [0103504]With monthly and six-monthly times and seasons, with the full
    year's sweet essence do we fill thee, [p. a32]
   May Indra, Agni, and all Gods together, showing no anger, grant
    thee what thou wishest.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a33]

  

BOOK II

  

HYMN I

  

Glorification of the prime cause of all things

[0200101]Vena beholds That Highest which lies hidden, wherein this All
    resumes one form and fashion.
   Thence Prisni milked all life that had existence: the hosts that
    know the light with songs extolled her.
 [0200102]Knowing Eternity, may the Gandharva declare to us that highest
    secret station.
   Three steps thereof lie hidden in the darkness: he who knows
    these shall be the father's father.
 [0200103]He is our kinsman, father, and begetter: he knows all beings
    and all Ordinances.
   He only gave the Gods their appellations: all creatures go to
    him to ask direction.
 [0200104]I have gone forth around the earth and heaven, I have approached
    the first-born Son of Order.
   He, putting voice, as 'twere, within the speaker, stands in the
    world, he, verily is Agni.
 [0200105]I round the circumjacent worlds have travelled to see the far-
    extended thread of Order.
   Wherein the Gods, obtaining life eternal, have risen upward to
    one common birthplace.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a34]

  

HYMN II

  

A charm to ensure success in gambling

[0200201]Lord of the World, divine Gandharva, only he should be
    honoured in the Tribes and worshipped.
   Fast with my spell, celestial God, I hold thee. Homage to thee!
   Thy home is in the heavens.
 [0200202]Sky-reaching, like the Sun in brightness, holy, he who averts
    from us the Gods' displeasure.
   Lord of the World, may the Gandharva bless us, the friendly
   God who only must be worshipped.
 [0200203]I came, I met these faultless, blameless beings: among the
   Apsarases was the Gandharva.
   Their home is in the sea--so men have told me,--whence they
    come quickly hitherward and vanish.
 [0200204]Thou, Cloudy! ye who follow the Gandharva Visva-vasu, ye,
   Starry! Lightning-Flasher!
   You, O ye Goddesses, I truly worship.
 [0200205]Haunters of darkness, shrill in voice, dice-lovers, maddeners of
    the mind
   To these have I paid homage, the Gandharva's wives, Apsarases.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a35]

  

HYMN III

  

A water-cure charm

[0200301]That little spring of water which is running downward from the
    hill
   I turn to healing balm for thee that thou mayst be good
    medicine.
 [0200302]Hither and onward! Well! Come on! Among thy hundred
    remedies
   Most excellent of all art thou, curing disease and morbid flow.
 [0200303]The Asuras bury deep in earth this mighty thing that healeth
    wounds.
   This is the cure for morbid flow, this driveth malady away.
 [0200304]The emmets from the water-flood produce this healing medicine:
   This is the cure for morbid flow, this driveth malady away.
 [0200305]Mighty is this wound-healing balm: from out the earth was it
    produced.
   This is the cure for morbid flow, this driveth malady away.
 [0200306]Bless us the Waters! be the Plants auspicious!
   May Indra's thunderbolt drive off the demons. Far from us fall
    the shafts they shoot against us!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a36]

  

HYMN IV

  

A charm to ensure health and prosperity by wearing an amulet

[0200401]For length of life, for mighty joy, uninjured, ever showing
    strength.
   We wear Vishkandha's antidote, the Amulet of Jangida.
 [0200402]Amulet of a thousand powers, Jangida save us, all around.
   From Jambha, and from Viara, Vishkandha, and tormenting
    pain.
 [0200403]This overcomes Vishkandha, this chases the greedy fiends away:
   May this our panacea, may Jangida save us from distress.
 [0200404]With Jangida that brings delight, Amulet given by the Gods,
   We in the conflict overcome Vishkandha and all Rakshasas.
 [0200405]May Cannabis and Jangida preserve me from Vishkandha,--
    that
   Brought to us from the forest, this sprung from the saps of
    husbandry.
 [0200406]This Amulet destroys the might of magic and malignity:
   So may victorious Jangida prolong the years we have to live.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a37]

  

HYMN V

  

Invitation to, and praise of Indra

[0200501]Indra, be gracious, drive thou forth, come, Hero, with thy two
    bay steeds.
   Taste the libation, hither, enjoying meath and the hymn, come,
    fair, to the banquet.
 [0200502]O Indra, even as one athirst, fill thee with meath as 'twere from
    heaven.
   Sweet-toned, the raptures of this juice have come to thee as to
    the light.
 [0200503]Swift-conquering Indra, Mitra like, smote, as a Yati, Vritra
    dead.
   Like Bhrigu he cleft Vala through, and quelled his foes in Soma's
    rapturous joy.
 [0200504]O Indra, let the juices enter thee. Fill full thy belly, sate thee,
    mighty one! Let the hymn bring thee.
   Hear thou my call, accept the song I sing, here, Indra, with thy
    friends enjoy thyself, to height of rapture.
 [0200505]Now will I tell the manly deeds of Indra, the first that he
    achieved, the thunder-wielder.
   He slew the Dragon, then disclosed the waters, and cleft the
    channels of the mountain torrents.
 [0200506]He slew the Dragon lying on the mountain: his heavenly bolt of
    thunder Tvashtar fashioned.
   Like lowing kine in rapid flow descending the waters glided
    downward to the ocean.
 [0200507]Impetuous as a bull he chose the Soma, and quaffed the juices
    in three sacred beakers. [p. a38]
   Maghavan grasped the thunder for his weapon, and smote to
    death this first-born of the dragons.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

A prayer to Agni for protection

[0200601]Half-years and seasons strengthen thee, O Agni, the years, and
    all the Verities, and Rishis! [p. a39]
   Flash forth with thy celestial effulgence: illumine all four regions
    of the heavens.
 [0200602]Kindle thee, Agni, and make this man prosper: rise up erect
    for high and happy fortune.
   Agni, be those uninjured who adore thee, and may thy priests be
    glorious and no others.
 [0200603]These Brahmans have elected thee, O Agni: be thou propitious
    in our sacred chamber.
   Slayer of rivals, Agni, quell our foemen: watch in our house
    with care that never ceases.
 [0200604]Seize, Agni, on thy power and firmly hold it: contend thou with
    the Friend by way of friendship.
   Placed in the centre of our fellows, Agni, flash forth to be
    invoked by kings around thee.
 [0200605]Past those who slay, past enemies, past thoughtless men, past
    those who hate,
   Yea, Agni, hear us safe past all distresses: give thou us opulence
    with men about us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

  

A counter-charm against imprecation and malignity

[0200701]Hated by sinners, sprung from Gods, this Plant that turns the
    curse away
   Hath washed from me all curses, as water makes clean from
    spot and stain.
 [0200702]All curses of a rival, each curse of a female relative, Curse
    uttered by an augry priest, all these we tread beneath our feet.
 [0200703]Spread on the surface of the earth, downward from heaven thy
    root depends: [p. a40]
   With this that hath a thousand joints keep thou us safe on every
    side.
 [0200704]Guard on all sides this woman, guard my children, us, and all
    our wealth!
   Let not malignity o'ercome, nor adversaries conquer us.
 [0200705]Upon the curser fall his curse! Dwell we with him whose heart
    is true!
   We split the cruel villain's ribs whose evil eye bewitches us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

  

A charm against hereditary disease (kshetriya)

[0200801]Twin Stars of happy omen, named Releasers, have gone up.
   May they
   Loose, of inherited disease, the uppermost and lowest bond.
 [0200802]Vanish this Night, extinct in Dawn! Let those who weave their
    spells depart.
   So let the plague-destroying Plant remove inherited disease.
 [0200803]With straw of barley tawny-brown in colour with its silvery ears,
    with stalk and stem of Sesamum-
   So let the plague-destroying Plant remove inherited disease.
 [0200804]Let homage to thy ploughs be paid, our homage to the pole and
    yokes.
   So let the plague-destroying Plant remove inherited disease.
 [0200805]Homage to men with blinking eyes, homage to those who hear
    and act! To the Field's Lord be homage paid.
   So let the plague-destroying Plant remove inherited disease.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a41]

  

HYMN IX

  

A charm to cure dangerous disease

[0200901]Free this man, Dasavriksha! from the demon, from Grahi who
    hath seized his joints and members,
   And raise him up again, O Tree, into the world of living men.
 [0200902]He hath arisen and come once more, rejoined the band of those
    who live.
   May he become the sire of sons, and of all men most fortunate.
 [0200903]He hath returned to consciousness, rejoined the living's firm
    abodes,
   For hundred leeches are in this, yea, and a thousand healing
    herbs.
 [0200904]The Gods, the Brahman-priests, and plants observed the way to
    gather thee:
   All deities described the way men gather thee upon the earth.
 [0200905]Let him who made it also heal: he, truly, is the deftest leech.
   Pure, with a leech he verily shall give thee medicines that heal.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a42]

  

HYMN X

  

Absolution and benediction

[0201001]From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's noose I free and save thee.
   With spell and prayer I make thee pure and sinless: to thee be
    both, the Earth and Heaven, auspicious!
 [0201002]Gracious to thee be Agni with the Waters, let Soma with the
   Plants be kind and bless thee.
   From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's noose I thus release thee.
 [0201003]May kind Wind strengthen thee in air's mid-region, to thee may
    heaven's four quarters be auspicious.
   From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's curse I thus release thee.
 [0201004]These Goddesses, four regions of the heavens, on whom the
   Sun looks kindly, wives of Vata--
   From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's noose I thus release thee.
 [0201005]For long life, in the midst of these I set thee. Away pass Nirriti,
    away Consumption!
   From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's noose I thus release thee.
 [0201006]Thou hast been freed from Phthisis and from trouble, from
    shame, and from the snare of Druh and Grain.
   From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's noose I thus release thee.[p. a43]
 [0201007]Joy hast thou found, and left ill-will behind thee: thou hast
    attained the happy world of virtue.
   From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's noose I thus release thee.
 [0201008]The Gods have freed from, sinfulness, redeeming the Sun, the
   Law from darkness and from Grahi.
   From family sickness, kinsmen's curse, Destruction, from Druh,
    from Varuna's noose I thus release thee.
   With spell and prayer I make thee pure and sinless: to thee be
    both, the Earth and Heaven, auspicious!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XI

  

Counter-charm, with an amulet, against an enemy's spell

[0201101]Dart against dart, destroyer of destruction, thou art the missile
    sent to meet the missile. [p. a44]
   Reach thy superior, thou; surpass thine equal.
 [0201102]Sraktya art thou, an Amulet art thou, a counter-charm of spells,
   Reach thy superior, thou; surpass thine equal.
 [0201103]Use spells against the man we hate, against the man who hateth
    us.
   Reach thy superior, thou; surpass thine equal.
 [0201104]A prince art thou, giver of speech, thou art our bodies' strong
    defence.
   Reach thy superior, thou; surpass thine equal.
 [0201105]Fulgent art thou, and splendid, thou art heavenly lustre, thou
    art light.
   Reach thy superior, thou; surpass thine equal.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XII

  

A prayer for vengeance on a malicious rival worshipper

[0201201]The spacious Firmament, and Earth and Heaven, the Field's
   Queen, and the wonderful Wide-Strider,
   Yea, the broad middle air which Vata guardeth, may these now
    burn with heat while I am burning.
 [0201202]Listen to this, ye Gods who merit worship. Hymns here are sung
    for me by Bharadvaja.
   Bound in the noose may he be doomed to trouble whoever mars
    this that our mind hath purposed.
 [0201203]Hear this my call, O Indra, Soma-drinker, as with a burning
    heart I oft invoke thee.
   I smite, as 'twere a tree felled with a hatchet, the man who
    marreth this my plan and purpose.
 [0201204]Together with thrice-eighty Sama-singers, Angirases, and Vasus,
    and Adityas,
   May the felicity of the Fathers guard us. I seize that man with
    fire that Gods have kindled. [p. a45]
 [0201205]O Heaven and Earth, regard me with your favour, and, all ye
   Gods, stand on my side and help me.
   Angirases, Fathers worthy of the Soma! woe fall on him who,
    caused the hateful outrage!
 [0201206]Whoever either scorns us, O ye Maruts, or blames devotion
    which we now are paying.
   Let his own wicked deeds be fires to burn him. May Heaven
    consume the man who hates devotion.
 [0201207]Thy sevenfold vital breath, thine eight marrows I rend away
    with prayer.
   With Agni as thine envoy, go, prepared, to Yama's dwelling
    place.
 [0201208]In Jatavedas kindled flame I set the place assigned to thee.
   Let fire consume thy body, and thy voice go to the general
    breath.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a46]

  

HYMN XIII

  

A youth's Investiture ceremony (godanam)

[0201301]Strength-giver, winning lengthened life, O Agni, with face and
    back shining with molten butter,
   Drink thou the butter and fair milk and honey, and, as a sire
    his sons, keep this man safely.
 [0201302]For us surround him, cover him with splendour, give him long
    life, and death when age removes him.
   The garment hath Brihaspati presented to Soma, to the King, to
    w rap about him.
 [0201303]Thou for our w eal hast clothed thee in the mantle: thou hast
    become our heifers' guard from witchcraft.
   Live thou a hundred full and plenteous autumns, and wrap thee
    in prosperity of riches.
 [0201304]Come hither, stand upon the stone: thy body shall become a
    stone.
   The Universal Gods shall make thy life a hundred autumns
    long.
 [0201305]So may the Universal Gods protect thee, whom we divest of
    raiment worn aforetime.
   So after thee, well-formed and growing stronger, be born a
    multitude of thriving brothers.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a47]

  

HYMN XIV

  

A charm to banish vermin and noxious creatures

[0201401]Forth from the hall the bold, the sharp, the greedy one, the
    single-voiced,
   Sadanvas, and all progeny of Chanda we exterminate.
 [0201402]We drive you forth from cattle-shed, from axle, from within the
    wain,
   Ye daughters of Magundi, we frighten and chase you from out
    homes.
 [0201403]Yonder let the Arayis dwell, there where that house is down
    below.
   Let utter indigence and all the Yatudhanis settle there.
 [0201404]May Bhutapati drive away, and Indra, the Sadanvas hence.
   Let Indra with his bolt quell those who sit upon our dwelling's
    floor.
 [0201405]Whether ye be of farm and field, or whether ye be sent by men,
   Or be ye sprung from Dasyu race, vanish, Sadanvas, and begone.
 [0201406]I have gone round their homes as runs a fleet-foot racer round
    the post,
   And in all races conquered you. Vanish, Sadanvas, and begone.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a48]

  

HYMN XV

  

A charm against fear

[0201601]As Heaven and Earth are not afraid, and never suffer loss or
    harm,
   Even so, my spirit, fear not thou.
 [0201602]As Day and Night are not afraid, nor ever suffer loss or harm,
   Even so, my spirit, fear not thou.
 [0201603]As Sun and Moon are not afraid, nor ever suffer loss or harm.
   Even so. my spirit, fear not thou.
 [0201604]As Brahmanhood and Princely Power fear not, nor suffer loss,
    or harm,
   Even so, my spirit, fear not thou.
 [0201605]As Truth and Falsehood have no fear, nor ever suffer loss or
    harm,
   Even so, my spirit, fear not thou.
 [0201606]As What Hath Been and What Shall Be fear not, nor suffer loss
    or harm,
   Even so, my spirit, fear not thou.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a49]

  

HYMN XVI

  

A prayer for general protection

[0201601]Guard me from death, Inhaling and Exhaling! All bliss to you!
 [0201602]Guard me from overhearing, Earth and Heaven! All hail to
    you!
 [0201603]Do thou, O Surya, with thine eye protect me! All hail to
    thee!
 [0201604]Agni Vaisvanara, with all Gods preserve me! All hail to thee!
 [0201605]Preserve me with all care. O All-Sustainer! All hail to thee!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVII

  

A prayer to an amulet for health and strength

[0201701]Power art thou, give me power. All hail!
 [0201702]Might art thou, give me might. All hail!
 [0201703]Strength art thou, give me strength. All hail!
 [0201704]Life art thou, give me life. All hail!
 [0201705]Ear art thou, give me hearing! Hail!
 [0201706]Eye art thou, give me eyes. All hail!
 [0201707]Shield art thou, shield me well. All hail

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVIII

  

A charm against enemies, goblins, and other evil creatures

[0201801]Destruction of the foe art thou, give me the scaring of my foes.
   All hail!
 [0201802]The rival's ruiner art thou, give me to drive my rivals off. All
    hail!
 [0201803]Arayis' ruiner art thou, give me to drive Arayis off. All hail! [p. a50]
 [0201804]Pisa-chas' ruiner art thou, give me to drive Pisachas off. All
    hail!
 [0201805]Sadanvas' ruiner art thou, give me to drive Sadanvas off. All
    hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIX

  

A prayer to Agni for aid against an enemy

[0201901]Burn thou, O Agni, with that heat of thine against the man
    who hates us, whom we hate.
 [0201902]Flame thou, O Agni, with that flame of thine against the man
    who hates us, whom we hate.
 [0201903]Shine out, O Agni, with that sheen of thine against the man who
    hates us, whom we hate.
 [0201904]Blaze thou, O Agni, with that blaze of thine against the man
    who hates us, whom we hate.
 [0201905]O Agni, with the splendour that is thine darken the man who
    hates us, whom we hate.

It appears that hymns 20-23 were omitted--JBH

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIV

  

A charm against the magic arts of fiends

[0202401]O Serabhaka, Serabha, back fall your arts of witchery! Back,
   Kimidins! let your weapon fall.
   Eat your possessor; eat ye him who sent you forth;
 [0202402]Srvridhaka, O Sevridha, back fall your arts of witchery! Back,
   Kimidins! let your weapon fall, etc.
 [0202403]O Mroka, Anumroka, back return your arts of witchery! Back,
   Kimidins! let your weapon fall, etc.
 [0202404]O Sarpa, Anusarpa, back return your arts of witchery! Back, 'i
   Kimidins! let your weapon fall, etc.
 [0202405]Back fall your witcheries, Jurni! back your weapon, ye
   Kimidinis, etc. [p. a51]
 [0202406]Back fall your spells, Upabdi! back your weapon, ye Kimidinis,
    etc.
 [0202407]Back fall your witchcrafts, Arjuni! your weapon, ye Kimidinis,
    etc,
 [0202408]Back, O, Bharuji! fall your charms, your weapon, ye Kimidinis.
   Eat your possessor; eat ye him who sent you forth; eat your
    own flesh.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXV

  

A charm against fiends who cause abortion

[0202501]The Goddess Prisniparni hath blest us, and troubled Nirriti.
   Fierce crusher of the Kanvas she: her have I gained, the mighty
    one.
 [0202502]Victorious in the olden time this Prisniparni was brought forth:
   With her I cleave, as 'twere a bird's, the head of the Detestables. [p. a52]
 [0202504]The hateful fiend who drinks the blood, and him who take away
    the growth,
   The Kanva who devours the germ, quell, Prisniparni! and!
    destroy.
 [0202505]Drive and imprison in a hill these Kanvas harassers of life:
   Follow them Prisniparni, thou Goddess, like fire consuming.
    them.
 [0202506]Drive thou away these Kanvas, drive the harassers of life afar.
   Whither the shades of darkness go, I send the fiends who feed
    on flesh.

There is no verse 3 in the copytext--JBH

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVI

  

A benediction on homeward coming cattle

[0202601]Let them come home, the cattle that have wandered, whom Vayu
    hath delighted to attend on,
   Whose forms and figures are well known to Tvashtar. These cows
    let Savitar drive within this stable.
 [0202602]Let the beasts stream together to this cow-pen. Brihaspati who
    knoweth lead them hither!
   Let Sinivali guide the foremost homeward. When they have
    come, Anumati! enclose them.
 [0202603]Together stream the cattle! stream together horses and the
    men!
   Hitherward press all growth of grain! I offer sacrifice with mixt
    oblation.
 [0202604]I pour together milk of kine, with butter blending strength and
    juice.
   Well sprinkled be our men, as true to me as cows are to their
    herd! [p. a53]
 [0202605]Hither I bring the milk of cows, hither have brought the juice
    of corn.
   Hitherward have our men been brought, hitherward to this
    house our wives.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVII

  

A charm against an opponent in debate

[0202701]Let not the enemy win the cause! Strong and predominant art
    thou.
   Refute mine adversary's speech. Render them dull and flat, O
   Plant.
 [0202702]The strong-winged bird discovered thee, the boar unearthed thee
    with his snout.
   Refute mine adversary's speech. Render them dull and flat, O
   Plant.
 [0202703]Yea, Indra laid thee on his arm, to cast the Asuras to the
    ground.
   Refute mine adversary's speech. Render them dull and flat, O
   Plant.
 [0202704]Indra devoured the Pata plant that he might lay the Asuras
    low.
   Refute mine adversary's speech! Render them dull and flat, O
   Plant. [p. a54]
 [0202705]With this I overcome my foes as Indra overcame the wolves.
   Refute mine adversary's speech! Render them dull and flat, O
   Plant.
 [0202706]O Rudra, Lord of Healing Balms, dark-crested, skilful in thy
    work!--
   Refute mine adversary's speech. Render them dull and flat, O
   Plant.
 [0202707]Indra, defeat the speech of him who meets us with hostility.
   Comfort us with thy power and might. Make me superior in
    debate.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

A prayer for a boy's long and happy life

[0202801]This Child, Old Age! shall grow to meet thee only: none of
    the hundred other deaths shall harm him. [p. a55]
   From trouble caused by friends let Mitra guard him, as a kind
    mother guards the son she nurses.
 [0202802]Mitra or Varuna the foe-destroyer, accordant, grant him death
    in course of nature!
   Thus Agni, Hotar-priest, skilled in high statutes, declareth all
    the deities' generations.
 [0202803]Thou art the Lord of all terrestrial cattle, of cattle born and to
    be born hereafter.
   Let not breath drawn or breath emitted fail him. Let not his
    friends, let not his foemen slay him.
 [0202804]Let Heaven thy father and let Earth thy mother, accordant, give
    thee death in course of nature,
   That thou mayst live on Aditi's bosom, guarded, a hundred
    winters, through thy respirations.
 [0202805]Lead him to life, O Agni, and to splendour, this dear child,
   Varuna! and thou King Mitra!
   Give him protection, Aditi! as a mother; All Gods, that his be
    life of long duration;

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  

A benediction on a sick man

[0202901]Gods, give him all that earth hath best with bodily strength and
    happy fate.
   Agni and Surya grant him life, Brihaspati give him eminence!
 [0202902]Bestow thou life on him, O Jatavedas. Store him with future
    progeny, O Tvashtar.
   Send him, O Savitar, full growth of riches. Let this thy servant
    live a hundred autumns.
 [0202903]May this our prayer bring strength and goodly offspring. Give,
    both of you one-minded, strength and riches. [p. a56]
   Let him with might win fields and victory, Indra! setting beneath
    his feet the rest, his rivals.
 [0202904]As Indra's gift, by Varuna instructed the fierce one came to us
    sent by the Maruts.
   Let him, O Heaven and Earth, rest in your bosom. Let him not
    hunger, let him not be thirsty.
 [0202905]Ye twain endowed with vigour, grant him vigour. Ye who are
    rich in milk, give milk to feed him.
   These twain have given him vigour, Earth and Heaven, and all
    the Gods, the Maruts, and the Waters.
 [0202906]With health-bestowing drops thine heart I comfort: all-bright
    again, and undiseased, enjoy them.
   Drest in like robes let these two drink the mixture, wearing
    the Asvins' form as an illusion.
 [0202907]Erst Indra, wounded, made this strengthening portion, eternal
    food: thine is it, here presented.
   With this live full of vigour through the autumns. Let not thy
    strength be drained. Leeches have helped thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXX

  

A man's love-charm

[0203001]As the wind shake this Tuft of Grass hither and thither on the
    ground. [p. a57]
   So do I stir and shake thy mind, that thou mayst be in love
    with me, my darling, never to depart.
 [0203002]Ye, Asvins, lead together, ye unite and bring the loving pair.
   Now have the fortunes of you twain, now have your vows and
    spirits met.
 [0203003]When eagles, calling out aloud, are screaming in the joy of
    health,
   Then to my calling let her come, as to the arrow's neck the
    shaft.
 [0203004]Let what is inward turn outside, let what is outward be within:
   Seize and possess, O Plant, the mind of maidens rich in every
    charm.
 [0203005]Seeking a husband she hath come! and I came longing for a
    wife:
   Even as a loudly-neighing steed may fate and fortune have I
    met.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a58]

  

HYMN XXXI

  

A charm against all sorts of worms

[0203101]With Indra's mighty millstone, that which crushes worms of
    every sort,
   I bray and bruise the worms to bits like vetches on the grinding
    stone.
 [0203102]The Seen and the Invisible, and the Kururu have I crushed:
   Alandus, and all Chhalunas, we bruise to pieces with our spell.
 [0203103]I kill Alandus with a mighty weapon: burnt or not burnt they
    now have lost their vigour .
   Left or not left, I with the spell subdue them: let not a single
    worm remain uninjured.
 [0203104]The worm that lives within the ribs, within the bowels, in the
    head.
   Avaskava and Borer, these we bruise to pieces with the spell.
 [0203105]Worms that are found on mountains, in the forests, that live in
    plants, in cattle, in the waters,
   Those that have made their way within our bodies,--these I
    destroy, the worms' whole generation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a59]

  

HYMN XXXII

  

A charm against worms or bots in cows 

[0203201]Uprising let the Sun destroy, and when he sinketh, with his
    beams.
   The Worms that live within the cow.
 [0203202]The four-eyed worm, of every shape, the variegated, and the
    white
   I break and crush the creature's ribs, and tear away its head
    besides.
 [0203203]Like Atri I destroy you, Worms! in Kanva's, Jamadagni's way:
   I bray and bruise the creeping things to pieces with Agastya's*
    spell.
 [0203204]Slain is the sovran of these Worms, yea, their controlling lord
    is slain:
   Slain is the Worm, his mother slain, brother and sister both are
    slain.
 [0203205]Slain are his ministers, and slain his followers and retinue:
   Yes, those that seemed the tiniest things, the Worms have all
    been put to death.
 [0203206]I break in pieces both thy horns wherewith thou pushest here
    and there:
   I cleave and rend the bag which holds the venom which is*
    stored in thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a60]

  

HYMN XXXIII

[0203301]From both thy nostrils, from both eyes, from both thine ears,
    and from thy chin,
   Forth from thy brain and tongue I root Consumption seated in
    thy head.
 [0203302]Forth from the neck and from the nape, from dorsal vertebrae
    and spine.
   From arms and shoulder-blades I root Consumption seated in
    thine arms.
 [0203303]Forth from thy heart and from thy lungs, from thy gall-bladder
    and thy sides,
   From kidneys, spleen and liver thy Consumption we eradicate.
 [0203304]From bowels and intestines, from the rectum and the belly, I
   Extirpate thy Consumption, from flanks, navel and mesentery.
 [0203305]Forth from thy thighs and from thy knees, heels and the fore-
    parts of thy feet.
   Forth from thy loins and hips I draw Consumption setted in
    thy loins.
 [0203306]Forth from thy marrows and thy bones, forth from thy tendons
    and thy veins
   I banish thy Consumption, from thy hands, thy fingers, and thy
    nails.
 [0203307]In every member, every hair, in every joint wherein it lies,
   We with the exorcising spell of Kasyapa drive far away Con-
    sumption settled in thy skin.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a61]

  

HYMN XXXIV

  

A prayer accompanying an animal sacrifice

[0203401]May this, of all the beasts that Pasupati rules, Lord of animals,.
    quadruped and biped,
   Come, purchased, to the sacrificial portion. May growth of
    wealth attend the sacrificer.
 [0203402]Loosing the seed of future-time existence, give good success, O
   Gods, to him who worships.
   May what is present, duly brought, the victim, go to the deities'
    beloved region.
 [0203403]Those who are looking, deep in meditation, on the bound ani-
    mal with eye and spirit
   To them, the first, may Agni, God, give freedom, rejoicing in his
    creatures, Visvakarman.
 [0203404]Tame animals of every shape, though varied in colour, manifold.
    alike in nature
   To them, the first, may Vayu, God, give freedom, Prajapati.
    rejoicing in his creatures.
 [0203405]Let those who know receive before all others the vital breath
    proceeding from the body.
   Go to the sky. Stay there with all thy members. By paths which
   Gods have travelled go to Svarga.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a62]

  

HYMN XXXV

  

Expiation for an imperfectly performed sacrifice

[0203501]We who enjoying it have grown no richer, for whom the sacred
    altar-fires have sorrowed,
   We who compounded with deficient worship,--may Visvakarman
    make our service prosper.
 [0203502]Rishis have called the sacrifice's patron amerced through sin,
    sorrowing for his offspring.
   Those drops of meath whereof the missed enjoyment,--may
   Visvakarman with those drops unite us.
 [0203503]Regarding niggard churls as Soma-drinkers, skilful in sacrifice,
    weak at the meeting,
   Whatever sin the captive hath committed, do thou for weal
    release him, Visvakarman!
 [0203504]Awful are Rishis: unto them be homage, and to their eye and
    truthfulness of spirit!
   Loud homage to Brihaspati, O mighty! Homage to thee, O
   Visvakarman! Guard us.
 [0203505]The eye of sacrifice, source, and beginning--with voice, ear,
    spirit unto him I offer.
   To this our sacrifice wrought by Visvakarman may the Gods
    come gracious and kindly-hearted.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a63]

  

HYMN XXXVI

  

A charm to secure a husband for a marriageable girl

[0203601]To please us may the suitor come, O Agni, seeking this maid and
    bringing us good fortune.
   Approved by wooers, lovely in assemblies, may she be soon
    made happy with a husband.
 [0203602]As bliss beloved by Soma, dear to Prayer, and stored by Arya-
    man,
   With the God Dhatar's truthfulness I work the bridal oracle.
 [0203603]O Agni, may this woman find a husband. Then verily King Soma
    makes her happy.
   May she bear sons, chief lady of the household, blessed and
    bearing rule beside her consort.
 [0203604]As this lair, Maghavan! that is fair to look on was dear to wild
    things as a pleasant dwelling,
   So may this woman here be Bhaga's darling. Loved by her lord
    and prizing his affection. [p. a64]
 [0203605]Mount up, embark on Bhaga's ship, the full, the inexhaustible,
   Thereon bring hitherward to us the lover whom thou fain
    wouldst wed.
 [0203606]Call out to him, O Lord of Wealth! Make thou the lover well-
    inclined.
   Set each on thy right hand who is a lover worthy of her choice.
 [0203607]Here is the Bdellium and the gold, the Auksha and the bliss are
    here:
   These bring thee to the husbands, so to find the man whom thou.
    wouldst have.
 [0203608]May Savitar lead and bring to thee the husband whom thy heart
    desires.
   O Plant, be this thy gift to her!

[p. a65]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a66]

  

BOOK III

  

HYMN I

  

A prayer or charm for the defeat and destruction of enemies in battle

[0300101]Let the wise Agni go against our foemen, burning against ill-will
    and imprecation
   Let him bewilder our opponents' army, Let Jatavedas smite and
    make them handless.
 [0300102]Mighty are ye for such a deed, O Maruts. Go forward, overcome
    them and destroy them.
   The Vasus slew, and these were left imploring. Wise Agni as our
    messenger assail them!
 [0300103]O Maghavan, O Indra, thou who slayest fiends, and, Agni, thou,
   Burn, both of you, against these men, the foeman's host that
    threatens us.
 [0300104]Shot down the slope, with thy two tawny coursers, forth go thy
    bolt, destroying foes, O Indra!
   Slay those who fly, slay those who stand and follow.
   On every side fulfil these men's intention.
 [0300105]Indra, bewilder thou the foemen's army.
   With Agni's, Vata's furious rush drive them away to every side.
 [0300106]Let Indra daze their army. Let the Maruts slay it with their
    might.
   Let Agni take their eyes away, and let the conquered host
    retreat.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a67]

  

HYMN II

  

A rifaccimento or recension of I

[0300201]May Agni, he who knows, our envoy, meet them, burning
    against ill-will and imprecation.
   May he bewilder our opponent's senses. May Jatavedas smite and
    make them handless.
 [0300202]This Agni hath bewildered all the senses that were in your
    hearts:
   Now let him blast you from your home, blast you away from
    every side.
 [0300203]Dazing their senses, Indra, come hitherward with the wish and
    will.
   With Agni's, Vata's furious rush drive them to every side away.
 [0300204]Vanish, ye hopes and plans of theirs, be ye confounded, all their
    thoughts!
   Whatever wish is in their heart, do thou expel it utterly.
 [0300205]Bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize on their bodies and
    depart, O Apva!
   Go meet them, flame within their hearts and burn them. Smite
    thou the foes with darkness and amazement.
 [0300206]That army of our enemies, O Maruts, that comes against us with'
    its might, contending--
   Meet ye and strike it with unwelcome darkness so that not one.
    of them may know another.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN III

  

A charm for the restoration of an expelled king

  L Loudly he roared. Here let him labour deftly. Spread, Agni, over
    spacious earth and heaven. [p. a68]
   Let Maruts who possesses all treasures yoke thee. Bring him who
    reverently paid oblations.
 [0300302]Though he be far away, let the red horses bring Indra, bring the
    sage to us and friendship,
   Since with Sautramani Gods for him o'erpower Gayatri, Brihati,
    and hymn of praises.
 [0300303]King Varuna call thee hither from the waters! From hills and
    mountains Soma call thee hither!
   Let Indra call thee hither to these people. Fly hither to these
    people as a falcon.
 [0300304]May the hawk bring the man who must be summoned, from far
    away, in alien land, an exile.
   May both the Asvins make thy pathway easy. Come, and unite
    yourselves with him, ye Kinsmen.
 [0300305]Let thine opponents call thee back. Thy friends have chosen,
    thee again.
   Indra and Agni, all the Gods have kept thy home amid the
    tribe.
 [0300306]He who disputes our calling thee, be he a stranger or akin.
   Drive him, O Indra, far away, and do thou bring this man to
    us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a69]

  

HYMN IV

  

A benediction at the election of a king

[0300401]To thee hath come the kingship with its splendour: On! shine
    as lord, sole ruler of the people.
   King! let all regions of the heavens invite thee. Here let men
    wait on thee and bow before thee.
 [0300402]The tribesmen shall elect thee for the Kingship, these five celestial
    regions shall elect thee.
   Rest on the height and top of kingly power: thence as a mighty
    man award us treasures.
 [0300403]Kinsmen, inviting thee, shall go to meet thee, with thee go
   Agni as an active herald.
   Let women and their sons be friendly-minded. Thou mighty one,
    shalt see abundant tribute.
 [0300404]First shall the Asvins, Varuna and Mitra, the Universal Gods,
    and Maruts call thee.
   Then turn thy mind to giving gifts of treasures, thence, mighty
    one, distribute wealth among us.
 [0300405]Speed to us hither from the farthest distance. Propitious unto
    thee be Earth and Heaven.
   Even so hath Varuna this King asserted, he who himself hath
    called thee: come thou hither.
 [0300406]Pass to the tribes of men. O Indra, Indra. Thou the Varunas
    hast been found accordant.
   To his own place this one hath called thee, saying, Let him adore
    the Gods and guide the clansmen.
 [0300407]The Bounteous Paths in sundry forms and places,
    all in accord, have given thee room and comfort.
   Let all of these in concert call thee hither. Live thy tenth decade
    here, a strong kind ruler.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a70]

  

HYMN V

  

A King's address to an amulet which is to strengthen his authority

[0300501]This Parna-Amulet hath come, strong and destroying with its
    strength my rivals.
   The power of the Gods, the plants' sweet essence, may it incite
    me ceaselessly with vigour.
 [0300502]O Parna-Amulet, in me set firmly might and opulence.
   Within the compass of my rule may I be rooted and supreme.
 [0300503]That dear mysterious Amulet which Gods have set within the
    tree,
   May the Gods grant to me to wear together with extended
    life.
 [0300504]As Indra's gift, by Varuna instructed, Parna hath come, the
    mighty strength of Soma:
   This would I, brightly shining, love and cherish for long life
    lasting through a hundred autumns.
 [0300505]The Parna-Charm hath come to me for great security from ill.
   That I may be exalted, yea, above the wealth of Aryaman.
 [0300506]Sagacious builders of the car, cleaver and skilful artisans,--
   Make all the men on every side, Parna, obedient to my will
 [0300507]The kings and makers of the kings, troop-leaders, masters of the
    horse,
   Make all the men on every side, Parna, obedient to my will.
 [0300508]Thou, Parna, art my body's guard, man kin my birth to me a
    man.
   With splendour of the circling year I bind thee on me, Amulet!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a71]

  

HYMN VI

  

Address to an amulet which is to secure the defeat of the wearer's enemies

[0300601]Masculine springs from masculine, Asvattha grows from Kha-
    dira,
   May it destroy mine enemies, who hate me and whom I detest.
 [0300602]Crush down my foes, Asvattha! Rend, O Burster, those who
    storm and rage,
   With Indra, slayer of the fiends, with Mitra and with Varuna.
 [0300603]As thou hast rent and torn apart, Asvattha! in the mighty sea,
   So rend asundar all those men who hate me and whom I detest.
 [0300604]Thou who like some victorious bull displayest thy surpassing
    might,
   With thee, with thee, Asvattha! we would overcome our
    enemies.
 [0300605]Nirriti bind them with the bonds of Death which never may be
    loosed. [p. a72]
   Mine enemies, Asvattha! those who hate me and whom I
    detest.
 [0300606]As thou, Asvastha!, mountest on the trees and overthrowest
    them,
   So do thou break my foeman's head asunder and o'erpower
    him.
 [0300607]Let them drift downward like a boat torn from the rope that
    fastened it.
   There is no turning back for those whom He who Cleaves hath
    driven away.
 [0300608]With mental power I drive them forth, drive them with intellect
    and charm.
   We banish and expel them with the branch of an Asvattha tree.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

  

A charm with an amulet of buck horn to drive away hereditary disease

[0300701]The fleet-foot Roebuck wears upon his head a healing remedy.
   Innate disease he drives away to all directions with his horn.
 [0300702]With his four feet the vigorous Buck hath bounded in pursuit of
    thee.
   Unbind the chronic sickness, Horn! deeply inwoven in the heart.
 [0300703]That which shines younder, like a roof resting on four walls,
    down on us,-- [p. a73]
   Therewith from out thy body we drive all the chronic malady,
 [0300704]May those twin stars, auspicious, named Releasers, up in yonder
    sky.
   Loose of the chronic malady the uppermost and lowest bond.
 [0300705]Water, indeed, hath power to heal, Water drives malady away.
   May water--for it healeth all--free thee from permanent disease.
 [0300706]Hath some prepared decoction brought inveterate disease on
    thee,
   I know the balm that healeth it: we drive the malady away.
 [0300707]What time the starlight disappears, what time the gleams of
   Dawn depart,
   May evil fortune pass from us, the chronic sickness disappear.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

  

A charm to secure the submission, love, and fidelity of kinsmen

[0300801]Let Mitra come, arranging, with the Seasons, lulling the Earth
    to rest with gleams of splendour.
   And so let Agni, Varuna, and Vayu make our dominion tran-
    quil and exalted.
 [0300802]May Indra, Tvashtar hear my word with favour, may Dhatar,
   Rati, Savitar accept it.
   I call the Goddess Aditi, heroes' mother, that I may be the
    centre of my kinsmen.
 [0300803]Soma I call, and Savitar with homage, and all the Adityas in the
    time of contest. [p. a74]
   Long may this fire send forth its splendour, lighted by kinsmen
    uttering no word against me.
 [0300804]Here, verily, may you stay: go ye no farther. The strong Herd,
   Lord of Increase, drive you hither!
   To please this man may all the Gods together come unto you
    and be as dames who love him.
 [0300805]We bend together all your minds, your vows and purposes we
    bend.
   We bend together you who stand apart with hopes opposed to
    ours.
 [0300806]I with my spirit seize and hold your spirits. Follow with thought
    and wish my thoughts and wishes.
   I make your hearts the thralls of my dominion; on me attendant
    come thy way I guide you.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

  

A charm against rheumatism (vishkondha)

[0300901]Heaven is the sire, the mother Earth, of Karsapha and Visapha.
   As ye have brought them hither, Gods! so do ye move therm
    hence away.
 [0300902]The bands hold fast without a knot: this is the way that Manu-
    used.
   I make Vishkandha impotent as one emasculateth bulls.
 [0300903]Then to a tawny-coloured string the wise and skilful bind a
    brush.
   Let bandages make impotent the strong and active Kabava.
 [0300904]Ye who move active in your strength like Gods with Asuras'
    magic powers,
   Even as the monkey scorns the dogs, Bandages! scorn the
   Kabava.
 [0300905]Yea, I will chide thee to thy shame, I will disgrace the Kabava. [p. a75]
   Under our impracations ye, like rapid cars, shall pass away.
 [0300906]One and one hundred over earth are the Vishkandhas spread
    abroad.
   Before these have they fetched thee forth. Vishkandha quelling
   Amulet.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN X

  

A new year prayer

[0301001]The First hath dawned. With Yama may it be a cow to pour
    forth milk.
   May she be rich in milk and stream for us through many a com-
    ing year.
 [0301002]May she whom Gods accept with joy, Night who approacheth.
    as a cow,
   She who is Consort of the Year, bring us abundant happiness
 [0301003]Thou whom with reverence we approach, O Night, as model of
    the Year,
   Vouchsafe. us children long to live; bless us with increase of
    our wealth.
 [0301004]This same is she whose light first dawned upon us: she moves
    established in the midst of others: [p. a76]
   Great powers and glories are contained within her: a first-born
    bride, she conquers and bears children.
 [0301005]Loud was the wooden pass-gear's ring and rattle, as it made
    annual oblation ready.
   First Ashtaka! may we be lords of riches, with goodly children
    and good men about us.
 [0301006]The shrine of Ila flows with oil and fatness: accept, O Jatavedas,
    our oblations.
   Tame animals of varied form and colour--may all the seven
    abide with me contented.
 [0301007]Come thou to nourish me and make me prosper. Night! may the
    favour of the Gods attend us.
   Filled full, O Ladle, fly thou forth. Completely filled fly back
    again.
   Serving at every sacrifice bring to us food and energy.
 [0301008]This Year hath come to us, thy lord and consort, O Ekashtaka.
   Vouchsafe us children long to live, bless us with increase of our
    wealth.
 [0301009]The Seasons, and the Seasons' Lords I worship, annual parts
    and groups.
   Half years, Years, Months, I offer to the Lord of all existing
    things.
 [0301010]I offer to the Seasons, to their several groups, to Months, to
   Years.
   Dhatar, Vidhatar, Fortune, to the lord of all existing things.
 [0301011]With fatness and libation we sacrifice and adore the Gods.
   Wealthy in kine may we retire to rest us in our modest homes.
 [0301012]Ekashtaka, burning with zealous fervour, brought forth her
    babe the great and glorious Indra.
   With him the Gods subdued their adversaries: the Lord of
   Might became the Dasyus' slayer.
 [0301013]Indra's and Soma's mother! thou art daughter of Prajapati.
   Satisfy thou our hearts' desires. Gladly accept our sacrifice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a77]

  

HYMN XI

  

A charm for the recovery of a dangerously sick man

[0301101]For life I set thee free by this oblation both from unmarked'.
    decline and from consumption:
   Or if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from her,.
   O Indra, thou and Agni!
 [0301102]Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he brought very
    near to death already,
   Out of Destruction's lap again I bring him, save him for life to
    last a hundred autumns. [p. a78]
 [0301103]With sacrifice thousand-eyed and hundred-powered, bringing a
    hundred lives, have I restored him,
   That Indra through the autumns may conduct him safe to the
    farther shore of all misfortune.
 [0301104]Live, waxing in thy strength a hundred autumns, live through
    a hundred springs, a hundred winters!
   Indra, Agni, Savitar, Brihaspati give thee a hundred! With
    hundred-lived oblation have I saved him,
 [0301105]Breath, Respiration, come to him, as two car-oxen to their
    stall!
   Let all the other deaths, whereof men count a hundred, pass
    away.
 [0301106]Breath, Respiration, stay ye here. Go ye not hence away from
    him,
   Bring, so that he may reach old age, body and members back
    again.
 [0301107]I give thee over to old age, make thee the subject of old age.
   Let kindly old age lead thee on. Let all the other deaths, whereof
    men count a hundred, pass away!
 [0301108]Old age hath girt thee with its bonds even as they bind a bull
    with rope.
   The death held thee at thy birth bound with a firmly-knotted
    noose,
   Therefrom, with both the hands of Truth, Brihaspati hath loose-
    ned thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a79]

  

HYMN XII

  

A benediction on a newly built house

[0301201]Here, even here I fix my firm-set dwelling; flowing with fatness
    may it stand in safety.
   May we approach thee, House! with all our people, uncharmed
    and goodly men, and dwell within thee,
 [0301202]Even here, O House, stand thou on firm foundation, wealthy in
    horses, rich in kine and gladness.
   Wealthy in nourishment. in milk and fatness, rise up for great
    felicity and fortune.
 [0301203]A spacious store, O House, art thou, full of clean corn and
    lofty-roofed.
   Let the young calf and little boy approach thee, and milch-kine
    streaming homeward in the evening.
 [0301204]This House may Savitar and Vayu stablish, Brihaspati who
    knows the way, and Indra.
   May the moist Maruts sprinkle it with fatness, and may King
   Bhaga make our corn-land fruitful.
 [0301205]Queen of the home! thou, sheltering, kindly Goddess, wast sta-
    blished by the Gods in the beginning.
   Clad in thy robe of grass be friendly-minded, and give us wealth
    with goodly men about us.
 [0301206]Thou Pole, in ordered fashion mount the pillar. Strong, shining
    forth afar, keep off our foemen.
   House! let not those who dwell within thee suffer. Live we with
    all our men, a hundred autumns.
 [0301207]To this the tender boy hath come, to this the calf with all the
    beasts,
   To this crock of foaming drink, hither with jars of curdled
    milk.
 [0301208]Bring hitherward, O dame, the well-filled pitcher, the stream
    of molten butter blent with nectar.
   Bedew these drinkers with a draught of Amrit.
   May all our hopes' fulfilment guard this dwelling.
 [0301209]Water that kills Consumption, free from all Consumption, here
   I bring.
   With Agni, the immortal one, I enter and possess the house.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a80]

  

HYMN XIII

  

A benediction on a newly cut water channel

[0301301]As ye, when Ahi had been slain, flowed forth together with a
    roar,
   So are ye called the Roaring Ones: this, O ye Rivers, is your
    name.
 [0301302]As driven forth by Varuna ye swiftly urged your rolling waves,
   There Indra reached you as you flowed; hence ye are still the
   Water-floods.
 [0301303]Indra restrained you with his might. Goddesses, as ye glided
    on
   Not in accordance with his will: hence have ye got the name of
   Streams.
 [0301304]One only God set foot on you flowing according to your will, [p. a81]
   The mighty ones breathed upward fast: hence; Water is the name
    they bear.
 [0301205]Water is good, water indeed is fatness. Agni and Soma, truly,
    both bring water.
   May the strong rain of those who scatter sweetness come helpful
    unto me with breath and vigour.
 [0301206]Then verily, I see, yea, also hear them: their sound approaches
    me, their voice comes hither.
   Even then I think I am enjoying Amrit, what time I drink my
    fill of you, gold coloured!
 [0301207]Here, O ye Waters, is your heart. Here is your calf, ye holy
    ones.
   Flow here, just here, O mighty Streams, whither I now am lead-
    ing you.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a82]

  

HYMN XIV

  

A benediction on a cattle pen

[0301401]A Pen wherein to dwell at ease, abundance and prosperity,
   Whate'er is called the birth of day, all this do we bestow on
    you.
 [0301402]May Aryaman pour gifts on you, and Pushan, land Brihaspati,
   And Indra, winner of the prize. Make ye my riches grow with me.
 [0301403]Moving together, free from fear, with plenteous droppings in
    this pen,
   Bearing sweet milk-like Soma-juice, come hither free from all
    disease.
 [0301404]Come hither, to this place, O Cows: here thrive as though ye
    were manured.
   Even here increase and multiply; let us be friendly, you and me.
 [0301405]Auspicious be this stall to you. Prosper like cultivated rice.
   Even here increase and multiply. Myself do we bestow on you.
 [0301406]Follow me, Cows, as master of the cattle. Here may this Cow-
    pen make you grow and prosper,
   Still while we live may we approach you living, ever increasing
    with the growth of riches.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XV

  

A merchant's prayer for success in his business

[0301501]I stir and animate the merchant Indra; may he approach and
    be our guide and leader. [p. a83]
   Chasing ill-will, wild beast, and highway robber, may he who
    hath the power give me riches.
 [0301502]The many paths which Gods are wont to travel, the paths which
    go between the earth and heaven,
   May they rejoice with me in milk and fatness that I may make
    rich profit by my purchase.
 [0301503]With fuel. Agni! and with butter, longing, mine offering I
    present for strength and conquest;
   With prayer, so far as I have strength, adoring--this holy hymn
    to gain a hundred treasures.
 [0301504]Pardon this stubbornness of ours. O Agni, the distant pathway
    which our feet have trodden.
   Propitious unto us be sale and barter, may interchange of mer-
    chandise enrich me.
   Accept, ye twain, accordant, this libation! Prosperous be our
    ventures and incomings.
 [0301505]The wealth wherewith I carry on my traffic, seeking, ye Gods!
    wealth with the wealth I offer,
   May this grow more for me, not less: O Agni, through sacrifice
    chase those who hinder profit!
 [0301506]The wealth wherewith I carry on my traffic, seeking, ye Gods!
    wealth with the wealth I offer,
   Herein may Indra, Savitar, and Soma, Prajapati, and Agni give
    me splendour.
 [0301507]With reverence we sign thy praise, O Hotar-priest Vaisvanara.
   Over our children keep thou watch, over our bodies, kine, and
    lives.
 [0301508]Still to thee ever will we bring oblation, as to a stabled horse, O
   Jatavedas.
   Joying in food and in the growth of riches may we thy servants,
   Agni, never suffer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a84]

  

HYMN XVI

  

A Rishi's morning prayer

[0301601]Agni at dawn, and Indra we invoke at dawn, and Varuna and
   Mitra, and the Asvins twain:
   Bhaga at dawn, Pushan and Brahmanaspati, Soma at dawn, and
   Rudra we invoke at dawn.
 [0301602]We all strong Bhaga, conqueror in the morning, the son of
   Aditi, the great Disposer,
   Whom each who deems himself poor, strong and mighty, a king,
    addresses thus, Grant thou my portion!
 [0301603]Bhaga, our guide, Bhaga whose gifts are faithful, favour this
    hymn and give us wealth, O Bhaga.
   Bhaga, augment our store of kine and horses. Bhaga, may we be
    rich in men and heroes.
 [0301604]So may felicity be ours at present, and when the Sun advances,
    and at noontide;
   And may we still, O Bounteous One, at sunset be happy in the
   Gods' protecting favour. [p. a85]
 [0301605]May Bhaga verily be bliss-bestower, and through him, Gods!
    may happiness attend us.
   As such with all my might I call and call thee: as such be thou
    our leader here, O Bhaga.
 [0301606]To this our sacrifice may the Dawns incline them, and come to
    the pure place like Dadhikravan.
   As strong steeds draw a chariot may they bring me hitherward
   Bhaga who discovers treasure.
 [0301607]May the kind Mornings dawn on us for ever with, wealth of
    kine, of horses, and of heroes.
   Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness,
   Do ye preserve us evermore with blessings!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVII

  

A farmer's song and prayer to speed the plough

[0301701]Wise and devoted to the Gods the skilful men bind plough-ropes
    fast, [p. a86]
   And lay the yokes on either side.
 [0301702]Lay on the yokes and fasten well the traces: formed is the
    furrow, sow the seed within it.
   Viraj vouchsafe us hearing fraught with plenty!
   Let the ripe grain come near and near the sickle.
 [0301703]The keen-shared plough that bringeth bliss, furnished with traces
    and with stilts,
   Shear out for me a cow, a sheep, a rapid drawer of the car, a
    blooming woman, plump and strong!
 [0301704]May Indra press the furrow down, may Pushan guard and cherish
    her.
   May she, well stored with milk yield milk for us through each
    succeeding year.
 [0301705]Happily let the shares turn up the ploughland, the ploughers
    happily follow the oxen.
   Pleased with our sacrifice, Suna and Sira! make the plants bring
    this man abundant produce.
 [0301706]Happily work our steers and men! May the plough furrow
    happily,
   Happily be the traces bound. Happily ply the driving-goad.
 [0301707]Suna and Sira, welcome ye this laud, and with the milk that ye
    have made in heaven,
   Bedew ye both this earth of ours.
 [0301708]Auspicious Sita, come thou near: we venerate and worship thee.
   That thou mayst bless and prosper us and bring us fruits
    abundantly.
 [0301709]Loved by the Visvedevas and the Maruts, let Sita be bedewed.
    with oil and honey.
   Turn thou to us with wealth of milk, O Sita, in vigorous
    strength and pouring streams of fatness.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a87]

  

HYMN XVIII

  

A jealous wife's incantation against a rival

[0301801]From out the earth I dig this Plant, and herb of most effectual
    power,
   Wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the husband for
    one's self.
 [0301802]Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, victorious
   Plant,
   Drive thou, the rival wife away, and make my husband only
    mine.
 [0301803]Indeed he hath not named her name: thou with this husband
    dalliest not,
   Far into distance most remote we drive the rival wife away. [p. a88]
 [0301804]Stronger am I, O stronger one, yea, mightier than the mightier;
   Beneath me be my rival wife, down, lower than the lowest
    dames!
 [0301805]I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also art victorious:
   As victory attends us both we will subdue my fellowwife.
 [0301806]I've girt thee with the conquering Plant, beneath thee laid the
    mightiest one.
   As a cow hastens to her calf, so let thy spirit speed to me,
    hasten like water on its way.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIX

  

A glorification of the office of a king's household priest

[0301901]Quickened is this my priest rank, quickened is manly strength
    and force,
   Quickened be changeless power, whereof I am the conquering
   President!
 [0301902]I quicken these men's princely sway, the might, the manly
    strength and force;
   I rend away the foemen's arms with this presented sacrifice.
 [0301903]Down fall the men, low let them lie, who fight against our
    mighty prince,
   I ruin foemen with my spell, and raise my friends to high estate.
 [0301904]Keener than is the axe's edge, keener than Agni's self are they,
   Keener than Indra's bolt are they whose Priest and President am I.
 [0301905]The weapons of these men I whet and sharpen, with valiant
    heroes I increase their kingdom. [p. a89]
   Victorious be their power and ever ageless! May all the Gods
    promote their thoughts and wishes.
 [0301966]Let their fierce powers, O Maghavan, be heightened, and upward
    go the shout of conquering heroes.
   Apart and clear, let shout and roar and shriek and lamentation
    rise!
   Let the Gods led by Indra, let the Maruts with our army go.
 [0301907]Advance and be victorious, men I Exceeding mighty be your
    arms!
   Smite with sharp-pointed arrows those whose bows are weak.
   With your strong arms and weapons smite the feeble foe.
 [0301908]Loosed from the bowstring fly away, thou Arrow, sharpened by
    our prayer.
   Assail the foemen, vanquish them, conquer each bravest man of
    theirs, and let not one of them escape.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XX

  

A prayer for riches and general prosperity

[0302001]This is thine ordered place of birth whence sprung to life thou
    shinest forth. [p. a90]
   Knowing this, Agni, mount on high and cause our riches to
    increase.
 [0302002]Turn hither, Agni, speak to us, come to us with a friendly mind.
   Enrich us, Sovran of the Tribes! Thou art the giver of our
    wealth.
 [0302003]Let Aryaman vouchsafe us, wealth, and Bhaga, and Brihaspati,
   The Goddesses grant wealth to us, Sunrita, Goddess, give me
    wealth!
 [0302004]We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our songs and.
    hymn,
   The Adityas, Vishnu, Surya, and the Brahman-priest Brihaspati.
 [0302005]Do thou, O Agni, with thy fires strengthen our prayer and.
    sacrifice.
   Incite thou us, O God, to give, and send us riches to bestow.
 [0302006]Both Indra here and Vayu we invoke with an auspicious call,
   That in assembly all the folk may be benevolent to us, and be
    inclined to give us gifts.
 [0302007]Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Brihaspati,
   Vata, Vishnu, Sarasvati, and the strong courser Savitar.
 [0302008]Now have we reached the ordering of power, and all these
    worlds of life are held within it.
   Let him who knows urge e'en the churl to bounty Give wealth.
    to us with all good men about us.
 [0302009]May heaven's five spacious regions pour their milk for me with
    all their might.
   May I obtain each wish and hope formed by my spirit and my
    heart.
 [0302010]May speech that winneth cows be mine. With splendour mount
    thou over me.
   May Vayu hedge me round about May Pushan make me pros-
    perous.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a91]

  

HYMN XXI

  

In honour of fire in all shapes, to appease Agni of the funeral pile and to quench the flames of cremation

[0302101]All Fires that are in water and in Vritra, all those that man and
    stones contain within them,
   That which hath entered herbs and trees and bushes--to all
    these Fires be this oblation offered.
 [0302102]That which abides in Soma and in cattle, that which lies deep in
    birds and sylvan creatures,
   That which hath entered quadrupeds and bipeds--to all these
   Fires be this oblation offered.
 [0302103]The Fire that rideth by the side of Indra, the God Vaisvanara,.
    yea all-consuming,
   Whom, as the victor, I invoke in battles--to all these Fires be
    this oblation offered.
 [0302104]The all-devouring God whom men call Kama, he whom they
    call the Giver and Receiver,
   Invincible, pervading, wise, and mighty--to all these Fires be
    this oblation offered.
 [0302105]To thee, strength-giver, glorious, rich in pleasant strains, whom.
    in their minds the thirteen creatures of the world,
   And the five sons of man regard as Hotar-priest--to all these-
   Fires be this oblation offered. [p. a92]
 [0302106]To him who feeds on ox and cow, sage, bearing Soma on his
    back,
   To all Vaisvanara's followers--to these be this oblation paid.
 [0302107]All fiery flames that follow after lightning, flashing o'er earth,
    through firmament and heaven,
   All that are in the wind and skyey regions--to all these Fires be
    this oblation offered.
 [0302108]The golden-handed Savitar and Indra, Brihaspati, Varuna,
   Mitra, and Agni,
   The Angirases we call, the Visve Devas: let them appease this
   Agni, Flesh-devourer.
 [0302109]Flesh-eating Agni is appeased, appeased is he who hurteth men.
   Now him who burneth every thing, the Flesh-consumer, have I
    stilled.
 [0302110]The mountains where the Soma grows, the waters lying calm and
    still,
   Vata, Parjanya, Agni's self have made the Flesh-consumer rest.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a93]

  

HYMN XXII

  

The taming and training of an elephant for a king to ride on

[0302201]Famed be the Elephant's strength, the lofty glory, which out of
   Aditi's body took existence!
   They all have given me this for my possession, even all the Gods
    and Aditi accordant.
 [0302202]On this have Mitra, Varuna, Indra, and Rudra fixed their
    thought.
   May those all-fostering deities anoint and balm me with his
    strength.
 [0302203]The strength wherewith the Elephant was dowered, that decks a
   King among the men, in waters,
   O Agni, even with that strength make thou me vigorous to-day.
 [0302204]The lofty strength which sacrifice brings, Jatavedas! unto thee,
   What strength the Sun possesses, all strength of the royal Ele-
    phant--such strength vouchsafe to me the pair of Asvins
    lotus-garlanded!
 [0302205]Far as the heaven's four regions spread, far as the eye's most
    distant ken.
   So wide, so vast let power be mine, this vigour of the Elephant.
 [0302206]Now hath the Elephant become chief of all pleasant beasts to
    ride.
   With his high fortune and his strength I grace and conscorate
    myself.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a94]

  

HYMN XXIII

  

A charm to remove a woman's sterility, and to assure the birth of boys

[0302301]From thee we banish and expel the cause of thy sterility.
   This in another place we lay apart from thee and far removed.
 [0302302]As arrow to the quiver, so let a male embryo enter thee.
   Then from thy side be born a babe, a ten-month child, thy hero
    son.
 [0302303]Bring forth a male, bring forth a son. Another male shall follow
    him.
   The mother shalt thou be of sons born and hereafter to be
    born.
 [0302304]With that auspicious general flow wherewith steers propagate
    their kind,
   Do thou obtain thyself a son: be thou a fruitfu! mother-cow.
 [0302305]I give thee power to bear a child: within, thee pass the germ of
    life!
   Obtain a son, O woman, who shall be a blessing unto thee. Be
    thou a blessing unto him.
 [0302306]May those celestial herbs whose sire was Heaven, the Earth their
    mother, and their root the ocean.
   May those celestial healing Plants assist thee to obtain a son.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a95]

  

HYMN XXIV

  

A song of harvest

[0302401]The plants of earth are rich in milk, and rich in milk is this
    my word,
   So from the rich in milk I bring thousandfold profit hitherward.
 [0302402]Him who is rich in milk I know. Abundant hath he made our
    corn.
   The God whose name is Gatherer, him we invoke who dwelleth
    in his house who sacrifices not.
 [0302403]All the five regions of the heavens, all the five races of man-
    kind,
   As after rain the stream brings drift, let them bring increase
    hitherward.
 [0302404]Open the well with hundred streams, exhaustless, with a thousand
    streams.
   So cause this corn of ours to be exhaustless, with a thousand
    streams.
 [0302405]O Hundred-handed, gather up. O Thousand-handed, pour thou
    forth.
   Bring hither increase of the corn prepared and yet to be pre-
    pared.
 [0302406]Three sheaves are the Gandharvas' claim, the lady of the house
    hath four.
   We touch thee with the sheaf that is the most abundant of them
    all.
 [0302407]Adding and Gathering are thy two attendants, O Prajapati.
   May they bring hither increase, wealth abundant, inexhaustible.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a96]

  

HYMN XXV

  

A man's love-charm

[0302501]Let the Impeller goad thee on. Rest not in peace upon thy bed.
   Terrible is the shaft of Love: therewith I pierce thee to the
    heart.
 [0302502]That arrow winged with longing thought, its stem Desire, its
    neck, Resolve,
   Let Kama, having truly aimed, shoot forth and pierce thee in
    the heart.
 [0302503]The shaft of Kama, pointed well, that withers and consumes the
    spleen.
   With hasty feathers, all aglow, therewith I pierce thee to the
    heart.
 [0302504]Pierced through with fiercely-burning heat, steal to me with thy
    parching lips,
   Gentle and humble, all mine own, devoted, with sweet words of
    love.
 [0302505]Away Lfrom mother and from sire I drive thee hither with a
    whip,
   That thou mayst be at my command and yield to every wish of
    mine. [p. a97]
 [0302506]Mitra and Varuna, expel all thought and purpose from her
    heart.
   Deprive her of her own free will and make her subject unto me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVI

  

A charm to win the favour of all serpents

[0302601]Ye Gods who dwell within this eastward region, entitled
   Weapons, Agni forms your arrows.
   Be kind and gracious unto us and bless us. To you be reverence,
    to you be welcome!
 [0302602]Ye Gods who dwell within this southward region, entitled Eager,
   Kama forms your arrows.
   Be kind, etc.
 [0302603]Ye Gods who dwell within this westward region, whose name is
   Radiant, Water forms your arrows.
   Be kind, etc.
 [0302604]Ye Gods who dwell within this northward region, whose name
    is Piercers, Vata forms your arrows.
   Be kind, etc.
 [0302605]Ye Gods whose home is in this firm-set region--Nilimpas is your
    name--Plants are your arrow.
   Be kind, etc.
 [0302606]Ye Gods whose home is in this upmost region, Yearners by
    name, Brihaspati forms your arrows.
   Be kind and gracious unto us and bless us. To you be reverence,
    to you be welcome!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a98]

  

HYMN XXVII

  

A charm consigning an enemy to the serpents for punishment

[0302701]Agni is regent of the East, its warder is Asita, the Adityas are
    the arrows.
   Worship to these the regents, these the warders, and to the
    arrows, yea, to these be worship!
   Within your jaws we lay the man who hateth us and whom we
    hate.
 [0302702]Indra is regent of the South, its warder Tiraschiraji, and the
    shafts the Fathers.
   Worship to these the regents, these the warders, and to the
    arrows, yea, to these be worship!
   Within your jaws we lay the man who hateth us and whom we
    hate.
 [0302703]Of the West region Varuna is ruler, Pridaku warder, Nourish-
    ment the arrows.
   Worship, etc.
 [0302704]Soma is ruler of the Northern region, Svaja the warder, lightn-
    ing's flash the arrows.
   Worship, etc.
 [0302705]Vishnu is ruler of the firm-set region, Kalmashagriva warder,
   Plants the arrows.
   Worship, etc.
 [0302706]Brihaspati controls the topmost region, Svitra is warder, and
    the Rain the arrows.
   Worship to these the regents, these the warders, and to the
    arrows, yea, to these be worship,!
   Within your jaws we lay the man who hateth us and whom we
    hate.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a99]

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

A charm to change the ill-omened birth of twin calves into a blessing

[0302701]This cow was born to bring forth offspring singly, though they
    created kine of every colour.
   When she produces twins in spite of Order, sullen, with groan
    and grudge she harms the cattle.
 [0302702]She brings destruction on the beasts, turned to a flesh-devouring
    worm.
   Yes, give her to the Brahman that she may bring luck and
    happiness.
 [0302703]Be thou auspicious to our folk, bring luck to horses and to kine.
   Auspicious unto all this farm, bring luck and happiness to us.
 [0302704]Let there be rain and increase here, here be thou most munifi-
    cient.
   Mother of twins, prosper our herd.
 [0302705]Where, having left all sickness of their bodies, the pious lead, as
    friends, their lives of gladness
   Nigh to that world approached the twin calves' mother. Let her
    not harm our people and our cattle.
 [0302706]Where lies the world of those dear friends, the pious, those who
    have brought due sacrifice to Agni
   Nigh to that world approached the twins calves' mother. Let her
    not harm our people and our cattle.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a100]

  

HYMN XXIX

  

On the means to obtain immunity from taxation in the next world

[0302901]When yonder kings who sit beside Yama divide among them-
    selves the sixteenth part of hopes fulfilled,
   A ram bestowed as sacrifice, white-footed, frees us from the tax.
 [0302902]He satisfies each hope and want, prevailing, present and pre-
    pared.
   The wish-fulfilling ram, bestowed, white-footed is exhaustless
    still.
 [0302903]He who bestows a white-hooved ram, adequate to the place he
    holds.
   Ascends to the celestial height, the heaven where tribute is not
    paid to one more mighty by the weak.
 [0302904]He who bestows a white-hooved ram, adequate to the place he
    holds.
   Offered with five cakes, lives on that, unwasting, in the Fathers'
    world.
 [0302905]He who bestows a white-hooved ram, adequate to the place he
    holds,
   Offered with five cakes, lives on that, wasteless, while Sun and.
   Moon endure.
 [0302906]Like a refreshing draught, like sea, the mighty flood, he faileth
    not.
   Like the two Gods whose home is one, the ram white-footed,
    faileth not.
 [0302907]Whose gift was this, and given to whom? Kama to Kama gave
    the gift.
   Kama is giver, Kama is receiver. Kama has passed into the sea.
   Through Kama do I take thee to myself. O Kama, this is thine. [p. a101]
 [0302708]May Earth receive thee as her own, and this great interspace of
    air.
   Neither in breath and body nor in progeny may this acceptance
    do me harm.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  

On the means to obtain immunity from taxation in the next world

[0303001]Freedom from hate I bring to you, concord and unanimity.
   Love one another as the cow loveth the calf that she hath borne.
 [0303002]One-minded with his mother let the son be loyal to his sire.
   Let the wife, calm and gentle, speak words sweet as honey to her
    lord.
 [0303003]No brother hate his brother, no sister to sister be unkind.
   Unanimous, with one intent, speak ye your speech in friend-
    liness.
 [0303004]That spell through which Gods sever not, nor ever bear each
    other hate,
   That spell we lay upon your home, a bond of union for the
    men.
 [0303005]Intelligent, submissive, rest united, friendly and kind, bearing
    the yoke together.
   Come, speaking sweetly each one to the other. I make you one-
    intentioned and one-minded. [p. a102]
 [0303006]Let what you drink, your share of food be common together,
    with one common bond I bid you.
   Serve Agni, gathered round him like the spokes about the
    chariot nave.
 [0303007]With binding charm I make you all united, obeying one sole
    leader and one-minded.
   Even as the Gods who watch and guard the Amrit, at morn and
    eve may ye be kindly-hearted.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXI

  

A charm for the recovery of one dangerously ill

[0303101]May Gods release from failing strength, thou Agni, from
    malignity!
   I free from every evil, from decline: I compass round with life.
 [0303102]May Pavamana free from harm, and Sakra from unrighteous
    deed.
   I free from every evil, from decline: I compass round with life.
 [0303103]Tame beasts have parted from wild beasts, water and thirst have
    gone apart
   I free, etc.
 [0303104]Parted are heaven and earth, and paths turned to each quarter
    of the sky.
   I free, etc.
 [0303105]Tvashtar prepares the bridal of his daughter; then all this world
    of life departs and leaves him.
   I free, etc.
 [0303106]Agni combines the vital airs. The moon is closely joined with
    breath.
   I free. etc. [p. a103]
 [0303107]The Gods have lifted up with breath the Sun whose might is
    everywhere.
   I free, etc.
 [0303108]Die not. Live with the breath of those who make and who enjoy
    long life.
   I free, etc.
 [0303109]Die not. Stay here. Breathe with the breath of those who draw
    the vital air.
   I free, etc.
 [0303110]Rise up with life, conjoined with life. Up, with the sap of growing
    plants!
   I free, etc.
 [0303111]We as immortal beings have arisen with Parjanya's rain,
   I free from every evil, from decline: I compass round with life.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a104]

  

BOOK IV

  

HYMN I

  

Cosmogonical and mystico-theological doctrine

[0400101]Eastward at first the prayer was generated: Vena disclosed bright
    flashes from the summit,
   Disclosed his deepest, nearest revelations, womb of the non-
    existent and existent.
 [0400102]Let this Queen come in front, her Father's daughter, found in
    the worlds for earliest generation.
   For him they set this radiant vault in motion. Let them prepare
    warm milk for him who first would drink.
 [0400103]He who was born as his all-knowing kinsman declareth all the
    deities' generations.
   He from the midst of prayer his prayer hath taken. On high,
    below, spread forth his godlike nature.
 [0400104]For he, true to the law of Earth and Heaven, established both
    the mighty worlds securely.
   Mighty when born, he propped apart the mighty, the sky, our
    earthly home, and air's mid-region.
 [0400105]He from the depth hath been reborn for ever, Brihaspati the
    world's sole Lord and Ruler.
   From light was born the Day with all its lustre: through this
    let sages live endowed with splendour.
 [0400106]The sage and poet verily advanceth the statute of that mighty
   God primeval.
   He was born here with many more beside him: they slumbered
    when the foremost side was opened.
 [0400107]The man who seeks the friend of Gods, Atharvan the father,
    and Brihaspati, with worship,
   Crying to him, Be thou all things' creator! the wise God, self-
    dependent, never injures.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a107]

  

HYMN III

  

A Charm against tigers, wolves, thieves and other noxious creatures

 

[0400301]Three have gone hence and passed away, the man, the tiger,
    and the wolf.
   Down, verily, the rivers flow, down-goeth the celestial Tree,.
    down let our foemen bend and bow.
 [0400302]On distant pathway go the wolf, on pathway most remote the
    thief!
   On a far road speed forth the rope with teeth, and the malicious
    man!
 [0400303]We crush and rend to pieces both thine eyes, O Tiger, and thy
    jaws and all the twenty claws we break.
 [0400304]We break and rend the tiger first of creatures that are armed.
    with teeth;
   The robber then, and then the snake, the sorcerer, and then the
    wolf.
 [0400305]The thief who cometh near to-day departeth bruised and crush-
    ed to bits.
   By nearest way let him be gone. Let Indra slay him with his
    bolt.
 [0400306]Let the beast's teeth be broken off, shivered and shattered be
    his ribs! [p. a108]
   Slack be thy bowstring: downward go the wild beast that
    pursues the hare!
 [0400307]Open not what thou hast compressed, close not what thou hast
    not compressed.
   Indra's and Soma's child, thou art Atharvan's tiger-crushing
    charm.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a107]

  

HYMN III

  

A Charm against tigers, wolves, thieves and other noxious creatures

 

[0400301]Three have gone hence and passed away, the man, the tiger,
    and the wolf.
   Down, verily, the rivers flow, down-goeth the celestial Tree,.
    down let our foemen bend and bow.
 [0400302]On distant pathway go the wolf, on pathway most remote the
    thief!
   On a far road speed forth the rope with teeth, and the malicious
    man!
 [0400303]We crush and rend to pieces both thine eyes, O Tiger, and thy
    jaws and all the twenty claws we break.
 [0400304]We break and rend the tiger first of creatures that are armed.
    with teeth;
   The robber then, and then the snake, the sorcerer, and then the
    wolf.
 [0400305]The thief who cometh near to-day departeth bruised and crush-
    ed to bits.
   By nearest way let him be gone. Let Indra slay him with his
    bolt.
 [0400306]Let the beast's teeth be broken off, shivered and shattered be
    his ribs! [p. a108]
   Slack be thy bowstring: downward go the wild beast that
    pursues the hare!
 [0400307]Open not what thou hast compressed, close not what thou hast
    not compressed.
   Indra's and Soma's child, thou art Atharvan's tiger-crushing
    charm.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

A charm to restore virile power

[0400401]We dig thee from the earth, the Plant which strengthens and
    exalts the nerves,
   The Plant which the Gandharva dug for Varuna whose power
    was lost.
 [0400402]Let Ushas and let Surya rise, let this the speech I utter rise.
   Let the strong male Prajapati arise with manly energy.
 [0400403]Sicut tui surgentis (membrum virile) tanquam inflammatum
    palpitat, hoc illud tui ardentius haec herba faciat.
 [0400404]Sursum (estote) herbarum vires, taurorum vigor. Tu, Indra,
    corporis potens, virorum masculum robur in hoc homine
    depone.
 [0400405]Ros aquarum primigenitus atque arborum, Somae etiam frater
    es, vatum sacrorum masculus vigor es.
 [0400406]Hodie, Agnis! hodie Savitar! hodie dea Sarasvatis! hodie
   Brahmanaspatis! hujus fascinum velut arcum extende.
 [0400407]Velut nervum in arcu ego tuum fascinum extendo. Aggredere
   (mulierem) semper indefessus velut cervus damam.
 [0400408]Quae sunt equi vires, muli, capri, arietis, atque tauri, illas, cor-
    poris potens! in hoc homine depone.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a109]

  

HYMN V

  

A lover's sleep-charm

[0400501]The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up from out the
    sea,
   By him the strong and mighty one we lull the folk to rest and.
    sleep.
 [0400502]Over the surface of the earth there breathes no wind, there looks.
    no eye.
   Lull all the women, lull the dogs to sleep, with Indra as thy
    friend!
 [0400503]The woman sleeping in the court, lying without, or stretched on
    beds,
   The matrons with their odorous sweets--these, one and all, we
    lull to sleep.
 [0400504]Each moving thing have I secured, have held and held the eye
    and breath.
   Each limb and member have I seized in the deep darkness of
    the night.
 [0400505]The man who sits, the man who walks, whoever stands and clearly
    sees
   Of these we closely shut the eyes, even as we closely shut this
    house.
 [0400506]Sleep mother, let the father sleep, sleep dog, and master of the
    home.
   Let all her kinsmen sleep, sleep all the people who are round
    about.
 [0400507]With soporific charm, O Sleep, lull thou to slumber all the folk.
   Let the rest sleep till break of day, I will remain awake till
    dawn, like Indra free from scath and harm.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a110]

  

HYMN VI

  

A charm to make a poisoned arrow harmless

[0400601]The Brahman first was brought to life ten-headed and with faces
    ten.
   First drinker of the Soma, he made poison ineffectual.
 [0400602]Far as the heavens and earth are spread in compass, far as the
   Seven Rivers are extended,
   So far my spell, the antidote of poison, have I spoken hence,
 [0400603]The strong-winged Bird Garutman first of all, O Poison fed on
    thee:
   Thou didst not gripe or make him drunk: aye, thou becamest
    food for him.
 [0400604]Whoever with five fingers hath discharged thee from the crooked
    bow,
   I from the shaft have charmed away the poison of the fastening
    band.
 [0400605]The poison have I charmed away from shaft, cement, and feather-
    ed end;
   Yea, from the barb, the neck, the horn, the poison have I charmed
    away.
 [0400606]Feeble, O Arrow, is thy shaft, thy poison, too, hath lost its
    strength.
   Made of a worthless tree, thy bow, O feeble one, is impotent.
 [0400607]The men who brayed it, smeared it on, they who discharged it,
    sent it forth,
   All these are made emasculate, emasculate the poison-hill.
 [0400608]Thy diggers are emasculate, emasculate, O, Plant art thou.
   The rugged mountain that produced this poison is emasculate.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a111]

  

HYMN VII

  

A charm to make a poisonous plant innocuous

[0400701]So may this water guard us on the bank of Varanavati.
   Therein hath Amrit been infused: with that I ward thy poison
    off.
 [0400702]Weak is the poison of the East, weak is the poison of the North,
   So too this poison of the South counts as a cake of curds and
    meal.
 [0400703]When he hath made of thee a cake, broad, steaming, swelling up
    with fat,
   And even in hunger eaten thee, then gripe him not, thou hideous
    one!
 [0400704]Intoxicater! like a shaft we make thy spirit fly away, Like a pot
    boiling on the fire, we with our word remove thee hence.
 [0400705]We set around thee with the spell as 'twere a gathered arma-
    ment.
   Stay quiet like a rooted tree. Dug up with mattocks, gripe not
    thou.
 [0400706]For coverings men have bartered thee, for skins of deer and
    woven cloths.
   Thou art a thing of sale, O Plant. Dug up with mattocks, gripe
    not thou!
 [0400707]None have attained to those of old, those who wrought holy acts
    for you.
   Let them not harm our heroes here. Therefore I set before you
    this.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a112]

  

HYMN VIII

  

A benediction at the consecration of a King

[0400801]The Being lays the sap of life in beings: he hath become the
    sovran Lord of creatures.
   Death comes to this man's royal consecration: let him as King
    own and allow this kingdom.
 [0400802]Come forward, turn not back in scorn, strong guardian, slayer
    of the foes.
   Approach, O gladdener of thy friends. The Gods have blessed
    and strengthened thee.
 [0400803]All waited on him as he came to meet them. He self-resplendent
    moves endued with glory.
   That is the royal hero's lofty nature: he, manifold, hath gained
    immortal powers.
 [0400804]Stride forth to heaven's broad regions, thou, a tiger on a tiger's
    skin.
   Let all the people long for thee. Let heavenly floods be rich in
    milk.
 [0400805]Heaven's waters joyous in their milk, the waters of middle air,
    and those that earth containeth-
   I with the gathered power and might of all these waters sprinkle
    thee,
 [0400806]The heavenly waters rich in milk have sprinkled thee with power
    and might.
   To be the gladdener of thy friends. May Savitar so fashion thee.
 [0400807]These, compassing the tiger, rouse the lion to great joy and
    bliss. [p. a113]
   As strong floods purify the standing ocean, so men adorn the
    leopard in the waters

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

  

A charm addressed to a precious ointment for safety and wealth

[0400901]Approach! thou art the mountain's eye, the living thing that
    saveth us;
   A gift bestowed by all the Gods, yea, the defence that guardeth
    life.
 [0400902]Thou art the safeguard of the men, thou art the safeguard of
    the kine,
   Thou standest ready to protect the horses that are fleet of foot.
 [0400903]Thou, also, Salve! art a defence that rends and crushes
    sorcerers.
   Thou knowest, too, of Amrit, thou art the delight of all who
    live, a jaundice-curing balm art thou.
 [0400904]Whomso thou creepest over, Salve! member by member, joint
    by joint,
   From him, like some strong arbiter of strife, thou banishest
    decline.
 [0400905]No imprecation reaches him, no magic, no tormenting fiend,
   O Salve, Vishkandha seizes not the man who carries thee about.
 [0400906]From lying speech, from evil dream, from wicked act and
    sinfulness, [p. a114]
   From hostile and malignant eye,--from these, O Salve, protect
    us well.
 [0400907]I, knowing this, O Salve, will speak the very truth and not a
    lie:
   May I obtain both horse and ox, may I obtain thy life, O man.
 [0400908]Three are the slaves that serve the Salve, Fever, Consumption,
    and the Snake.
   Thy father is the loftiest of mountains, named the Triple-
    peaked.
 [0400909]Sprung from the Snowy Mountain's side, this Ointment of the
   Three-peaked hill.
   Crushes and rends all sorcerers and every witch and sorceress.
 [0400910]If thou art from the Three-peaked hill or hast thy name from
   Yamuna,
   These names are both auspicious: by these two protect thou us,
   O Salve!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a115]

  

HYMN X

  

A charm accompanying investiture with an amulet of shell

[0401001]Child of the wind firmament, sprung from the lightning and the
    light,
   May this the gold-born Shell that bears the pearl preserve us
    from distress.
 [0401002]Shell that wast born from out the sea, set at the head of
    things that shine!
   With thee we slay the Rakshasas and overcome voracious fiends.
 [0401003]We stay disease and indigence, and chase Sadanvas with the
   Shell.
   May the all-healing Shell that bears the pearl preserve us from
    distress.
 [0401004]Born in the heaven, sprung from the sea, brought to us hither
    from the flood.
   This gold-born Shell shall be to us an amulet to lengthen life.
 [0401005]From ocean sprang the Amulet, from Vritra sprang the Lord of
   Day:
   May this protect us round about from shaft of God and Asura.
 [0401006]Peerless 'mid golden ornaments art thou: from Soma wast thou
    born.
   Thou gleamest on the quiver, thou art beautiful upon the car:
    may it prolong our days of life!
 [0401007]Bone of the Good became the pearl's shell-mother endowed with
    soul it moveth in the waters.
   I bind this on thee for life, strength, and vigour, for long life
    lasting through a hundred autumns.
   May the pearl's mother keep and guard thee safely!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a116]

  

HYMN XI

  

A glorification of the sacrificial gharma or milk caldron

[0401101]The Bull supports the wide-spread earth and heaven, the Bull
    supports the spacious air between them.
   The Bull supports the sky's six spacious regions: the universal
    world hath he pervaded.
 [0401102]The Bull is Indra o'er the beasts he watches. He, Sakra
    measures out three several pathways.
   He, milking out the worlds, the past, the future, discharges all
    the Gods' eternal duties.
 [0401103]Being produced among mankind as Indra, the Caldron works
    heated and brightly glowing.
   Let him not, with good sons, pass off in vapour who hath not
    eaten of the Ox with knowledge.
 [0401104]The Ox pours milk out in the world of virtue: in earliest time,
    he, Pavam5na, swells it.
   Parjanya is the stream, Maruts his udder, sacrifice is the milk,
    the meed his milking.
 [0401105]That which not sacrifice nor sacrificer, not giver nor receiver
    rules and governs,
   All-winning, all-supporting, all-effecting,--which of all quadru-
    peds, tell us! is the Caldron?
 [0401106]May we, fame-seekers, reach the world of virtue by service of
    the Gharma and through fervour,
   Whereby the Gods went up to heaven, the centre of life eternal,
    having left the body.
 [0401107]Prajapati, supreme and sovran ruler, Indra by form and by his
    shoulder Agni,
   Came to Visvanara, came to all men's Bullock: he firmly forti-
    fied and held securely. [p. a117]
 [0401108]The middle of the Bullock's neck, there where the shoulder-bar
    is placed,
   Extends as far to east of him as that is settled to the west.
 [0401109]He whosoever knows the seven exhaustless pourings of the Ox,
   Wins himself offspring and the world: the great Seven Rishis
    know this well.
 [0401110]With feet subduing weariness, with legs extracting freshening
    draughts,
   Through toil the plougher and the Ox approach the honeyed
    beverage.
 [0401111]Assigned are these twelve nights, they say, as holy to Prajapati:
   Whoever knows their proper prayer performs the service of the
   Ox.
 [0401112]At evening he is milked, is milked at early morn, is milked at
    noon.
   We know that streams of milk that flow from him are in-
    exhaustible.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a118]

  

HYMN XII

  

A charm to mend a broken bone

[0401201]Thou art the healer, making whole, the healer of the broken
    bone:
   Make thou this whole, Arundhati!
 [0401202]Whatever bone of thine within thy body hath been wrenched or
    cracked,
   May Dhatar set it properly and join together limb by limb.
 [0401203]With marrow be the marrow joined, thy limb united with the
    limb.
   Let what hath fallen of thy flesh, and the bone also grow again.
 [0401204]Let marrow close with marrow, let skin grow united with the
    skin.
   Let blood and bone grow strong in thee, flesh grow together
    with the flesh.
 [0401205]Join thou together hair with hair, join thou together skin with
    skin.
   Let blood and bone grow strong in thee. Unite the broken part,.
   O Plant.
 [0401206]Arise, advance, speed forth; the car hath goodly fellies, naves,
    and wheels!!
   Stand up erect upon thy feet.
 [0401207]If he be torn and shattered, having fallen into a pit, or a cast
    stone have struck him,
   Let the skilled leech join limb with limb, as 'twere the portions
    of a car.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a119]

  

HYMN XIII

  

A charm to restore a sick man to health

[0401301]Gods, raise again the man whom ye, O Gods, have humbled
    and brought low.
   Ye Gods, restore to life again, him, Gods! who hath committed
    sin.
 [0401302]Here these two winds are blowing far as Sindhu from a distant
    land.
   May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow thy fault away.
 [0401303]Hither, O Wind, blow healing balm, blow every fault away, thou
   Wind!
   For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the Gods.
 [0401304]May the Gods keep and save this man, the Maruts' host deliver
    him.
   All things that be deliver him that he be freed from his offence.
 [0401305]I am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee rest and keep
    thee safe.
   I bring thee mighty strength, I drive thy wasting malady away.
 [0401306]Felicitous is this my hand, yet more felicitous is this.
   This hand contains all healing balms, and this makes whole with
    gentle touch.
 [0401307]The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with our tenfold-
    branching hands.
   With these two healers of disease, we stroke thee with a soft
    caress.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a120]

  

HYMN XIV

  

Accompanying the sacrifice of a he-goat

[0401401]The Goat was verily produced from Agni. Through sorrow he
    beheld, at first, his father.
   Through him at first the Gods attained to godhead, and, meet
    for sacrifices, were exalted.
 [0401402]Bearing in hands seethed viands, go with Agni to the cope of
    heaven.
   Reaching the sky that touches heaven, mix with the company of
   Gods.
 [0401403]From earth's high ridge to middle air I mounted, and from mid-
    air ascended up to heaven.
   From the high pitch of heaven's cope I came into the world of
    light.
 [0401404]Mounting the sky they look not round; they rise to heaven
    through both the worlds,
   Sages who paid the sacrifice that pours its streams on every
    side.
 [0401405]First among all the deities, come forward, thou who art eye of
   Gods and men, O Agni.
   Imploring, and accordant with the Bhrigus, to heaven in safety
    go the sacrificers!
 [0401406]With milk and butter I anoint the mighty, celestial Goat, strong-
    winged, and full of juices.
   Through him will we attain the world of virtue, ascending to the
    loftiest cope, to heaven.
 [0401407]Set the Goat's head toward the eastern region, and turn his right
    side to the southern quarter.
   His hinder part turn to the western quarter, and set his left side
    to the northern region.
 [0401408]Set the Goat's backbone upmost in the zenith, and lay his belly
    downward in the nadir; set his midportion in mid-air between
    them.
 [0401409]O'er the dressed Goat lay a dressed skin to robe him prepared,
    in perfect form, with all his members.
   Rise upward to the loftiest vault of heaven: with thy four feet
    stand firmly in the regions.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a121]

  

HYMN XV

  

A charm to hasten the coming of the rains

[0401501]Let all the misty regions fly together, let all the rain-clouds sped
    by wind, assemble.
   Let waters satisfy the earth, the voices of the great mist-enve-
    loped Bull who roareth.
 [0401502]Let them show forth, the strong, the bounteous Maruts: let
    plants and shrubs be hung with drops of moisture.
   Let floods of rain refresh the ground with gladness and herbs
    spring various with each form and colour.
 [0401503]Cause us who sing to see the gathering vapours: out burst in
    many a place the rush of waters!
   Let floods of rain refresh the ground with gladness; and herbs
    spring various with each form and colour.
 [0401504]Apart, Parjanya! let the troops of Maruts, roaring, swell the
    song.
   Let pouring torrents of the rain that raineth rain upon the
    earth.
 [0401500]5. Up from the sea lift your dread might, ye Maruts: as light and
    splendour, send the vapour upward! [p. a122]
   Let waters satisfy the earth, the voices of the great mist-enve-
    loped Bull who roareth.
 [0401506]Roar, thunder, set the sea in agitation, bedew the ground with
    thy sweet rain, Parjanya!
   Send plenteous showers on him who seeketh shelter, and let the
    owner of lean kine go homeward.
 [0401507]Let the boon Maruts, let the springs and coiling serpents tend!
    you well.
   Urged by the Maruts let the clouds pour down their rain upon.
    the earth.
 [0401508]Let lightning flash on every side: from all the regions blow the
    winds!
   Urged by the Maruts let the clouds pour down their rain upon
    the earth.
 [0401509]May waters, lightning, cloud, and rain, boon springs and serpents
    tend you well.
   Urged by the Maruts let the clouds pour down their rain upon
    the earth.
 [0401510]May he who hath become the plants' high regent, suiting our
    bodies, Agni of the Waters,
   May Jatavedas send us rain from heaven, Amrit and vital breath
    to earthly creatures.
 [0401511]Sending up waters from the flood and ocean Prajapati move the
    sea to agitation!
   Forth flow the moisture of the vigorous stallion!
   With this thy roar of thunder come thou hither,
 [0401512]Our father, Lord divine pouring the torrents. Let the streams
    breathe, O Varuna, of the waters.
   Pour the floods down: along the brooks and channels let frogs
    with speckled arms send out their voices.
 [0401513]They who lay quiet for a year, the Brahmans who fulfil their
    vows.
   The frogs, have lifted up their voice, the voice Parjanya hath.
    inspired.
 [0401514]Speak forth a welcome, female frog! Do thou O frog, accost
    the rain.
   Stretch thy four feet apart, and swim in the middle of the lake.
 [0401515]Khanvakha, ho! Khaimakha, ho! thou in the middle, Taduri!
   Fathers, enjoy the rain from one who strives to win the Marutes
    heart.[p. a123]
 [0401516]Lift up the mighty cask and pour down water; let the wind
    blow, and lightnings flash around us.
   Let sacrifice be paid, and, widely scattered, let herbs and plants
    be full of joy and gladness.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVI

  

On the omnipresence and omniscience of Varuna

[0401601]The mighty Ruler of these worlds beholds as though from close
    at hand,
   The man who thinks he acts by stealth: all this the Gods
    perceive and know.
 [0401602]If a man stands or walks or moves in secret, goes to his lying-
    down or his uprising,
   What two men whisper as they sit together, King Varuna knows:
    he as the third is present.
 [0401603]This earth, too, is King Varuna's possession, and the high
    heaven whose ends are far asunder.
   The loins of Varuna are both the oceans, and this small drop of
    water, too, contains him. [p. a124]
 [0401604]If one should flee afar beyond the heaven, King Varuna would
    still be round about him.
   Proceeding hither from the sky his envoys look, thousand-eyed,
    over the earth beneath them.
 [0401605]All this the royal Varuna beholdeth, all between heaven and
    earth and all beyond them.
   The twinklings of men's eyelids hath he counted. As one who
    plays throws dice he settles all things.
 [0401606]Those fatal snares of thine which stand extended, threefold,
   O Varuna, seven by seven,
   May they all catch the man who tells a falsehood, and pass un-
    harmed the man whose words are truthful.
 [0401607]Varuna, snare him with a hundred nooses! Man's watcher! let
    not him who lies escape thee.
   There let the villain sit with hanging belly and bandaged like a
    cask whose hoops are broken.
 [0401608]Varuna sends, and drives away, diseases: Varuna is both native
    and a stranger,
   Varuna is celestial and is human.
 [0401609]I bind and hold thee fast with all these nooses, thou son of such
    a man and such a mother.
   All these do I assign thee as thy portion.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a125]

  

HYMN XVII

  

A charm to secure freedom from various evils

[0401701]We seize and hold thee, Conquering One! the queen of medi-
    cines that heal.
   O Plant, I have endowed thee with a hundred powers for every
    man,
 [0401702]Still conquering, banishing the curse, mighty, with thy reverted.
    bloom.
   Thee and all Plants have I invoked: Hence let it save us! was
    my prayer.
 [0401703]She who hath cursed us with a curse, or hath conceived a
    murderous sin,
   Or seized our son to take his blood, may she devour the child
    she bare.
 [0401704]What magic they have wrought for thee in dish unbaked or
    burnt dark-red,
   What they have wrought in flesh undressed,--conquer the
    sorcerers therewith.
 [0401705]Ill dream and wretchedness of life, Rakshasa, monster, stingy
    hags,
   All the she-fiends of evil name and voice, we drive away from
    us.
 [0401706]Death caused by famine, caused by thirst, failure of children,.
    loss of kine,
   With thee, O Apamarga, all this ill we cleanse and wipe away.
 [0401707]Death caused by thirst, death caused by stress of hunger, loss at
    play with dice,
   All this, O Apamarga with thine aid we cleanse and wipe away.
 [0401708]The Apamarga is alone the sovran of all Plants that grow.
   With this we wipe away whate'er hath fallen on thee: go in
    health!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a126]

  

HYMN XVIII

  

A counter-charm against the incantations of enemies

[0401801]The moonlight equalleth the sun, night is the rival of the day.
   I make effectual power my help: let magic arts be impotent.
 [0401802]Gods! if one make and bring a spell on some man's house who
    knows it not,
   Close as the calf that sucks the cow may it revert and cling to
    him.
 [0401803]When one puts poison in a dish of unbaked clay to kill a man,
   It cracks when set upon the fire with the sharp sound of many
    stones.
 [0401804]Endowed with thousand powers! adjure the bald and those with
    necks awry.
   Back to its author turn the spell like a dear damsel to her
    friend!
 [0401805]I with this Plant have ruined all malignant powers of witchery.
   The spell which they have laid upon thy field, thy cattle, or thy
    men.
 [0401806]No power had he who wrought the spell: he hurt his foot, he
    broke his toe.
   His act hath brought us happiness and pain and sorrow to him-
    self.
 [0401807]Let Apamarga sweep away chronic disease and every curse,
   Sweep sorceresses clean away, and all malignant stingy hags.
 [0401808]Sweep thou away the sorcerers, all stingy fiendish hags away.
   All this, O Apamarga, with thine aid we wipe away from us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a127]

  

HYMN XIX

  

A counter-charm and charm to secure general protection.

[0401901]Thou breakest ties of kith and kin, thou causest, too, relation-
    ship:
   So bruise the sorcerer's offspring, like a reed that groweth in the
   Rains.
 [0401902]Thou hast been blessed with blessing by the Brahman, Kanva
   Narshada.
   Thou fliest like a flashing dart: there is no fear or danger, Plant!
    within the limit of thy range.
 [0401903]Illumining, as 'twere, with light, thou movest at the head of
    plants.
   The saviour of the simple man art thou, and slayer of the fiends.
 [0401904]As once when time began the Gods with thee expelled the
   Asuras,
   Even thence, O Plant, wast thou produced as one who wipes and
    sweeps away.
 [0401905]Thy father's name was Cleaver. Thou with thousand branches
    cleavest all.
   Do thou, turned backward, cleave and rend the man who treateth
    us as foes.
 [0401906]The evil sprang from earth; it mounts to heaven and spreads to
    vast extent.
   Reverted, shaking him with might, thence on its maker let it
    fall.
 [0401907]For thou hast grown reverted, and turned backward also is thy
    fruit.
   Remove all curses far from me, keep most remote the stroke of
    death. [p. a128]
 [0401908]Preserve me with a hundred, yea, protect me with a thousand
    aids.
   May mighty Indra, Lord of Plants! give store of strength and.
    power to thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XX

  

A charm for the acquisition of superhuman powers of sight

[0402001]It sees in front, it sees behind, it sees afar away, it sees
   The sky, the firmament, and earth: all this, O Goddess, it
    beholds.
 [0402002]Through thee, O godlike Plant, may I behold all creatures that
    exist,
   Three several heavens, three several earths, and these six regions
    one by one.
 [0402003]The pupil, verily, art thou of that celestial Engle's eye.
   On earth hast thou alighted as a weary woman seeks her couch.
 [0402004]The God who hath a thousand eyes give me this Plant in my
    right hand!
   I look on every one therewith, each Sudra and each Aryan man.
 [0402005]Make manifest the forms of things; hide not their essences from
    sight.
   And, thou who hast a thousand eyes, look the Kimidins in the
    face. [p. a129]
 [0402006]Make me see Yatudhanas, make thou Yatudhanis visible.
   Make me see all Pisachas With this prayer, O Plant, I hold thee
    fast.
 [0402007]Thou art the sight of Kasyapa and of the hound who hath four
    eyes.
   Make the Pisacha manifest as Surya when he rides at noon.
 [0402008]Kimidin, Yatudhana from their hiding-places have I dragged.
   I look on every one with this, Sudra and Aryan man alike.
 [0402009]Make that Pisacha visible, the fiend who flies in middle air,
   The fiend who glides across the sky, and him who deems the
    earth his help.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a130]

  

HYMN XXI

  

Glorification and benediction of cows

[0402101]The kine have come and brought good fortune: let them rest in
    the cow-pen and be happy near us.
   Here let them stay prolific, many-coloured, and yield through
    many morns their milk for Indra.
 [0402102]Indra aids him who offers sacrifice and praise: he takes not what
    is his, and gives him more thereto.
   Increasing ever more and ever more his wealth, he makes the
    pious dwell within unbroken bounds.
 [0402103]These are ne'er lost, no robber ever injures them: no evil-minded
    foe attempts to harass them.
   The master of the kine lives a long life with these, the Cows
    whereby he pours his gifts and serves the Gods.
 [0402104]The charger with his dusty brow o'ertakes them not, and never
    to the shambles do they take their way.
   These Cows, the cattle of the pious worshipper, roam over wide-
    spread pasture where no danger is.
 [0402105]To me the Cows seem Bhaga, they seem Indra, they seem a
    portion of the first poured Soma.
   These present Cows, they, O ye men, are Indra. I long for Indra
    with my heart and spirit.
 [0402106]O Cows, ye fatten e'en the worn and wasted, and make the
    unlovely beautiful to look on.
   Prosper my home, ye with auspicious voices! Your power is
    magnified in our assemblies.
 [0402107]In goodly pasturage, bright-hued, prolific, drinking pure water at
    fair drinking-places,
   Never be thief or sinful man your master, and may the dart of
   Rudra still avoid you!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a131]

  

HYMN XXII

  

A benediction on a newly consecrated king

[0402201]Exalt and strengthen this my Prince, O Indra, Make him sole
    lord and leader of the people.
   Scatter his foes, deliver all his rivals into his hand in struggles
    for precedence.
 [0402202]Give him a share in village, kine, and horses, and leave his
    enemy without a portion.
   Let him as King be head and chief of Princes, Give up to him,
   O Indra, every foeman.
 [0402203]Let him be treasure-lord of goodly treasures, let him as King be
    master of the people.
   Grant unto him great power and might, O Indra, and strip his
    enemy of strength and vigour.
 [0402204]Like milch-kine yielding milk for warm libations, pour, Heaven
    and Earth! on him full many a blessing.
   May he as King be Indra's well-beloved, the darling of the kine,
    the plants, the cattle.
 [0402205]I join in league with thee victorious Indra, with whom men
    conquer and are ne'er defeated.
   He shall make thee the folk's sole lord and leader, shall make
    thee highest of all human rulers.
 [0402206]Supreme art thou, beneath thee are thy rivals, and all, O King,
    who were thine adversaries.
   Sole lord and leader and allied with Indra, bring, conqueror, thy
    foremen's goods and treasures.
 [0402207]Consume, with lion aspect, all their hamlets, with tiger aspect,
    drive away thy foemen.
   Sole lord and leader and allied with Indra, seize, conqueror,
    thine enemies' possessions.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a132]

  

HYMN XXIII

  

Magnification of Agni and prayer for his protection

[0402301]I fix my heart on wise and ancient Agni, the Five Tribes' Lord,
    in many a place enkindled.
   We seek him who hath entered all our houses. May he deliver
    us from grief and trouble.
 [0402302]As thou conveyest offerings, Jatavedas! and fashionest the sacri-
    fice with knowledge,
   So bear thou to the Gods the prayer we utter. May he deliver
    us from grief and trouble.
 [0402303]I pray to Agni in each act successful, employed in every sacrifice,
    the strongest,
   Fiend-slayer, served with fatness, strengthening worship. May
    he deliver us from grief and trouble.
 [0402304]We invoke the oblation-bearer, well-born Agni Jatavedas,
   Him, Vaisvanara, almighty. May he set us free from trouble.
 [0402305]With whom as friend the Rishis gave their power new splendour,
    with whom they kept aloof the Asuras' devices,
   Agni, with whom Indra subdued the Panis. May he deliver us.
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402306]Through whom the Gods discovered life eternal, through whom
    they stored the plants with pleasant juices,
   Through whom they brought to men the light of heaven. May
    he deliver us from grief and trouble.
 [0402307]I, suppliant, praise and ever call on Agni, sole Lord of all this
    world, of all that shineth,
   Of what exists and shall exist hereafter. May he deliver us from
    grief and trouble.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a133]

  

HYMN XXIV

  

A hymn of prayer and praise to Indra

[0402401]I think of Indra, only him for ever, fiend-slayer, May these lauds
    of mine come near him.
   He cometh to the pious offerer's calling. May he deliver us from
    grief and trouble.
 [0402402]Who with strong arms o'ercame his strong opponents, who
    broke and crushed the power of the demons,
   Who won the rivers and the kine in battle. May he deliver us
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402403]Ruler of men, finder of light, the hero: the pressing-stones
    declare his valour, master.
   Of sweetest sacrifice with seven Hotars. May he deliver us from
    grief and trouble.
 [0402404]The lord of barren cows and bulls and oxen, finder of light for
    whom the posts are planted,
   For whom the bright juice flows cleansed by devotion. May he
    deliver us from grief and trouble.
 [0402405]Whose favour those desire who offer Soma, whom, arrow-bearer,
    men invoke in battle,
   On whom the hymn depends, in whom is power, May he deliver
    us from grief and trouble.
 [0402406]Why was born, first, for active operation, whose valour as the
    first hath been awakened,
   Who raised his bolt when he encountered Ahi. May he deliver us
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402407]Strong Lord, who leadeth hosts to meet for battle, who sendeth
    riches both of earth and heaven,
   I, suppliant, praise and ever call on Indra. May he deliver us
    from grief and trouble.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a134]

  

HYMN XXV

  

A hymn of prayer and praise to Vayu and Savitar

[0402501]I think on Vayu's and Savitar's holy rites, ye twain who penetrate
    and guard the living world:
   Ye who have come to be this All's pervaders, deliver us, ye two
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402502]Ye who have counted up the earth's expanses, and in the sky
    smoothed out the air's mid-region,
   Whose going-forth hath ne'er been reached by any, deliver us,
    ye two, from grief and trouble.
 [0402503]Beauteously bright! men rest in thy dominion when thou hast
    risen up and hastened onward.
   Ye, Vayu, Savitar, preserve all creatures. Deliver us, ye, twain,
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402504]Hence, Vayu, Savitar drive evil action, chase Simida away, drive
    off the demons.
   Ye give us store of energy and power. Deliver us, ye twain,
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402505]Of their own selves let Savitar and Vayu send favourable strength
    and wealth and plenty.
   Here give us perfect freedom from consumption. Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402506]Ye, Savitar and Vayu, to assist us, enjoy the hymn and the
    delightful cheerer.
   Come hither downward from the stream of blessing. Deliver us,
    ye twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402507]Like noblest benisons they have stayed in the God loving man's
    abode.
   I glorify bright Savitar and Vayu. Deliver us, ye twain, from
    grief and trouble.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a135]

  

HYMN XXVI

  

A hymn to Heaven and Earth

[0402601]O Heaven and Earth, I think on you, wise, givers of abundant
    gifts, ye who through measureless expanses have spread forth.
   For ye are seats and homes of goodly treasures. Deliver us, ye
    twain from grief and trouble.
 [0402602]Yea, seats and homes are ye of goodly treasures, grown strong,
    divine, blessed, and far-extending,
   To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious. Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402603]I call on you who warm and cause no sorrow, deep, spacious,
    meet to be adored by poets.
   To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious. Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402604]Ye who maintain Amrit and sacrifices, ye who support rivers
    and human beings,
   To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious, Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402605]Ye by whom cows and forest trees are cherished within whose
    range all creatures are included,
   To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious. Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402606]Ye who delight in nectar and in fatness, ye without whom men
    have no strength or power,
   To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious. Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402607]The grief that pains me here, whoever caused it, not sent by fate,
    hath sprung from human action.
   I, suppliant, praise Heaven, Earth, and oft invoke them. Deliver
    us, ye twain, from grief and trouble.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVII

  

A hymn to the Maruts

[0402701]I think upon the Maruts: may they bless me, may they assist
    me to this wealth in battle. [p. a136]
   I call them like swift well-trained steeds to help us. May they
    deliver us from grief and trouble.
 [0402702]Those who surround the never-failing fountain for ever, and
    bedew the plants with moisture,
   The Maruts, Prini's sons, I chiefly honour. May they deliver us
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402703]Bards, who invigorate the milk of milch-kine, the sap of growing
    plants, the speed of coursers
   To us may the strong Maruts be auspicious. May they deliver us
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402704]They who raised water from the sea to heaven and send it from
    the sky to earth in showers,
   The Maruts who move mighty with their waters, may they
    deliver us from grief and trouble.
 [0402705]They who delight in nectar and in fatness, they who bestow
    upon us health and vigour.
   The Maruts who rain mighty with their waters, may they deliver
    us from grief and trouble.
 [0402706]Whether with stormy might the Maruts established this All, or
   Gods with their celestial power,
   Ye, kindly Gods, are able to restore it. May they deliver us from
    grief and trouble.
 [0402707]Potent in battles is the Maruts' army, impetuous train, well-
    known, exceeding mighty.
   I, suppliant, praise and oft invoke the Maruts. May they deliver
    us from grief and trouble.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

A hymn to Bhava and Sarva

[0402801]I Reverence you--mark this--Bhava and Sarva, ye under whose
    control is this that shineth.
   Lords of this world both quadruped and biped. Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble. [p. a137]
 [0402802]Lords of all near and even of what is distant, famed as the best
    and skilfullest of archers,
   Lords of this world both quadruped and biped, Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402803]Thousand-eyed foe-destroyers, I invoke you, still praising you
    the strong, of wide dominion:
   Lords of this world both quadruped and biped, Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402804]Ye who of old wrought many a deed in concert, and showed
    among mankind unhappy omens;
   Lords of this world both quadruped and biped, Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402805]Ye from the stroke of whose destroying weapon not one among
    the Gods or men escapeth,
   Lords of this world both quadruped and biped, Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402806]Hurl your bolt, strong Gods, at the Yatudhana, him who makes
    ready roots and deals in magic:
   Lords of this world both quadruped and biped, Deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402807]Comfort and aid us, ye strong Gods, in battles, at each Kimidin
    send your bolt of thunder.
   I, suppliant, praise and ever call on Bhav and Sarva. Set us free
    from grief and trouble.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  

A hymn to Mitra-Varuna

[0402901]You twain, O Mitra, Varuna, I honour, Lawstrengtheners, wise,
    who drive away oppressors.
   Ye who protect the truthful in his battles, deliver us, ye twain,
    from grief and trouble. [p. a138]
 [0402902]Ye the wise Gods who drive away oppressors, ye who protect
    the truthful in his battles,
   Who come, men's guards, to juice pressed forth by Babhru,.
    deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402903]Mitra and Varuna who help Agasti, Atri, and Angiras, and
   Jamadagni,
   Ye who help Kasyapa, who help Vasishtha, deliver us, ye twain,
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402904]Mitra and Varuna, who help Syavasva, Atri, and Purumilha,
    and Vadhryasva,
   Ye who help Vimada and Saptavadhri, deliver us, ye twain,
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402905]Ye, Varuna, Mitra, who give aid to Kutsa, Gavishthira,
   Bharadvaja, Visvamitra,
   Who help Kakshivan and give aid to Kanva, deliver us, ye
    twain, from grief and trouble.
 [0402906]Ye, Mitra, Varuna, who help Trisoka, Medhatithi, and Usana
    son of Kavi,
   Ye, Gotama's and Mudgala's protectors, deliver us, ye twain,
    from grief and trouble.
 [0402907]Whose straight-reined car that keeps the track of goodness assails
    and ruins him who walks perversely
   I, suppliant, praise with constant invocation Mitra and Varuna.
   Save us from affliction.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a139]

  

HYMN XXX

  

A glorification of vak or speech

[0403001]I travel with the Rudras and the Vasus, with the Adityas and
   All-Gods I wander.
   I hold aloft both Varuna and Mitra, I hold aloft Indra and
    both the Asvins.
 [0403002]I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures, most thoughtful,
    first of those who merit worship.
   The Gods, making me enter many places, in diverse spots have
    set mine habitation.
 [0403003]I, verily, myself announce and utter the word that Gods, and
    men alike shall welcome.
   I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a
   Rishi, and a Brahman.
 [0403004]Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them, each man
    who sees, breathes, hears, the word out-spoken.
   They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one and
    all, the truth as I declare it.
 [0403005]I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay
    the hater of devotion.
   I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have penetrated
   Earth and Heaven.
 [0403006]I cherish and sustain high-swelling Soma, and Tvashtar I support,
   Pashan, and Bhaga.
   I load with wealth the zealous sacrificer who pours the juice and
    offers his oblation.
 [0403007]On the world's summit I bring forth the Father: my home is in
    the waters, in the ocean.
   Thence I extend o'er all existing creatures, and touch even
    yonder heaven with my forehead.
 [0403008]I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, the while I
    hold together all existence. [p. a140]
   Beyond this wide earth and beyond the heavens I have become
    so mighty in my grandeur.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXI

  

A hymn to Manyu or Wrath

[0403101]Borne on with thee, O Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brave men,
    impetuous, bursting forward,
   March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointed
    arrows, sharpening their weapons.
 [0403102]Flashing like fire, be thou, O conquering Manyu, invoked, O
    victor, as our army's leader.
   Slay thou our foes, distribute their possession: show forth thy
    vigour, scatter those who hate us.
 [0403103]O Manyu, overcome those who assail us. On! breaking, slaying,
    crushing down the foemen.
   They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour: mighty! sole
    born! reduce them to subjection.
 [0403104]Alone of many thou art worshipped, Manyu: sharpen the spirit
    of each clan for combat.
   With thee to aid, O thou of perfect splendour, we raise the
    glorious battle-shout for conquest.
 [0403105]Unyielding, bringing victory like Indra, O Manyu be thou here
    our sovran ruler. [p. a141]
   To thy dear name. O victor, we sing praises: we know the
    spring from which thou art come hither.
 [0403106]Twin-borne with power, destructive bolt of thunder the highest
    conquering might is thine, subduer!
   Be friendly to us in thy spirit, Manyu! O much-invoked, in
    shock of mighty battle!
 [0403107]For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth of both sides
    gathered and collected;
   And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o'er-whelmed with.
    terror, sling away defeated.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXII

  

A hymn to Manyu

[0403201]He who hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive bolt! breeds.
    for himself forthwith all conquering energy.
   Arya and Dasa will we conquer with thine aid, with thee the
    conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped.
 [0403202]Manyu was Indra, yea, the God was Manyu; Manyu was Hotar
   Varuna, Jatavedas.
   The tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Accordant, with
    thy fervour, Manyu! guard us.
 [0403203]Come hither, Manyu, mightier than the mighty: smite, with thy
    fervour, for ally, our foemen.
   Slayer of foes, of Vritra, and of Dasyu, bring thou to us all kinds
    of wealth and treasure.
 [0403204]For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, queller of the
    foe, and self-existent,
   Shared by all men, victorious, subduer: vouchsafe to us superior
    strength in battles.
 [0403205]I have departed still without a portion, wise God! according to
    thy will, the mighty.
   I, feeble man, was wroth with thee, O Manyu. Come in thy
    proper form and give us vigour.
 [0403206]Come hither, I am all thine own: advancing, turn thou to me,
    victorious, all-bestowing. [p. a142]
   Come to me, Manyu, wielder of the thunder: bethink thee of
    thy friend, and slay the Dasyus.
 [0403207]Approach, and on our right hand hold thy station, then let us
    slay a multitude of foemen.
   The best of meath I offer to support thee: may we be first to
    drink thereof in quiet.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIII

  

A prayer to Agni for protection and prosperity

[0403301]Chasing our pain with splendid light, O Agni, shine thou wealth
    on us.
   His lustre flash our pain away.
 [0403302]For goodly fields, for pleasant homes, for wealth we sacrifice to
    thee.
   His lustre flash our pain away!
 [0403303]Best praiser of all these be he, and foremost be our noble chiefs.
   His lustre flash our pain away!
 [0403304]So that thy worshipper and we, thine, Agni! in our sons may
    live.
   His lustre flash our pain away!
 [0403305]As ever conquering Agni's beams of splendour go to every side,
   His lustre flash our pain away.
 [0403306]To every side thy face is turned, thou art triumphant everywhere.
   His lustre flash our pain away!
 [0403307]O thou whose face looks every way, bear off our foes as in a
    ship.
   His lustre flash our pain away!
 [0403308]As in a ship across the flood, transport us to felicity. His lustre
    flash our pain away

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a143]

  

HYMN XXXIV

  

Glorification of the Vishtari sacrifice

[0403401]The head of this is prayer, its back the Brihat, Odanas's belly is
    the Vamadevya;
   Its face reality, its sides the metre, Vishtari sacrifice produced
    from fervour.
 [0403402]Boneless, cleansed, purified by him who cleanseth, they go res-
    plendent to the world of splendour.
   Fire burneth not their organ of enjoyment: much pleasure have
    they in the world of Svarga.
 [0403403]Never doth want or evil fortune visit those who prepare oblation
    called Vishtari.
   He goes unto the Gods, he dwells with Yama, he joys among
   Gandharvas meet for Soma.
 [0403404]Yama robs not of generative vigour the men who dress oblation
    called Vishtari.
   Borne on his car, a charioteer, he travels: endowed with wings
    he soars beyond the heavens.
 [0403405]Strongest is this, performed, of sacrifices: he hath reached
    heaven who hath prepared Vishtari.
   The oval-fruited lotus spreads his fibre: there bloom the nelo-
    phar and water-lilies.
   Abundant with their overflow of sweetness, these streams shall
    reach thee in the world of Svarga, whole lakes with lotus-
    blossom shall approach thee.
 [0403406]Full lakes of butter with their banks of honey, flowing with wine,
    and milk and curds and water
   Abundant with their overflow of sweetness, these streams shall
    reach thee in the world of Svarga, whole lakes with lotus-
    blossom shall approach thee.
 [0403407]I give four pitchers, in four several places, filled to the brim with
    milk and curds and water. [p. a144]
   Abundant with their overflow of sweetness, these streams shall
    reach thee in the world of Svarga, whole lakes with lotus-
    blossom shall approach thee.
 [0403408]I part this Odana among the Brahmans, Vishtari, conquering
    worlds and reaching heaven.
   Let me not lose it: swelling by its nature, be it my perfect Cow
    to grant all wishes!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXV

  

Magnification of the Odana or oblation of milk and rice

[0403501]Odana which Prajapati, the firstborn of Order, dressed with
    fervour for the Brahman,
    which guards the worlds from breaking atIthe centre,--I with this
   Odana will conquer Mrityu. [p. a145]
 [0403502]Whereby the World-Creators vanquished Mrityu, that which
    they found by fervour, toil and trouble,
   That which prayer first made ready for the Brahman,--I with
    this Odana will conquer Mrityu.
 [0403503]That which upholds the Earth, the all-sustainer, that which hath
    filled air's middle realm with moisture,
   Which, raised on high in grandeur, stablished heaven,--I with
    this Odana will conquer Mrityu.
 [0403504]From which the months with thirty spokes were moulded, from
    which the twelve-spoked year was formed and fashioned.
   Which circling day and night have ne'er o'ertaken,--I with this
   Odana will conquer Mrityu.
 [0403505]Which hath become breath-giver, life-bestower; to which the
    worlds flow full of oil and fatness,
   To whom belong all the refulgent regions,--I with this Odana
    will conquer Mrityu.
 [0403506]From which, matured, sprang Amrit into being, which hath
    become Gayatris lord and ruler,
   In which the perfect Vedas have been treasured,--I with this
   Odana will conquer Mrityu,
 [0403507]I drive away the hostile God-despiser: far off be those who are
    mine adversaries,
   I dress Brahmaudana that winneth all things. May the Gods
    hear me who believe and trust them.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVI

  

A charm against fiends, human enemies, and other pests

[0403601]Endowed with true strength, let the Bull, Agni Vaisvanara, burn
    them up.
   Him who would pain and injure us, him who would treat us as
    a foe. [p. a146]
 [0403602]Him who, unharmed, would injure us, and him who, harmed,
    would do us harm,
   I lay between the doubled fangs of Agni, of Vaisvanara.
 [0403603]Those who, what time the moon is dark, hunt with loud cry and
    answering shout,
   Flesh-eaters, others who would harm,--all these I overcome with
    might.
 [0403604]I conquer the Pisachas with my power, and take their wealth
    away.
   All who would injure us I slay. Let mine intention have success.
 [0403605]With Gods who flee with him, and match their rapid motion
    with the Sun,
   I with those animals who dwell in rivers and on hills am found.
 [0403606]I trouble the Pisachas as the tiger plagues men rich in kine.
   They, even as dogs when they have seen a lion, find no hiding-
    place.
 [0403607]Naught with Pisachas can I do, with thieves, with roamers of the
    wood.
   Pisachas flee and vanish from each village as I enter it.
 [0403608]Into whatever village this mine awful power penetrates,
   Thence the Pisachas flee away, and plot no further mischief
    there.
 [0403609]Those who enrage me with their prate, as flies torment an
    elephant,
   I deem unhappy creatures, like small insects troublesome to
    man.
 [0403610]Destruction seize upon the man, as with a cord they hold a
    horse,
   The fool who is enraged with me! He is not rescued from the
    noose.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a147]

  

HYMN XXXVII

  

A charm against Gandharvas and Apsarases

[0403701]With thee, O Plant, in olden time Atharvans smote and slew the
    fiends.
   Kasyapa smote with thee, with thee did Kanava and Agastya
    smite.
 [0403702]With thee we scare and drive away Gandharvas and Apsarases.
   O Ajasringi, chase the fiends. Cause all to vanish with thy
    smell.
 [0403703]Let the Apsarases, puffed away, go to the river, to the ford,--
   Guggulu, Pila, Naladi, Aukshagandhi, Pramandini.
   Ye have become attentive since the Apsarases have past away.
 [0403704]Where great trees are, Asvatthas and Nyagrodhas with their
    leafy crests,
   There where your swings are green and bright, and lutes and
    cymbals sound in tune,
   'Ye have become attentive since the Apsarases have past away.
 [0403705]Hither hath come this one, the most effectual of herbs and
    plants.
 [0403706]Let Ajasringi penetrate, Ara4aki with sharpened horn.
 [0403707]From the Gandharva, dancing near, the lord of the Apsarases,
   Wearing the tuft of hair, I take all manhood and virility.
 [0403708]With those dread hundred iron spears, the darts of Indra, let it
    pierce.
   The Blyxa-fed Gandharvas, those who bring no sacrificial gift.
 [0403709]With those dread hundred golden spears, the darts of Indra, let
    it pierce. [p. a148]
   The Blyxa-fed Gandharvas, those who bring no sacrificial gift.
 [0403710]O Plant, be thou victorious, crush the Pisachas, one and all,
   Blyxa-fed, shining in the floods, illumining the selfish ones.
 [0403711]Youthful, completely decked with hair, one monkey-like, one
    like a dog,--
   So the Gandharva, putting on a lovely look, pursues a dame.
   Him with an efficacious charm we scare and cause to vanish
    hence.
 [0403712]Your wives are the Apsarases, and ye, Gandharvas, are their
    lords.
   Run ye, immortal ones, away: forbear to interfere with men!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVIII

  

A charm for success in gambling

[0403801]Hither I call the Apsaras, victorious, who plays with skill,
   Her who comes freely fort to view, who wins the stakes in games
    of dice.
 [0403802]Hither I call that Apsaras who scatters and who gathers up. [p. a149]
   The Apsaras who plays with skill and takes her winnings in the
    game.
 [0403803]Dancing around us with the dice, winning the wager by her
    play.
   May she obtain the stake for us and gain the victory with skill.
   May she approach us full of strength: let them not win this
    wealth of ours.
 [0403804]Hither I call that Apsaras, the joyous, the delightful one--
   Those nymphs who revel in the dice, who suffer grief and yield
    to wrath.
 [0403805]Who follow in their course the rays of Surya, or as a particle of
    light attend him.
   Whose leader from afar, with store of riches, compasses quickly
    all the worlds and guards them.
   Pleased, may he come to this our burnt oblation, together with
    the Air, enriched with treasure.
 [0403806]Together with the Air, O rich in treasure, guard here the white
    cow and the calf, O mighty!
   Here are abundant drops for thee, come hither! Here is thy
    white calf, let thy mind be with us.
 [0403807]Together with the Air, O rich in treasure, keep the white calf in
    safety here, O mighty!
   Here is the grass, here is the stall, here do we bind the calf. We
    are your masters, name by name. All Hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIX

  

A prayer to various deities for health, wealth, and prosperity

[0403901]Agni no earth kath had mine homage. May he bless me. [p. a150]
   As I have bowed me down to Agni on the earth, so let the
   Favouring Graces bow them down to me.
 [0403902]Earth is the Cow, her calf is Agni. May she with her calf Agni
    yield me food, strength, all my wish, life first of all, and off-
    spring, plenty, wealth. All Hail!
 [0403903]Vayu in air hath had mine homage. May he bless me.
   As I have bowed me down to Vayu in the air, so let the Favour-
    ing Graces bow them down to me.
 [0403904]Air is the Cow, her calf is Vayu. May she with her calf Vayu
    yield me food, strength, all my wish, life first of all, and off-
    spring, plenty, wealth. All Hail!
 [0403905]The Sun in heaven hath had my homage. May he bless me.
   As I have bowed me down unto the Sun in heaven, so let the
   Favouring Graces bow them down to me.
 [0403906]Heaven is the Cow, her calf Aditya. May she yield with her calf
    the Sun food, strength, and all my wish, life first of all, and
    offspring, plenty, wealth. All Hail!
 [0403907]To Chandra in the quarters have I bowed me. May he bless me.
   As unto Chandra in the quarters I have bent, so let the Favour-
    ing Graces bow them down to me.
 [0403908]The quarters are the Cows, their calf is Chandra. May they
    yield with their calf the Moon food, strength and all my wish,
    life first of all, and offspring, plenty, wealth. All Hail!
 [0403909]Agni moves having entered into Agni, the Rishis' son, who
    guards from imprecations,
   I offer unto thee with reverent worship. Let me not mar the
   Gods' appointed service.
 [0403910]Skilled in all ways, O God, O Jatavedas, I offer what is cleansed
    by heart and spirit.
   To all thy seven mouths, O Jatavedas. Do thou accept with
    pleasure my libation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a151]

  

HYMN XL

  

A charm against rival worshippers

[0404001]O Jatavedas, eastward sacrificers, as foes assail us from the
    eastern quarter.
   May they, turned back, be pained for harming Agni. I drive
    them backward with mine incantation.
 [0404002]O Jatavedas, southward sacrificers as foes assail us from the
    southern quarter.
   May they, turned back, be pained for harming Yama. I smite
    them backward with mine incantation.
 [0404003]O Jatavedas, westward sacrificers as foes assail us from the
    western quarter.
   For harming Varuna be they turned and troubled! I smite them
    backward with mine incantation.
 [0404004]Jatavedas, northward sacrificers as foes assail us from the
    northern quarter.
   For harming Soma be they turned and troubled! I smite them
    backward with mine incantation.
 [0404005]O Jatavedas, nether sacrificers, as foes assail us from the stead-
    fast quarter.
   For harming Earth let them be turned and troubled. I smite
    them backward with mine incantation.
 [0404006]Those who pay sacrifice, O Jatavedas, from air assail us from
    the midway quarter.
   For harming Vayu be they turned and troubled! I smite them
    backward with mine incantation.
 [0404007]The sacrificers from above assail us, O Jatavedas, from the lofty
    quarter.
   For wronging Surya be they turned and troubled! I smite them
    backward with mine incantation.
 [0404008]Those from all points assail us, Jatavedas, who sacrifice from
    intermediate regions.
   For wronging Prayer let them be turned and troubled, I smite
    them backward with mine incantation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a152] [p. a153]

  

BOOK V

  

HYMN I

  

A glorification of Trita and Varuna

[0500101]He who with special plans and deathless spirit, waxing, well-
    born, hath come unto his birth-place,
   As he who shines upholds the days, thus Trita, of pure life,
    bears the Three as their supporter.
 [0500102]He who, the first, approached the holy statutes makes, after,
    many beauteous forms and figures.
   Eager to drink, his birth-place first he entered who understands
    the word when yet unspoken.
 [0500103]He who--the fluid gold, with radiant kinsmen--to fervent glow
    delivered up thy body,
   On him both set names, that shall live for ever: to him the regions
    shall send robes to clothe him,
 [0500104]As these have gone to their primeval station, each gaining an
    imperishable dwelling,
   May kissing mothers of the bards' beloved bring the pole-draw-
    ing husband to the sister.
 [0500105]By holy wisdom I a sage, Far-Strider! offer to thee this lofty
    adoration.
   This worship both the mighty eddying rivers, coming together
    to this station, heighten.
 [0500106]Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned: to one
    of these may come the troubled mortal.
   On sure ground where the ways are parted standeth Life's Pillar
    in the dwelling of the Highest.
 [0500107]Working, I go my way with deathless spirit: life, spirit, bodies
    have gone gladly thither.
   Aye, Sakra also gives his gift of treasure as when the sacrificer
    meets with power.
 [0500108]Yea, the son asks dominion of his father: this they declared the
    noblest path to welfare.
   Varuna, let them see thy revelations: display the wondrous
    shapes of times to follow. [p. a154]
 [0500109]Halt with the milk, its other half, thou minglest and with that
    half, strong! unbeguiled! increasest.
   Let us exalt the gracious friend, the mighty, Varuna son of-
   Aditi, strength-giver.
   We have told him the marvels sung by poets. The utterance of
   Heaven and Earth is truthful.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a155]

  

HYMN II

  

A glorification of Indra

[0500201]In all the worlds That was the best and highest whence sprang
    the Mighty One of splendid valour.
   As soon as born he overcomes his foemen, when those rejoice in
    him who bring him succour.
 [0500202]Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, he as a foe
    strikes fear into the Dasa,
   Eager to win the breathing and the breathless: All sang thy
    praise at banquet and oblation.
 [0500203]All concentrate on thee their mental vigour what time these,
    twice or thrice, are thine assistants,
   Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness win quickly
    with our meath that meath in battle.
 [0500204]If verily in every war the sages joy and exult in thee who win-
    nest treasures,
   With mightier power, strong God, extend thy firmness: let not
    malevolent Kaokas harm thee.
 [0500205]Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold
    great wealth the prize of combat.
   I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and sharpen with
    my prayer thy vital vigour.
 [0500206]Thou in that house, the highest or the lowest, which thy protec-
    tion guards, bestowest riches.
   Establish ye the ever-wandering mother, and bring full many
    deeds to their completion.
 [0500207]Praise in the height Him who hath many pathways, courageous,
    strongest, Aptya of the Aptyas
   Through strength he shows himself of ample power: pattern of
   Prithivi, he fights and conquers.
 [0500208]Brihaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, hath made these holy
    prayers, this strength for Indra. [p. a156]
   Free Lord, he rules the mighty fold of cattle, winning, aglow,
    even all the billowy waters.
 [0500209]Thus hath Brihaddiva, the great Atharvan, spoken to Indra as
    himself in person.
   Two sisters free from stain, the Matarivans, with power impel
    him onward and exalt him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a157]

  

HYMN III

  

A prayer to Agni, Indra, and other deities for victory and prosperity

[0500301]Let strength be mine while I invoke thee, Agni! enkindling thee
    may we support our bodies.
   May the four regions bend and bow before me: with thee for
    guardian may we win the combat.
 [0500302]Baffling the range of our opponents, Agni! guard us as our
    protector round about us.
   Down the steep slope go they who hate us, backward, and let
    their thought who watch at home be ruined.
 [0500303]May all the Gods be on my side in battle, the Maruts led by
   Indra, Vishnu, Agni.
   Mine be the middle air's extended region, and may the Wind
    blow favouring these my wishes.
 [0500304]For me let them present all mine oblations, and let my mind's
    intention be accomplished.
   May I be guiltless of the least transgression: may all the Gods
    come hither and protect me.
 [0500305]May the Gods grant me riches, may the blessing and invocation
    of the Gods assist me.
   This boon shall the celestial Hotars win us: may we, unwound-
    ed, have brave heroes round us.
 [0500306]Ye six divine Expanses, give us freedom. Here, all ye Gods,
    acquit yourselves like heroes.
   Let not calamity or curse o'ertake us, nor deeds of wickedness
    that merit hatred.
 [0500307]Do ye three Goddesses give ample shelter and all success to us
    ourselves and children.
   Let us not lose our children or our bodies: let us not benefit
    the foe, King Soma!
 [0500308]Foodful and much-invoked, at this our calling may the far-
    reaching Bull grant us wide shelter.
   Lord of bay coursers, Indra, bless our children: harm us not,
    give us not as prey to others.
 [0500309]Lord of the world, Creator and Disposer, may the God Savitar
    who quells assailants,
   May the Adityas, Rudras, both the Asvins, Gods, guard the
    sacrificer from destruction.
 [0500310]Let those who are our foemen stay afar from us: with Indra
    and with Agni we will drive them off. [p. a158]
   The Adityas and the Rudras, over us on high, have made me
    strong, a thinker, and a sovran lord.
 [0500311]Yea, we call Indra hitherward, the winner of wealth in battle
    and of kine and horses.
   May he mark this our worship when we call him, Lord of bay
    steeds, thou art our friend and comrade.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

A charm against fever and other ailments

[0500401]Thou who wast born on mountains, thou most mighty of all
    plants that grow.
   Thou Banisher of Fever, come, Kushtha! make Fever pass
    away.
 [0500402]Brought from the Snowy Mountain, born on the high hill where
    eagles breed,
   Men seek to buy thee when they hear: for Fever's Banisher
    they know.
 [0500403]In the third heaven above us stands the Asvattha tree, the seat
    of Gods.
   There the Gods sought the Kushtha Plant, embodiment of end-
    less life.
 [0500404]There moved through heaven a golden ship, a ship with cordage
    wrought of Gold.
   There the Gods won the Kushtha Plant, the blossom of eternal
    life. [p. a159]
 [0500405]They sailed on pathways paved with gold, the oars they piled
    were wrought of gold:
   All golden were the ships wherein they carried Kushtha down
    to earth.
 [0500406]O Kushtha, bring thou hitherward this man of mine, restore his
    health,
   Yes, free him from disease for me.
 [0500407]Thou art descended from thee Gods, Soma's benignant friend
    art thou,
   Befriend my breath and vital air be gracious unto this mine eye.
 [0500408]Sprung, northward, from the Snowy Hill thou art conveyed to
    eastern men.
   There they deal out among themselves Kushtha's most noble
    qualities.
 [0500409]Most excellent, indeed, art thou, Kushtha! most noble is thy
    sire.
   Make all Consumption pass away and render Fever powerless.
 [0500410]Malady that affects the head, eye-weakness, bodily defect--
   All this let Kushtha heal and cure: aye, godlike is the vigorous
    power.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

  

A charm to mend a broken bone

[0500501]Aryaman is thy grandsire, Night thy mother, and the Cloud thy
    sire.
   Thy name is called Silachi. Thou, thyself, art sister of the Gods.
 [0500502]Whoever drinketh thee hath life: thou savest and protectest
    man.
   As nursing mother of mankind, thou takest all upon thy lap.
 [0500503]Thou clingest close to every tree, as a fond damsel clasps her
    love. [p. a160]
   Thy name is called The Conqueror, She who Stands Fast, The
   Rescuer.
 [0500504]Whatever wound the arrow, or the staff, or violence inflicts,
   Thereof thou art the remedy: as such restore this man to health.
 [0500505]Thou springest from blest Plaxa, or Asvattha, Dhava, Khadira,
   Parna, or blest Nyagrodha, so come thou to use, Arundhati!
 [0500506]Gold-coloured, bringing happy fate, most lovely, brilliant as the
   Sun,
   Mayst thou, O Healing! come unto the fracture: Healing is thy
    name.
 [0500507]Gold-coloured, bringing happy fate, odorous, hairy-bodied one,
   The sister of the Waters art thou, Laksha! and thy soul is Wind.
 [0500508]Silachi is thy name: thy sire, O goat-brown! is a damsel's son.
   Thou hast been sprinkled by the mouth of Yama's tawny-
    coloured horse.
 [0500509]Issuing from the horse's blood away she glided to the trees.
   Become a winged water-brook, and come to us, Arundhati!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

A prayer for protection and prosperity

[0500601]Eastward at first the prayer was generated: Vena disclosed bright
    flashes from the summit, [p. a161]
   Disclosed his deepest nearest revelations, womb of the non-
    existent and existent.
 [0500602]None have attained to those of old, those who wrought holy
    acts for you,
   Let them not harm our heroes here. Therefore I set before you
    this.
 [0500603]Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their voices down
    together in heaven's vault that pours a thousand streams.
   His wildly-restless warders never close an eye: in every place
    the snarers stand to bind men fast.
 [0500604]Speed forward, conquering all foes, to win the spoil,
   Thou comest on thy haters with a surging sea. Thy name is
   Fragile. The thirteenth month is Indra's home.
 [0500605]Through this now hast thou sent thy gifts. All hail!
   With sharpened arms and missiles, kind and friendly, be gracious
    unto us, Soma and Rudra!
 [0500606]Through this hast thou been left in want. All hail!
   With sharpened arms and missiles, kind and friendly, be gracious
    unto us, Soma and Rudra!
 [0500607]Through this hast thou committed faults. All hail!
   With sharpened arms and missiles, kind and friendly, be gracious
    unto us, Soma and Rudra!
 [0500608]Free us from trouble, free us from dishonour, accept our wor-
    ship, give us life immortal.
 [0500609]O missile of the eye, missile of spirit, thou missile of devotion
    and of fervour!
   Thou art the weapon shot against the weapon. Let those be
    weaponless who sin against us.
 [0500610]Make with thy weapon weaponless, O Agni, all wicked men
    who deal with us as foemen with eye, with thought, with
    spirit, or intention.
 [0500611]Thou art the house of Indra. I betake me to thee, I enter thee
    with all my cattle,
   With all my people and with all my body, with all my soul, with
    mine entire possessions.
 [0500612]Thou art the guard of Indra. I betake me to thee, etc.
 [0500613]Thou art the shield of Indra. I betake me to thee, etc.
 [0500614]Indra's protection art thou. I betake me to thee, I enter thee
    with all my cattle.
   With all my people and with all my body, with all my soul, with [p. a162]
    mine entire possessions.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

  

A charm to deprecate Arati or Malignity

[0500701]Bring thou to us, bar not the way, Arati! Stay not the guerdon
    that is being brought us.
   Homage be paid to Failure, to Misfortune, and Malignity.
 [0500702]The man whom thou preferrest, O Arati, he who prates to us--
   This man of thine, we reverence. Baffle not thou my heart's
    desire,
 [0500703]May our desire which Gods have roused fulfil itself by day and
    night.
   We seek to win Arati: to Arati be our homage paid.
 [0500704]We, suppliant, call on Bhaga, on Sarasvati, Anumati,
   Pleasant words have I spoken, sweet as honey is, at invocations
    of the Gods.
 [0500705]The portion that I crave with speech intelligent and full of
    power,
   May faith, presented with the gift of tawny Soma, find to-day.
 [0500706]Do not thou make our words or wishes fruitless. Let the twain
   Indra Agni, bring us treasures.
   All, fain to-day to give us gifts, welcome Arati with your love. [p. a163]
 [0500707]Misfortune! go thou far away: we turn thy harmful dart aside.
   I know thee well, Arati! as oppressor, one who penetrates.
 [0500708]Oft, coming as a naked girl thou hauntest people in their sleep,
   Baffling the thought, Arati! and the firm intention of a man.
 [0500709]To her the mighty vast in size, who penetrates all points of
    space,
   To her mine homage have I paid, Nirriti with her golden hair.
 [0500710]Auspicious, with her golden hue, pillowed on gold, the mighty
    one
   To this Arati clad in robes of gold mine homage have I paid.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

  

A charm for the discomfiture and destruction of hostile priests

[0500801]With fuel of Vikankata bring molten butter to the Gods.
   O Agni, make them joyful here: let them all come unto my call.
 [0500802]O Indra, come unto my call, This will I do. So hear it thou.
   Let these exertions for the sake of Indra guide my wish aright.
   Therewith, O Jatavedas, Lord of Bodies! may we win us strength.
 [0500803]Whatever plot from yonder, O ye Gods, that godless man would
    frame,
   Let not the Gods come to his call, nor Agni bear his offering up.
   Come, ye, come hither to my call.
 [0500804]Run, ye Fxertions, farther on By Indra's order smite and slay.
   As a wolf worrieth a sheep, so let not him escape from you
    while life remains. Stop fast his breath.
 [0500805]The Brahman whom those yonder have appointed priest, for
    injury,
   He, Indra! is beneath thy feet. I cast him to the God of Death.
 [0500806]If they have issued forth, strongholds of Gods, and made their
    shield of prayer, [p. a164]
   Gaining protection for their lives, protection round about, make
    all their instigation powerless.
 [0500807]Exertions which that man hath made, Exertions which he yet
    will make
   Turn them, O Indra, back again, O Vritra-slayer, back again on
    him that they may kill that man.
 [0500808]As Indra, having seized him, set his foot upon Udvachana,
   Even so for all the coming years I cast those men beneath my
    feet.
 [0500809]Here, Indra Vritra-slayer, in thy strength pierce thou their vital.
    parts.
   Here, even here, attack them, O Indra. Thine own dear friend
    am I.
   Indra, we closely cling to thee. May we be in thy favouring
    grace.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

  

A prayer to Heaven and Earth for protection and assistance

[0500901]All hail to Heaven!
 [0500902]All hail to Earth!
 [0500903]All hail to Air!
 [0500904]All hail to Air!
 [0500905]All hail to Heaven!
 [0500906]All hail to Eartht!
 [0500907]Mine eye is Siirya and my breath is Vata, Air is my soul and
   Prithivi my body.
   I verily who never have been conquered give up my life toe
   Heaven and Earth for keeping. [p. a165]
 [0500908]Exalt my life, my strength, my deed and action; increase my
    understanding and my vigour.
   Be ye my powerful keepers, watch and guard me, ye mistresses
    of life and life's creators! Dwell ye within me, and forbear
    to harm me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN X

  

A prayer to the presiding deities of the four quarters for protection

[0501001]Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who fights against
    me from the eastern quarter.
   May he encounter it!
 [0501002]Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who fights against
    me from the southern quarter.
   May he encounter it!
 [0501003]Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who fights against
    me from the western quarter.
   May he encounter it!
 [0501004]Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who fights against
    me from northern quarter.
   May he encounter it!
 [0501005]Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who fights against
    me from the stedfast region.
   May he encounter it!
    r 6.Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who fights against
   Lme from the lofty region!
   M iy he encounter it!
 [0501007]Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who from points
    intermediate fights against me.
   May he encounter it!
 [0501008]With Brihat I invoke the mind, with Matarisvan both the
    breaths,
   The eye from Surya, and the ear from Air, the body from the
   Earth. [p. a166]
   We, with Sarasvati who suits the mind, call Speech to come to
    us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XI

  

A dialogue between Atharvan and Varuna

[0501101]How, terrible in might, hast thou here spoken to the great God,
    how to the gold-hued Father!
   Thy mind watched, greedy Varuna! to recover the brindled cow
    thou hadst bestowed as guerdon.
 [0501102]Not through desire do I revoke my present: I bring this brind-
    led cow to contemplate her.
   Now by what lore, by what inherent nature, knowest thou all
    things that exist, Atharvan?
 [0501103]Truly I am profound in wisdom, truly I know by nature all
    existing creatures.
   No Dasa by his greatness, not an Arya, may violate the law that
   I will stablish.
 [0501104]None, self-dependent Varuna! existeth wiser than thou or sager
    by his wisdom.
   Thou knowest well all these created beings: even the man of
    wondrous powers fears thee.
 [0501105]O self-dependent Varuna, wise director, thou knowest verily all
    generations.
   What is, unerring one! beyond this region? What more remote
    than that which is most distant?
 [0501106]One thing there is beyond this air, and something beyond that
    one, most hard to reach, remotest.
   I, Varuna, who know, to thee declare it. Let churls be mighty [p. a167]
    in the lower regions. Let Dasas sink into the earth beneath
    them.
 [0501107]Many reproaches, Varuna, dost thou utter against the misers.
    who revoke their presents.
   Be not thou added to that crowd of niggards: let not men call
    thee an illiberal giver.
 [0501108]Let not men call me an illiberal giver. I give thee back the
    brindled cow, O singer.
   Attend in every place where men inhabit, with all thy powers,
    the hymn that tells my praises.
 [0501109]Let hymns of praise ascend to thee, uplifted in every place of
    human habitation.
   But give me now the gift thou hast not given. Thou art my
    friend for ever firm and faithful.
 [0501110]One origin, Varuna! one bond unites us I know the nature of
    that common kinship.
   I give thee now the gift that I retracted. I am thy friend for ever
    firm and faithful.
 [0501111]God, giving life unto the god who lauds me, Sage strengthener
    of the sage who sings my praises.
   Thou, self-dependent Varuna! hast begotten the kinsman of the
   Gods, our sire Atharvan.
   On him bestow most highly-lauded riches. Thou art our friend,
    high over all, our kinsman.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a168]

  

HYMN XII

  

An Apri or propitiatory hymn

[0501201]Thou in the house of man this day enkindled worshippest Gods
    as God, O Jatavedas.
   Observant, bright as Mitra, bring them hither. Thou art a
    sapient and foreknowing envoy.
 [0501202]Tanunapat, fair-tongued! with sweet meath balming the baths
    and ways of Order, make them pleasant.
   Bear to the Gods our sacrifice, exalting with holy thoughts our
    hymns of praise and worship.
 [0501203]Invoked, deserving prayer and adoration, O Agni, come accor
    dant with the Vasus.
   Thou art, O youthful Lord, the Gods' Invoker, so, best of sacri-
    ficers, bring them quickly.
 [0501204]By rule the Sacred Grass is scattered eastward, a robe to clothe
    this earth when dawns are breaking.
   Widely it spreads around and far extended, fair for the Gods
    and bringing peace and freedom,
 [0501205]Let the expansive Doors be widely opened, like wives who deck
    their beauty for their husbands.
   Lofty, celestial, all-impelling Portals, admit the Gods and give
    them easy entrance!
 [0501206]Pouring sweet dews let holy Night and Morning, each close to
    each, be seated at their station,--
   Lofty, celestial Dames with gold to deck them, assuming all
    their fair and radiant beauty.
 [0501207]Come the first two celestial sweet-voiced Hotars, arranging
    sacrifice for man to worship, [p. a169]
   As singers who inspire us in assemblies, showing the eastern
    light with their direction!
 [0501208]Let Bharati come quickly to our worship and Ila showing like a
    human being.
   So let Sarasvati and both her fellows, deft Goddesses, on this
    fair grass be seated.
 [0501209]Hotar more skilled in sacrifice, bring hither with speed to-day
   God Tvashar, thou who knowest,
   Even him who formed these two, the Earth and Heaven, the
   Parents, with their forms, and every creature.
 [0501210]Bring thou to our oblations which thou balmest the companies
    of Gods in ordered season.
   Agni, Vanaspati, the Immolator sweeten our offered gifts with
    meath and butter!
 [0501211]Agni as soon as he was born made ready the sacrifice and was
    the Gods' preceder.
   May the Gods eat our offering consecrated according to this true
   Priest's voice and guidance.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a170]

  

HYMN XIII

  

A charm against snakes

[0501301]Varuna, Sage of heaven, hath given me the gift: with spells of
    mighty power I draw thy poison out.
   Dug up, not dug, adherent, I have seized it fast: low hath thy
    venom sunk like water in the sands.
 [0501302]All the non-fluid portion of thy venom, I receive in these.
   I take thy middlemost, thy highest, lowest juice: may it be
    spent and lest by reason of thy fear.
 [0501303]Strong is my cry like thunder with the rainy cloud: with power-
    ful incantation let thy strength be stayed.
   I, with the men to aid, have seized that juice of his; as light
    from out the gloom, let Surya rise on high
 [0501304]I with this eye destroy thine eye, and with this poison conquer
    thine.
   Live not, O Snake, but die the death: back go thy venom on
    thyself.
 [0501305]Listen to me, Black Snakes and hateful creatures, Lurker-in-
   Grass, Karait, and Brown, and Spotty,
   Approach not near the house my friend inhabits: give warning,
    and rest quiet with your poison.
 [0501306]Even as the cord that strings the bow, I slacken, as it were, the
    cars.
   Of the All-conquering serpent's wrath, of the fierce rage of
   Black, and Brown, Taimata, and Apodaka.
 [0501307]And Aligi and Viligi, their father and the mother too,--
   What will ye do? Your venomed sap, we know, is utterly
    powerless.
 [0501308]Daughter of Urugula, she-fiend whom the black, skinned mother
    bare--
   All female serpents poison who crept swiftly near is impotent.
 [0501309]Dwelling beside the mountain's slope, the quick-eared porcupine
    exclaimed:
   Of all these she-snakes homed in earth the poison is most
    powerless.
 [0501310]Tabuva or not Tabuva, thou verily art not Tabuva: poison is
    killed by Tabuva. [p. a171]
   Tastuva or not Tastuva, thou verily art not Tastuva: poison is
    killed by Tastuva.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIV

  

A charm against witchcraft

[0501401]An eagle found thee: with his snout a wild boar dug thee from
    the earth.
   Harm thou, O Plant, the mischievous, and drive the sorcerer
    away.
 [0501402]Beat thou the Yatudhanas back, drive thou away the sorcerer;
   And chase afar, O Plant, the man who fain would do us injury.
 [0501403]As 'twere a strip cut round from skin of a white-footed an-
    telope,
   Bind, like a golden chain, O God, his witchcraft on the sorcerer.
 [0501404]Take thou his sorcery by the hand, and to the sorcerer lead it
    back.
   Lay it before him, face to face, that it may kill the sorcerer.
 [0501405]Back on the wizard fall his craft, upon the curser light his
    curse! [p. a172]
   Let witchcraft, like a well-naved car, roll back upon the
    sorcerer.
 [0501406]Whoso, for other's harm hath dealt-woman or man-in magic
    arts,
   To him we lead the sorcery back, even as a courser with a rope.
 [0501407]Now whether thou hast been prepared by Gods or been pre-
    pared by men,
   We, with our Indra at our side to aid us, lead thee back again.
 [0501408]Agni, victorious in fight, subdue the armies of our foes!
   Back on the sorcerer we cast his sorcery, and beat it home.
 [0501409]Thou who hast piercing weapons, pierce him who hath wrought
    it; conquer him.
   We do not sharpen thee to slay the man who hath not practised
    it.
 [0501410]Go as a son goes to his sire: bite as a trampled viper bites.
   As one who flies from bonds, go back, O Witchcraft, to the
    sorcerer.
 [0501411]Even as the timid antelope or hind from her assailant flees,
   So swiftly let the sorcery o'ertake and reach the sorcerer.
 [0501412]Straighter than any arrow let it fly against him, Heaven and
   Earth.
   So let that witchcraft seize again the wizard like a beast of
    chase.
 [0501413]Let it go contrary like flame, like water following its course.
   Let witchcraft, like a well-naved car, roll back upon the
    sorcerer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XV

  

A charm for general prosperity

[0501501]Plant! I have those who shall avert the threatened danger, ten
    and one. [p. a173]
   O sacred Plant, produced aright! make sweetness, sweet thy self,
    for me.
 [0501502]Twenty and two, O Plant, have I who shall avert the threatened
    ill.
   O sacred Plant, produced aright! make sweetness, sweet thyself,
    for me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVI

  

A charm for the increase of cattle

[0501601]Bull! if thou art the single bull, beget. Thou hast no vital sap.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVII

  

The abduction and restoration of a Brahman's wife

[0501701]These first, the boundless Sea, and Matarisvan, fierce glowing
   Fire, the Strong, the Bliss-bestower,
   And heavenly Floods, first-born by holy Order, exclaimed
    against the outrage on a Brahman.
 [0501702]King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made restitution of
    the Brahman's consort.
   Mitra and Varuna were the inviters: Agni as Hotar took her
    hand and led her.
 [0501703]The man, her pledge, must by the hand be taken when he hath
    cried, She is a Brahman's consort.
   She stayed not for a herald to conduct her: thus is the kingdom
    of a ruler guarded.
 [0501704]She whom they call the star with loosened tresses, descending as.
    misfortune on the village, [p. a174]
   The Brahman's consort, she disturbs the kingdom where hath
    appeared the hare with fiery flashing.
 [0501705]Active in duty serves the Brahmachari: he is a member of the
   Gods' own body.
   Through him Brihaspati obtained his consort, as the Gods gained
    the ladle brought by Soma.
 [0501706]Thus spake of her those Gods of old, Seven Rishis, who sate
    them down to their austere devotion:
   Dire is a Brahman's wife led home by others: in the supremest
    heaven she plants confusion.
 [0501707]When infants die, untimely born, when herds of cattle waste
    away,
   When heroes strike each other dead, the Brahman's wife
    destroyeth them.
 [0501708]Even if ten former husbands--none a Brahman--had espoused a
    dame,
   And then a Brahman took her hand, he is her husband, only he,
 [0501709]Not Vaisya, not Rajanya, no, the Brahman is indeed her lord:
   This Surya in his course proclaims to the Five Races of man-
    kind.
 [0501710]So then the Gods restored her, so men gave the woman back
    again.
   Princes who kept their promises restored the Brahman's wedded
    wife.
 [0501711]Having restored the Brahman's wife, and freed them, with Gods'
    aid, from sin,
   They shared the fulness of the earth and worn themselves ex-
    tended sway.
 [0501712]No lovely wife who brings her dower in hundreds rests upon his
    bed,
   Within whose kingdom is detained, through want of sense, a
   Brahman's dame.
 [0501713]No broad-browed calf with wide-set ears is ever in his homestead
    born.
   Within whose kingdom is detained, through want of sense, a
   Brahman's dame.
 [0501714]No steward, golden-necklaced, goes before the meat-trays of the
    man.
   Within whose kingdom is detained, through want of sense, a
   Brahman's dame. [p. a175]
 [0501715]No black-eared courser, white of hue, moves proudly, harnessed
    to his car,
   In whose dominion is detained, through want of sense, a
   Brahman's dame.
 [0501716]No lily grows with oval bulbs, no lotus-pool is in his field,
   In whose dominion is detained, through senseless love, a
   Brahman's dame.
 [0501717]The men whose task it is to milk drain not the brindled cow for
    him,
   In whose dominion is detained, through senseless love, a
   Brahman's dame.
 [0501718]His milch-cow doth not profit one, his draught-ox masters not
    the yoke,
   Wherever, severed from his wife, a Brahman spends the mourn-
    ful night.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a176]

  

HYMN XVIII

  

The wickedness of oppressing and robbing Brahmans

[0501801]The Gods, O Prince, have not bestowed this cow on thee to eat
    thereof.
   Seek not, Rajanya, to devour the Brahman's cow which none
    may eat.
 [0501802]A base Rajanya, spoiled at dice, and ruined by himself, may eat.
   The Brahman's cow and think, To-day and not tomorrow, let
    me live!
 [0501803]The Brahman's cow is like a snake, charged with due poison,
    clothed with skin.
   Rajanya! bitter to the taste is she, and none may eat of her.
 [0501804]She takes away his strength, she mars his splendour, she ruins
    everything like fire enkindled.
   That man drinks poison of the deadly serpent who counts the
   Brahman as mere food to feed him.
 [0501805]Whoever smites him, deeming him a weakling-blasphemer,
    coveting his wealth through folly
   Indra sets fire alight within his bosom. He who acts thus is
    loathed by Earth and Heaven.
 [0501806]No Brahman must be injured, safe as fire from him who loves
    himself.
   For Soma is akin to him and Indra guards him from the curse.
 [0501807]The fool who eats the Brahmans' food and thinks it pleasant to
    the taste,
   Eats, but can ne'er digest, the cow that bristles with a hundred
    barbs,
 [0501808]His voice an arrow's neck, his tongue a bowstring, his windpipes
    fire-enveloped heads of arrows, [p. a177]
   With these the Brahman pierces through blasphemers, with
   God-sped bows that quell the hearts within them.
 [0501809]Keen arrows have the Brahmans, armed with missiles: the shaft,
    when they discharge it, never faileth.
   Pursuing him with fiery zeal and anger, they pierce the foeman
    even from a distance.
 [0501810]They who, themselves ten hundred, were the rulers of a thousand
    men,
   The Vaitahavyas, were destroyed for that they ate a Brahman's
    cow.
 [0501811]The cow, indeed, when she was slain o'erthrew those Vaitahavyas,
    who
   Cooked the last she-goat that remained of Kesaraprabandha's
    flock.
 [0501812]One and a hundred were the folk, those whom the earth shook
    off from her:
   When they had wronged the Brahman race they perished incon-
    ceivably.
 [0501813]Among mankind the Gods' despiser moveth: he hath drunk
    poison, naught but bone is left him.
   Who wrongs the kinsman of the Gods, the Brahman, gains not
    the sphere to which the Fathers travelled.
 [0501814]Agni, in sooth, is called our guide, Soma is called our next of
    kin.
   Indra quells him who curses us. Sages know well that this is so.
 [0501815]Prince! like a poisoned arrow, like a deadly snake, O lord of
    kine!
   Dire is the Brahman's arrow: he pierces his enemies therewith.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a178]

  

HYMN XIX

  

The wickedness of robbing or insulting Brahmans

[0501901]The sons of Vitahavya, the Srinjayas, waxed exceeding strong.
   They well-nigh touched the heavens, but they wronged Bhrigu
    and were overthrown.
 [0501902]When men pierced Brihatsaman through, the Brahman, son of
   Angiras,
   The ram with teeth in both his jaws, the sheep, devoured their
    progeny.
 [0501903]If men have spat upon, or shot their rheum upon a Brahman,
    they.
   Sit in the middle of a stream running with blood, devouring
    hair.
 [0501904]While yet the Brahman's cow which men are dressing quivers in
    her throe:
   She mars the kingdom's splendour: there no vigorous hero
    springs to life.
 [0501905]Terrible is her cutting-up: her bitter flesh is cast away,
   And it is counted sin among the Fathers if her milk is drunk.
 [0501906]If any King who deems himself mighty would eat a Brahman
    up,
   Rent and disrupted is that realm wherein a Brahman is oppres-
    sed.
 [0501907]She grows eight-footed, and four-eyed, four-eared, four-jawed,
    two-faced, two-tongued,
   And shatters down the kingdom of the man who doth the
   Brahman wrong.
 [0501908]As water swamps a leaky ship so ruin overflows that realm.
   Misfortune smites the realm wherein a Brahman suffers scath
    and harm.
 [0501909]The very trees repel the man, and drive him from their sheltering
    shade,
   Whoever claims, O Narada, the treasure that a Brahman owns. [p. a179]
 [0501910]That wealth, King Varuna hath said, is poison by the Gods
    prepared.
   None hath kept watch to guard his realm who hath devoured a
   Brahman's cow.
 [0501911]Those nine-and-ninety people whom Earth shook and cast away
    from her,
   When they had wronged the Brahman race were ruined incon-
    ceivably.
 [0501912]Oppressor of the Brahmans! thus the Gods have spoken and
    declared,
   The step-effacing wisp they bind upon the dead shall be thy
    couch.
 [0501913]Oppressor of the Brahmans! tears wept by the man who suffers
    wrong,
   These are the share of water which the Gods have destined to be
    thine.
 [0501914]The share of water which the Gods have destined to be thine, is
    that,
   Oppressor of the priest! wherewith men lave the corpse and wet
    the beard.
 [0501915]The rain of Mitra-Varuna falls not on him who wrongs the
    priest.
   To him no counsel brings success: he wins, no friend to do his
    will.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a180]

  

HYMN XX

  

A hymn to the War-drum to secure victory

[0502001]Formed out of wood, compact with straps of leather, loud is the:
   War-drum as he plays the hero.
   Whetting thy voice and vanquishing opponents, roar at them
    like a lion fain to conquer!
 [0502002]The fastened frame hath roared as 'twere a lion, like a bull bel-
    lowing to meet the heifer.
   Thou art a bull, thine enemies are weaklings: thine is the foe-
    subduing strength of Indra.
 [0502003]Like a bull marked by strength among the cattle, roar seeking
    kine and gathering up the booty.
   Pierce through our adversaries' heart with sorrow, and let our
    routed foes desert their hamlets.
 [0502004]Victorious in the battle, loudly roaring, seizing what may be
    seized, look all around thee.
   Utter, O Drum, thy heavenly voice with triumph. Bring, as a
    priest, our enemies' possessions.
 [0502005]Hearing the Drum's far-reaching voice resounding, let the foe's
    dame, waked by the roar, afflicted,
   Grasping her son, run forward in her terror amid the conflict of
    the deadly weapons.
 [0502006]Thou, first of all, O Drum, thy voice shalt utter: over the ridge
    of earth speak forth exultant.
   Crunching with might the army of the foemen, declare thy
    message pleasantly and clearly.
 [0502007]Loud be thy roar between the earth and heaven. Swift let thy
    sounds go forth in all directions.
   Neigh at them, thunder, set in opposition, song-maker, good
    ally that friends may conquer. [p. a181]
 [0502008]He shall send forth his voice whom art hath fashioned. Make
    thou the weapons of our warriors bristle.
   With Indra for ally call out our heroes, and with thy friends
    scatter and chase the foemen
 [0502009]Resonant, roaring, with thy powerful weapons, warning, and
    heard by troops in many places,
   Knowing all rules and winning us advantage, deal fame to many
    where two kings are fighting.
 [0502010]Bent on advantage, mightier, gaining treasures, victor in war,
    the spell hath made thee keener.
   As, in the press, the stone to stalks of Soma, thus, Drum! go
    dancing to our foes' possessions.
 [0502011]Foe-conqueror, victor, vanquishing opponents, seeker of booty,
    mastering, destroying.
   Speak out as a skilled speaker tells his counsel, speak strength
    to us that we may win the battle.
 [0502012]Shaker of things unshaken, readiest corner to battles; conquer-
    ing foes, resistless leader,
   Guarded by Indra, watching our assemblies, go quickly, breaker
    of their hearts who hate us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXI

  

A hymn to the War-drum and various deities for victory

[0502101]Speak to our enemies, O Drum, discouragement and wild
    dismay.
   We bring upon our foemen fear and discord and discomfiture.
   Drum! drive these enemies away.
 [0502102]When sacrificial butter hath been offered, let our foemen flee.
   Through consternation, terrified, trembling in mind and eye and
    heart.
 [0502103]Wrought out of wood, compact with straps of leather, dear to
    all the clan, [p. a182]
   Bedewed with sacrificial oil, speak terror to our enemies.
 [0502104]As the wild creatures of the wood flee in their terror from a
    man,
   Even so do thou, O Drum, roar out against our foes to frighten
    them, and then bewilder thou their thoughts.
 [0502105]As, when the wolf approaches, goats and sheep run sorely
    terrified,
   Even so do thou, O Drum, roar out against our foes to frighten
    them, and then bewilder thou their thoughts.
 [0502106]As birds of air, day after day, fly in wild terror from the hawk,
    as from a roaring lion's voice,
   Even so do thou, O Drum, roar out against our foes to frighten
    them, and then bewilder thou their thoughts.
 [0502107]May all the deities whose might controls the fortune of the fray
   Frighten away our enemies with Drum and skin of antelope.
 [0502108]Let those our enemies who go yonder in their battalions shake.
   In fear at shadows and the sounds of feet which Indra sporteth
    with.
 [0502109]To all the quarters of the sky let clang of bowstrings and our
   Drums.
   Cry out to hosts of foes that go discomfited in serried ranks.
 [0502110]Aditya, take their sight away! Follow them close, ye motes of
    light.
   Let them cleave fast to foot-bound hosts when strength of arm
    hath past away.
 [0502111]Do ye, O mighty Maruts, sons of Prisni, crush down, with
   Indra for ally, our foemen.
   King Soma. Varuna, great God and sovran, Indra too, aye,
   Death,--
 [0502112]May these embattled Gods, brilliant as Surya--All hail!--one-
    minded conquer those who hate us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a183]

  

HYMN XXII

  

A charm against fever

[0502201]Hence, filled with holy strength let Agni, Soma, and Varuna,
    the Press-stone, and the Altar.
   And Grass, and glowing Fuel banish Fever. Let hateful things
    stay at a distance yonder.
 [0502202]And thou thyself who makest all men yellow, consuming them
    with burning heat like Agni,
   Thou, Fever! then be weak and ineffective. Pass hence into the
    realms below or vanish.
 [0502203]Endowed with universal power! send Fever down-ward, far
    away,
   The spotty, like red-coloured dust, sprung from a spotty
    ancestor.
 [0502204]When I have paid obeisance to Fever I send him downward
    forth.
   So let Sakambhara's boxer go again to the Mahavrishas.
 [0502205]His mansions are the Mujavans, and the Mahavrishas his home,
   Thou, Fever, ever since thy birth hast lived among the Bahlikas.
 [0502206]Fever, snake, limbless one, speak out! Keep thyself far away
    fi om us.
   Seek thou a wanton Dast girl and strike her with thy thunder-
    bolt.
 [0502207]Go, Fever, to the Mujavans, or, farther, to the Bahlikas.
   Seek a lascivious Sara girl and seem to shake her through and
    through.
 [0502208]Go hence and eat thy kinsmen the Mahavrishas and Mujavans.
   These or those foreign regions we proclaim to Fever for his
    home.
 [0502209]In a strange land thou joyest not; subdued, thou wilt be kind
    to us.
   Fever is eager to depart, and to the Bahlikas will go,
 [0502210]Since thou now cold, now burning hot, with cough besides, hast
    made us shake,
   Terrible, Fever, are thy darts: forbear to injure us with these.
 [0502211]Take none of these to be thy friends, Cough, or Consumption
    or Decline:
   Never come thence again to us! O Fever, thus I counsel thee.
 [0502212]Go, Fever, with Consumption, thy brother, and with thy sister,
   Cough. [p. a184]
   And with thy nephew Herpes, go away unto that alien folk.
 [0502213]Chase Fever whether cold or hot, brought by the summer or
    the rains,
   Tertian, intermittent, or autumnal, or continual.
 [0502214]We to Gandharis, Mujavans, to Angas and to Magadhas.
   Hand over Fever as it were a servant and a thing of price.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIII

  

A charm against parasitic worms

[0502301]I have called Heaven and Earth to aid, have called divine
   Sarasvati,
   Indra and Agni have I called: Let these destroy the worm, I
    prayed.
 [0502302]O Indra, Lord of Treasures, kill the worms that prey upon this
    boy.
   All the malignant spirits have been smitten by my potent spell. [p. a185]
   We utterly destroy the worm, the worm that creeps around the
    eyes.
   The worm that crawls about the nose, the worm that gets bet-
    ween the teeth.
 [0502303]Two of like colour, two unlike, two coloured black, two
    coloured red.
   The tawny and the tawny-eared, Vulture and Wolf, all these
    are killed.
 [0502304]Worms that are white about the sides, those that are black with
    black-hued arms,
   All that show various tints and hues, these worms we utterly
    destroy.
 [0502305]Eastward the Sun is mounting, seen of all, destroying thing
    unseen,
   Crushing and killing all the worms invisible and visible.
 [0502306]Let the Yevashas, Kaskashas, Ejatkas, Sipavitnukas,
   Let both the worm that we can see, and that we see not, be
    destroyed.
 [0502307]Slain the Yevasha of the worms, slain too is the Nadaniman.
   I have reduced them all to dust like vetches with the pounding-
    stone.
 [0502308]The worm Saranga, white of hue, three-headed, with a triple
    hump,
   I split and tear his ribs away, I wrench off every head he has.
 [0502309]I kill you, worms, as Atri, as Kanva and Jamadagni killed.
   I crush the worms to pieces with a spell that erst Agastya used.
 [0502310]The King of worms hath been destroyed, he who was lord of
    these is slain.
   Slain is the worm whose mother, whose brother and sister have
    been slain.
 [0502311]Destroyed are his dependants, who those dwell around him are
    destroyed,
   And all the worms that seem to be the little ones are done to
    death
 [0502312]Of every worm and insect, of the female and the male alike,
   I crush the head to pieces with a stone and burn the face with
    fire.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a186]

  

HYMN XXIV

  

A priest's prayer for protection and assistance

[0502401]Savitar, Lord of furthering aids, protect me, in this my prayer,
    in this mine act, in this my sacerdotal charge, in this perfor-
    mance, in this thought, in this my plan and wish, in this my
    calling on the Gods! All hail!
 [0502402]May Agni, Lord of forest trees, protect, me, in, etc.
 [0502403]May Heaven and Earth, the Queens of bounties, save me.
 [0502404]May Varuna, the Lord of waters, save me.
 [0502405]May Mitra-Varuna, Lords of rain, preserve me.
 [0502406]Lords of the mountains, may the Maruts save me.
 [0502407]May, Soma, Lord of plants and herbs, protect me.
 [0502408]May Vayu, Lord of middle air, protect me.
 [0502409]May Surya, sovran Lord of eyes, protect me.
 [0502410]May the Moon, Lord of constellations, save me.
 [0502411]May Indra who is Lord of heaven protect me.
 [0502412]The Maruts' father, Lord of cattle, save me.
 [0502413]May Mrityu, Lord of living creatures, save me.
 [0502414]May Yama, Regent of the Fathers, save me.
 [0502415]May the Forefathers of old time protect me.
 [0502416]May Fathers of succeeding ages save me.
 [0502417]Next may the Fathers of our fathers save me, in this my prayer,.
    in this mine act, in this my sacerdotal charge, in this perfor-
    mance, in this thought, in this my plan and wish, in this my
    calling on the Gods! All hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a187]

  

HYMN XXV

  

A charm to facilitate conception

[0502501]Let the man, sower of the germ, lay, as a feather on a shaft.
   Limb drawn from limb, whate'er is culled from cloud and from
    the womb of heaven.
 [0502502]Even as this broad earth received the germ of all the things that
    be,
   Thus within thee I lay the germ. I call thee, Earth, to strengthen
    it.
 [0502503]O Sinivali, set the germ, set thou the germ, Sarasvati! In thee
    let both the Asvins, crowned with lotuses, bestow the germ.
 [0502504]Let Mitra-Varuna and God Brihaspati lay the germ in thee.
   Indra and Agni lay the germ, Dhatar bestow the germ in thee.
 [0502505]Let Vishnu form and mould the womb, let Tvashtar duly shape
    the forms,
   Prajapati infuse the stream, and Dhatar lay for thee the germ.
 [0502506]Drink thou the procreative draught well-known to Varuna the
   King,
   Known to divine Sarasvati, and Indra slayer of the foe.
 [0502507]Thou art the germ of plants and herbs, thou art the germ of
    forest trees,
   The germ of each existing thing, so here, O Agni, lay the germ.
 [0502508]Rise up, put forth thy manly strength, and lay thy germ within
    the womb.
   A bull art thou with vigorous strength: for progeny we bring
    thee near.
 [0502509]Prepare thee, Barhatsama, let the germ be laid within thy side.
   The Soma-drinking Gods have given a son to thee, thy son and
    mine.
 [0502510]O Dhatar, thou Disposer, lay within the body of this dame.
   A male germ with the noblest form, for her, in the tenth month,
    to bear.
 [0502511]Tvashtar, celestial artist, lay within the body of this dame.
   A male germ with the noblest form for her in the tenth month
    to bear. [p. a188]
 [0502512]Savitar, vivifier, lay within the body of this dame A male germ
    with the noblest form for her in the tenth month to bear.
 [0502513]O Lord of Life, Prajapati, within this woman's body lay
   A male germ with the noblest form for her in the tenth month
    to bear.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVI

  

A hymn of invitation to the gods

[0502601]In sacrifice for you may sapient Agni--All hail!--use Yajus
    texts and fuel.
 [0502602]May Savitar the God--All hail!--foreknowing, chief in this
    sacrifice, employ them.
 [0502603]In this great rite--All hail!--may sapient Indra use lauds,
    rejoicings, well-yoked coursers.
 [0502604]Bring Praishas in the rite--All hail!--and Nivids, learned, con-
    nected, with the Consorts.
 [0502605]As a dame brings her son--All hail! O Maruts, connected, in
    the rite bring measures.
 [0502606]Here Aditi is come--All hail!--preparing the rite with grass and
    lustral waters.
 [0502607]Let Vishnu in this rite in varied manner--All hail! use well-
    yoked steeds, his fervours.
 [0502608]Let Tvashtar in this rite in varied manner--All hail!--use forms,
    his well-yoked coursers. [p. a189]
 [0502609]Let Bhaga in this rite use prayers, foreknowing--All hail! for
    this use well-yoked coursers.
 [0502610]Let Soma in this rite in varied manner--All hail!--use milk-
    streams, well-yoked coursers.
 [0502611]Let Indra in this rite in varied manner--All hail!--use powers,.
    his well-yoked coursers.
 [0502612]Hitherward come ye with the prayer, O Asvins, exalting sacrifice
    with cry of Vashat!
   Brihaspati!--All hail!--with prayer come hither. Here is the
    rite, here heaven for him who worships.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVII

  

An Apri or Propitiatory hymn

[0502701]Uplifted be this sacrificer's fuel: lofty and brilliant be the flames
    of Agni!
   Splendidly bright, fair-faced, with all his offspring, Tanunapat
    the Asura, many-handed.
 [0502702]God among Gods, the God bedews the paths with fatness and'
    with mead.
 [0502703]With store of mead to sacrifice comes Agni, comes Narasansa
   Agni, friendly-minded, comes Savitar, righteous God who
    brings all blessings.
 [0502704]Hither he comes with power and fatness also, the luminous,.
    implored with adoration. [p. a190]
 [0502705]At holy rites and offerings Agni loveth the scoops: let this man
    worship Agni's greatness.
 [0502706]He is the furtherer at glad oblations: there stood the Vasus and
    the treasure-givers.
 [0502707]Ever the Doors divine, and all protect this worshipper's holy
    work.
 [0502708]Far-reaching, ruling by the Law of Agni,
   May Dawn and Night, the holy, speeding near us, aid this our
    sacrificial ceremony.
 [0502709]Celestial Hotars, with the tongues of Agni praise and extol our
    lofty ceremony, so that our sacrifice be well conducted!
 [0502710]Three Goddesses upon this grass, be seated, Ida, Sarasvati,
   Mahi, and Bharati adored with praise.
 [0502711]This our nutritious genial flow, God Tvashtar! and growth of
    wealth, pour down on this man's kindred.
 [0502712]Vanaspati, rejoicing, of thyself send God-ward! Let Agni, Im-
    molator, sweeten our libation.
 [0502713]Pay sacrifice to Indra, Jatavedas Agni, with Hail! Let all the
   Gods accept the gifts we offer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a191]

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

A charm to ensure general protection and prosperity

[0502801]For lengthened life, to last through hundred autumns, they
    equalize with nine the nine aspirations.
   Three in gold, three in silver, three in iron by heat are stablished
    in their several places.
 [0502802]May Agni, Sun, and Moon, and Earth, and Waters, Sky, Air,
    the Quarters and the Points between them,
   And Parts of Years accordant with the Seasons by this three-
    threaded Amulet preserve me.
 [0502803]In three-threaded Charm rest triple fulness! Let Pushan cover it
    with milk and butter.
   Here rest abundant store of food and people, may ample store
    of cattle rest within it.
 [0502804]Enrich this charm, Adityas, with your treasure; magnify this,
    when magnified, O Agni.
   Endow it with heroic strength, O Indra: therein be lodged a
    triple power of increase.
 [0502805]With gold let Earth protect thee, and with iron, accordant, all-
    sustaining Agni save thee!
   And in accordance with the plants may silver, regarding thee
    with favour, grant thee vigour.
 [0502806]This gold, born threefold at its first production, grew the one
    thing that Agni loved most dearly: it fell away, one part of
    injured Soma.
   One part they call seed of the sapient Waters. This gold bring
    thee long life when triply threaded!
 [0502807]Three lives of Jamadagni, thrice the vital force of Kasyapa,
   Three sights of immortality, three lives have I prepared for thee.
 [0502808]When with the three-stringed charm came three strong eagles,
    sharing the Sacred Syllable and mighty,
   With immortality they drove off Mrityu, obscuring and conceal-
    ing all distresses.
 [0502809]The golden guard thee from the sky, the silvern guard thee from
    the air,
   The iron guard thee from the earth! This man hath reached the
    forts of Gods.
 [0502810]May these three castles of the Gods keep thee secure on every
    side.
   Endowed with strength, possessing these, be thou the master of
    thy foes, [p. a192]
 [0502811]The God who first bound on in the beginning the deities' im-
    mortal golden castle,--
   Him I salute with ten extended fingers. Blest be the three-
    stringed charm I bind upon thee.
 [0502812]Aryaman be thy binder-on, and Pushan and Brihaspati:
   Whatever name the brood of day possess, therewith we fasten
    thee.
 [0502813]With Seasons and with Lengths of Time, for vigour and exten-
    ded life,
   With all the splendour of the Sun we fasten thee about the neck.
 [0502814]Drawn forth from butter and with meath besprinkled, firm as
    the earth, unshakable, triumphant.
   Breaking down foes and casting them beneath me, be fastened
    on me for exalted fortune!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  

A charm for the destruction of malignant goblins

[0502901]Made ready in the east drive forth, take notice of what is hap-
    pening here, omniscient Agni! [p. a193]
   Thou bringest medicine and healest sickness: through thee may
    we win horses, kine, and people.
 [0502902]Accordant with all Gods, O Jatavedas Agni, perform this work
    as we beseech thee,
   That this defence of his may fall, whoever hath caused us pain,
    whoever hath consumed us.
 [0502903]Unanimous, with all the Gods together, so do this thing O Agni
   Jatavedas, that this defence of his may fall and fail him.
 [0502904]Pierce both his eyes, pierce thou the heart within him, crush
    thou his teeth and cleave his tongue asunder.
   Rend thou, most youthful Agni, that Pisacha whoso amid them
    all of this hath eaten.
 [0502905]Whatever of his body hath been taken, plundered, borne off, or
    eaten by Pisachas,
   This, Agni, knowing it, again bring hither! We give back flesh
    and spirit to his body.
 [0502906]If some Pisacha in my food raw, ready, thoroughly cooked, or,
    spotty, hath deceived me,
   Let the Pisachas with their lives and offspring atone for this,
    and let this man be healthy.
 [0502907]If one hath cheated me in milk or porridge, in food from grain
    or plants that need no culture.
   Let the Pisachas, etc.
 [0502908]If one, flesh eater, in a draught of water have wronged me lying
    in the bed of goblins,
   Let the Pisachas, etc.
 [0502909]If one, flesh-eater, in the day or night-time have wronged me
    lying in the bed of goblins,
   Let the Pisachas, etc.
 [0502910]O Agni Jatavedas, slay the bloody Pisacha, flesh-devourer, mind-
    destroyer,
   Strong Indra strike him with his bolt of thunder, courageous
   Soma cut his head to pieces!
 [0502911]Thou, Agni, ever slayest Yatudhanas, the fiends have never con-
    quered thee in battles.
   Consume thou from the root the flesh-devourers, let none of
    them escape thy heavenly weapon
 [0502912]Collect, O Jatavedas, what hath been removed and borne away.
   Let this man's members grow, let him swell like the tendril of a
    plant. [p. a194]
 [0502913]Like as the Soma's tendril, thus, O Jatavedas let him swell,
   Let him live, Agni I Make him fat, free from consumption, full
    of sap.
 [0502914]Here, Agni, is the fuel, here are logs that crush Pisachas down.
   O Jatavedas, willingly accept them and be pleased therewith.
 [0502915]Accept, O Agni, with thy flame the billets of Tarshtagha wood.
   Let the flesh-eater who would take the flesh of this man lose his
    form.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXX

  

A charm to restore life and health

[0503001]From thy vicinity I call, from near, from far, from night at
    hand.
   Stay here: depart not: follow not the Fathers of the olden
    time. I bind thy vital spirit fast.
 [0503002]If any man, a stranger or akin, hath cast a spell on thee,
   I with my voice to thee declare thy freedom and release there-
    from.
 [0503003]If in thy folly thou hast lied or cursed a woman or a man,
   I with my voice declare to thee thy freedom and release there-
    from. [p. a195]
 [0503004]If thou art lying there because of mother's or of father's sin,
   I with my voice declare to thee thy freedom and release there-
    from.
 [0503005]Accept the healing medicine, the balm thy mother and thy sire,
   Thy sister and thy brother bring. I make thee live through
    lengthened years.
 [050306]O man, stay here among us; stay with all thy spirit: follow not
   Yama's two messengers. Approach the castles where the living
    dwell.
 [0503007]Come back as thou art called to come, knowing the outlet of
    the path,
   And the Approach and its ascent, the way of every living man.
 [0503008]Be not alarmed: thou wilt not die. I give thee lengthened years
    of life.
   Forth from thy members have I charmed Decline that caused
    the fever there.
 [0503009]Gone is the pain that racked thee, gone thy fever, gone thy
    heart's disease.
   Consumption, conquered by my voice, hath, like a hawk, fled
    far away.
 [0503010]Two sages, Sense and Vigilance, the sleepless and the watchful
    one,
   These, the protectors of thy life, shall be awake both day and
    night.
 [0503011]This Agni must be waited on. Here let the Sun mount up for
    thee.
   Rise from deep death and come away, yea, from black darkness
    rise thou up!
 [0503012]Homage be paid to Yama, to Mrityu, and to the Fathers, and to
    those who guide us!
   I honour first, for this man's preservation, that Agni who well
    knoweth how to save him.
 [0503013]Let breath and mind return to him, let sight and vigour come
    again
   Let all his body be restored and firmly stand upon its feet.
 [0503014]Provide this man with breath and sight, O Agni, and with his
    body and his strength unite him.
   Thou knowest Amrit: let him not go hence, nor dwell in house
    of clay.
 [0503015]Let not thine inward breathing fail, let not thine outward breath [p. a196]
    be lost.
   Let Surya who is Lord Supreme raise thee from death with
    beams of light.
 [0503016]Tied, tremulously moving, here the tongue is speaking in the
    mouth.
   With thee I charmed Decline away and Fever's hundred ago-
    nies.
 [0503017]This living world, unconquered of the Gods, is most beloved of
    all.
   To whatsoever death thou wast destined when thou wast born,.
   O man,
   This death and we call after thee. Die not before decrepit age!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXI

  

A counter-charm against the incantations of an enemy

[0503101]The spell that they have cast for thee on unbaked dish or ming-
    led meal, [p. a197]
   The witchcraft wrought on undressed meat, this I strike back
    again on them.
 [0503102]The spell that they have cast for thee on jungle-cock, goat,
    horned ram,
   The witchcraft wrought upon thy ewe, this I strike back again
    on them.
 [0503103]The spell that they have cast upon thy beast that hath uncloven
    hooves,
   The ass with teeth in both his jaws, this I strike back again on
    them.
 [0503104]The secret spell upon thy plants Amula or Narachi, spell
   That they have cast upon thy field, this I strike back again on
    them.
 [0503105]The spell that wicked men have cast on thine original household-
    fire,
   And on thy sacrificial hall, this I strike back again on them.
 [0503106]The spell that they have cast upon thy public room thy gambl-
    ing-board,
   Spell they have cast upon thy dice, this I strike back again on
    them.
 [0503107]The spell that they have cast upon thine army or thy shafts and
    arms,
   Spell they have cast upon the drum, this I throw back again on
    them.
 [0503108]Charm they have laid within thy well or buried in the burning-
    ground,
   Charm they have laid within thy home, this I throw back again
    on them.
 [0503109]The spell that they have wrought for thee in flickering fire of
    human bones,--
   Mroka, consuming, cannibal, this I throw back again on them.
 [0503110]He brought this by no proper path, by the right path we drive it
    back.
   The fool in folly brought it to those who observe established
    bounds.
 [0503111]No power had he who wrought the spell: he hurt his foot, he
    broke his toe.
   Unlucky for his wealthy lords, he hath wrought happiness for us.
 [0503112]May Indra slay with mighty bolt, may Agni with his missible
    pierce. [p. a198]
   The sorcerer who brings the curse, who deals with roots and
    secret spells.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a199]

  

BOOK VI

  

HYMN I

  

In praise of Savitar

[0600101]Sing, Atharvana, at eve, sing loudly, bring a splendid present:
    hymn God Savitar with praises.
 [0600102]Yea, praise him whose home is in the river, Son of Truth, the
    youthful, gracious friend whose word is guileless.
 [0600103]Savitar our God shall send us many everlasting treasures, that
    both paths may well be travelled.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN II

  

In praise of Indra

[0600201]For Indra, ministering priests! run ye and press the Soma juice,
   That he may hear his praiser's word, and this my call.
 [0600202]Thou into whom the drops find way as sap pours life into a
    tree,
   Drive off in thine abundant might our demon foes.
 [0600203]For Indra, thunder-armed, who drinks the Soma press the Soma
    out:
   He, youthful, conqueror, and Lord is praised by all.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN III

  

A prayer to various deities for protection and prosperity

[0600301]Guard us the Maruts! Guard us well, O Indra, Piishan, Aditi.
   Guard us, O Waters' Child, and Rivers Seven. May Vishnu
    guard us, and the Sky. [p. a200]
 [0600302]May Heaven and Earth take care of us for victory, may Pressing-
   Stone and Soma save us from distress.
   Sarasvati, auspicious Goddess, guard us well: preserve us Agni
    and his kind protecting powers.
 [0600303]Preserve us both the Asvins, Gods and Lords of Light, and let
    the Dawns and Night bring us deliverance.
   The Waters' Child protect our house from every harm. Do thou,
   God Tvashtar, make us strong for health and wealth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

A hymn to various deities for protection

[0600401]May Tvashtar, Brahmanaspati, Parjanya hear my holy prayer.
   May Aditi with all her sons, the brothers, guard us, invincible,
    protecting power.
 [0600402]May Ansa, Bhaga, Varuna, and Mitra, Aryaman, Aditi, and
   Maruts guard us.
   May we be freed from that oppressor's hatred. May he keep
    off that foeman who is near us.
 [0600403]May both the Asvins further our devotion. With ceaseless care
    deliver us, Wide-Ranger! O Father Heaven, keep from us all
    misfortunes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

  

A prayer to Agni and Indra for the well being of a princely patron

[0600501]Agni, adored with sacred oil, lift up this man to high estate.
   Endow him with full store of strength and make him rich in
    progeny.
 [0600502]Advance him, Indra! Let him be ruler of all akin to him. [p. a201]
   Grant him sufficiency of wealth: guide him to life and length of
    days.
 [0600503]Prosper this man, O Agni, in whose house we offer sacrifice.
   May Soma bless him, and the God here present, Brahmanaspati.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

A prayer to Brahmanaspati for protection from wicked men

[0600601]The godless man whoever plots against us, Brahmanaspati,
   Thou shalt give up as prey to me the worshipper who pour the
    juice.
 [0600602]If, Soma, any spiteful man hath aimed at us whose thoughts are
    kind,
   Smite with thy bolt upon his face: he, crushed to pieces, vani-
    sheth.
 [0600603]Soma, whoever troubleth us, be he a stranger or akin,
   Deprive him of the strength he hath: slay him thy-self like
    mighty Dyaus!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

A prayer to Aditi for help and protection

[0700601]Aditi is sky, and air's mid-region, Aditi is the father, son, and
    mother,
   Aditi all the Gods and the Five Nations, Aditi what is now and
    what is future.
 [0700602]We call for help the Queen of Law and Order, great mother of
    all those whose ways are righteous,
   Far-spread, unwasting strong in her dominion, Aditi wisely lead-
    ing, well protecting. [p. a273]
 [0700603]Sinless may we ascend, for weal, the vessel, rowed with good
    oars, divine, that never leaketh,
   Earth, our strong guard, incomparable Heaven, Aditi wisely lead-
    ing, well protecting.
 [0700604]Let us bring hither, in pursuit of riches, Aditi with our word,
    the mighty mother,
   Her in whose lap the spacious air is lying: may she afford us
    triply-guarding shelter!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

  

A man's love-charm

[0600801]Like as the creeper throws, her arms on every side around the
    tree,
   So hold thou me in thine embrace that thou mayst be in love
    with me, my darling, never to depart.
 [0600802]As, when he mounts, the eagle strikes his pinions downward on
    the earth,
   So do I strike thy spirit down that thou mayst be in love with
    me, my darling, never to depart.
 [0600803]As in his rapid course the Sun encompasses the heaven and:
    earth,
   So do I compass round thy mind that thou mayst be in love with.
    me, my darling, never to depart.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

  

A man's love-charm

[0600901]Desire my body, love my feet, love thou mine eyes, and love my
    legs.
   Let both thine eyes and hair, fond girl! be dried and parched.
    through love of me.
 [0600902]I make thee hang upon mine arm, I make thee lie upon my
    heart.
   Thou yieldest to my wish, that thou mayst be submissive to my
    will.
 [0600903]May they whose kisses are a bond, a love-charm laid within the
    heart,
   Mothers of butter, may the cows incline that maid to love of
    me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a203]

  

HYMN X

  

A thanksgiving for life, hearing, and sight

[0601001]All hail for hearing to the Earth, to Trees, to Agni, sovran
   Lord!
 [0601002]All hail for breath to Air, for power to life to Vayu, sovran
   Lord!
 [0601003]All hail for vision to the Stars, to Heaven, to Surya, sovran
   Lord!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XI

  

An epithalamian charm to ensure the birth of a boy

[0601101]Asvattha on the Sami-tree. There a male birth is certified.
   There is the finding of a son: this bring we to the women-folk.
 [0601102]The father sows the genial seed, the woman tends and fosters it.
   This is the finding of a son: thus hath Prajapati declared.
 [0601103]Prajapati, Anumati, Sinivali have ordered it.
   Elsewhere may he effect the birth of maids, but here prepare a
    boy.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a204]

  

HYMN XII

  

A charm against venomous serpents

[0601201]I, As the Sun goes round the heaven, have travelled round the
   Serpents' race.
   I ward thy poison off, as Night parts all else living from the
   Sun.
 [0601202]With this, discovered in the days of old by Brahmans, Rishis,
   Gods,
   With this I ward thy poison off, thou Biter! formed and form-
    ing now.
 [0601203]With mead I mingle flowing streams: the hills and mountains
    shall be mead.
   Parushni and Sipala mead. May it be well with mouth and
    heart.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIII

  

Homage to death

[0601301]Worship to weapons of the Gods! worship to weapons of the
   Kings!
   Then worship to the people's arms! worship, O Death, be paid
    to thee!
 [0601302]Let worship be to thy defence and to thine accusation paid.
   Death! be this worship paid to thy good-will and thy malevo-
    lence!
 [0601303]Worship to thy physicians, to thy sorcerers be worship paid!
   Death! let this reverence be done unto thy Brahmans and thy
    roots.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a205]

  

HYMN XIV

  

A charm against consumption

[0601401]Remove thou all Decline that lurks within the members and the
    joints,
   The firmly-settled heart-disease that racks the bones and rends
    the limbs.
 [0601402]From the consumptive man I pluck Decline as 'twere a severed
    part.
   I cut the bond that fetters him, even as a root of cucumber.
 [0601403]Begone, Consumption, hence away, like a young foal that runs.
    at speed.
   Then, not pernicious to our men, flee, yearly visitant like grass!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XV

  

A charm for power and preeminence

[0601501]Most excellent of all the plants art thou: thy vassals are the
    trees.
   Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to injure
    us.
 [0601502]Whoever seeks to injure us, with kinsmen or no kin to aid,
   May I be uppermost of all, even as this Plant is queen of trees.
 [0601503]As Soma hath been made the best of all oblations 'mid the
    plants,
   So, as Talasa is the queen of trees, may I be chief of all.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a206]

  

HYMN XVI

  

A medical charm

[0601601]O Abayu, non-Abayu, dire is thy juice, O Abayu; we eat the
    gruel made of thee.
 [0601602]Vihalha is thy father's name, thy mother's is Madavati.
   Yea, verily thou art not he, thou who hast well protected life.
 [0601603]Go thou to rest, Tauvilika! This noisy cry hath sunk to rest.
   Go hence, depart, Nirala, thou! the tawny and the tawny-
    eared.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVII

  

A charm to ensure conception

[0601701]Even as this mighty Earth conceived the germ of all the things
    that be,
   So may the germ of life be laid in thee that thou mayst bear a
    son.
 [0601702]Even as this mighty Earth hath borne and bears the stately
    forest trees,
   So may the germ of life be borne in thee that thou mayst bear a
    son.
 [0601703]Even as this mighty Earth hath borne and bears the mountains
    and the hills,
   So may the germ of life be borne in thee that thou mayst bear
    a son. [p. a207]
 [0601704]Even as this mighty Earth supports the moving world that
    dwells thereon,
   So may the germ of life be borne in thee that thou mayst bear a
    son.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVIII

  

A charm to banish jealousy

[0601801]The first approach of Jealousy, and that which followeth the
    first,
   The pain, the fire that burns within thy heart we quench and
    drive away.
 [0601802]Even as the earth is dead to sense, yea, more unconscious than
    the dead,
   Even as a corpse's spirit is the spirit of the jealous man.
 [0601803]The thought that harbours in thy heart, the fluttering doubt
    that dwells therein.
   Yea, all thy jealousy, like heat born of the dance, I banish
    thence.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIX

  

A prayer for purification

[0601901]Let the Gods purify me, let men purify me with a prayer.
   Cleanse me all creatures that exist! may Pavamana make me
    pure.
 [0601902]May Pavamana make me pure for wisdom and for power and
    life, and unassailed security. [p. a208]
 [0601903]God Savitar, byboth of these, filter and pressing out this juice,
    purify us that we may see.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XX

  

A charm against fever

[0602001]He goes away as 'twere from this fierce burning fire, inebriated
    and lamenting he departs.
   Let him, the lawless, seek another and not us. Worship be paid
    to Fever armed with fiery heat.
 [0602002]To Rudra and to Fever be our worship paid: worship be paid
    to Varuna the splendid King!
   Worship to Dyaus, to Earth, worship be paid to Plants!
 [0602003]Thou who, aglow with heat, makest all bodies green, to thee,
    red, brown, I bow, the Fever of the wood.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXI

  

A charm to strengthen hair and promote its growth

[0602101]Of all the three terrestrial realms the ground is verily the best.
   I from the skin that covers these gather a healing medicine.
 [0602102]Thou art the best of medicines, most excellent of Plants art
    thou,
   As Soma 'mid the wandering stars, as Varuna among the Gods.
 [0602103]Endowed with wealth, denying not, give freely fain to give your
    gifts!
   Ye stay the hair from falling off: ye strengthen and increase its
    growth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a209]

  

HYMN XXII

  

To the Maruts or Storm-Gods

[0602201]Dark the descent; the strong-winged birds are golden: they fly
    aloft to heaven, enrobed in waters.
   They have come hither from the seat of Order, and inundated
    earth with streams of fatness.
 [0602202]Ye make floods rich in milk, make plants propitious, what time
    ye stir, O golden-breasted Maruts!
   Pour down your showers of vigorous strength and favour there
    where ye sprinkle mead, O Maruts, heroes!
 [0602203]O Maruts, send ye down, streaming with water rain which, may,
    filling all the sloping valleys,
   Leap like a bold girl in a man's embraces, or like a matron
    tumbled by her husband.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIII

  

To the Waters

[0602301]Here flow the restless ones, they flow unceasing through the day
    and night,
   Most excellently wise I call the Goddess Waters hitherward.
 [0602302]Let the deft Waters, summoned, give permission that we bear
    them off,
   And quickly set us on our way.
 [0602303]Let all the people celebrate the rite of Savitar the God.
   Sweet unto us be Waters, Plants propitious!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a210]

  

HYMN XXIV

  

To the Rivers

[0602401]Forth from the Hills of Snow they stream, and meet in Sindhu
    here or there.
   To me the sacred Waters gave the balm that heals the heart's
    disease.
 [0602402]Whatever rupture I have had that injured eyes or heels or toes.
   All this the Waters, skilfullest physicians, shall make well again,
 [0602403]All Rivers who have Sindhu for your Lady, Sindhu for your
   Queen,
   Give us the balm that heals this ill: this boon let us enjoy from
    you.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXV

  

A charm to remove pustules or scrofulous swellings (apachitas)

[0602501]May all the five-and-fifty which meet round the tendons of the
    neck.
   Depart and vanish hence away like plaguing insects buzz and
    hum!
 [0602502]Those seventy-and-seven which meet round the upper vertebrae,
   Let them all vanish hence away like plaguing insects' buzz and
    hum!
 [0602503]Those nine-and-ninety which, combined, attack the shoulder
    round about,
   Let them all vanish hence away like plaguing insects' buzz and
    hum!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a211]

  

HYMN XXVI

  

To Affliction

[0602601]Let me go free, O Misery: do thou, the mighty, pity us.
   Set me uninjured in the world of happiness, O Misery.
 [0602602]From thee, from thee who fliest not from us, O Misery, we fly.
   Then at the turning of the paths let Misery fall on someone else.
 [0602603]May the immortal, thousand eyed, dwell otherwhere apart from
    us.
   Let him afflict the man we hate: smite only him who is our foe.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVII

  

A charm to avert misfortune foreshown by the coming of a dove

[0602701]Gods! whatsoe'er the Dove came hither seeking, sent to us as
    the envoy of Destruction,
   For that let us sing hymns and make atonement, Well be it with
    our quadrupeds and bipeds!
 [0602702]Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a harmless bird,
   O Gods, that seeks our dwelling!
   May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and may the
    missile borne on wings avoid us.
 [0602703]Let not the arrow that hath wings distract us. Beside the fire-
    place, on the hearth it settles.
   May it bring welfare to our men and cattle: here let the Dove,
    ye Gods, forbear to harm us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a212]

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

A charm to avert misfortune foreshown by the coming of a dove

[0602801]Drive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses: rejoicing bring
    we hither food and cattle,
   Obliterating traces of misfortune. Most fleet may it fly forth and
    leave us vigour.
 [0602802]These men have strengthened Agni's might, these men have
    brought the kine to us.
   They have sung glory to the Gods. Who is the man that con-
    quers them?
 [0602803]Be reverence paid to him who, while exploring the path for
    many, first approached the river,
   Lord of this world of quadrupeds and bipeds; to him be rever-
    ence paid, to Death, to Yama!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  

A charm to avert misfortune foreshown by the coming of a dove and an owl

[0602901]On these men yonder fall the winged missile: the screeching of
    the Owl is ineffective,
   And that the Dove beside the fire hath settled. [p. a213]
 [0602902]Thine envoys who came hither, O Destruction, sent or not sent
    by thee unto our dwelling,
   The Dove and Owl, effectless be their visit!
 [0602903]Oft may it fly to us to save our heroes from slaughter, oft perch
    here to bring fair offspring,
   Turn thee and send thy voice afar: cry to the region far away;
   That I may see thee in the home of Yama reft of all thy power,
    that I may see thee impotent.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXX

  

A charm to promote the growth of hair

[0603001]Over a magic stone, beside Sarasvati, the Gods Ploughed in this
    barley that was blent with mead.
   Lord of the plough was Indra, strong with hundred powers: the
    ploughers were the Maruts they who give rich gifts.
 [0603002]Thy joy in hair that falleth or is scattered, wherewith thou sub-
    jectest a man to laughter
   To other trees, far from thee will I drive it. Grow up, thou
   Sami, with a hundred branches.
 [0603003]Auspicious, bearing mighty leaves, holy one, nurtured by the rain,
   Even as a mother to her sons, be gracious, Sami to our hair.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXI

  

To Surya the Sun-God

[0603101]This spotted Bull hath come and sat before his mother in the
    east.
   Advancing to his father Heaven. [p. a214]
 [0603102]As expiration from his breath his radiance penetrates within.
   The Bull shines out through all the sky.
 [0603103]He rules supreme through thirty realms--One winged with song
    hath made him mount
   Throughout the days at break of morn.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXII

  

A charm against fiends and goblins

[0603201]With butter, in his hall v4here fire is burning, perform that sacri-
    fice which quells the goblins.
   Burn from afar against the demons Agni! Afflict not in thy fury
    us who praise thee.
 [0603202]Let Rudra break your necks, O ye Pisachas, and split your ribs
    asunder, Yatudhanas!
   Your herb of universal power with Yama hath allied itself.
 [0603203]Here, Mitra-Varuna! may we dwell safely: with splendour drive
    the greedy demons backward,
   Let them not find a surety or a refuge, but torn away go down
    to Death together.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIII

  

A prayer to Indra for riches

[0603301]He who controls this air and men who aid his strength, and
    wood, and heaven, the lofty seat which Indra loves.
 [0603302]The bold whose overpowering might the boldest never hath
    defied,-- [p. a215]
   As erst still, unassailable is Indra's wrath, and fame, and force.
 [0603303]May he bestow on us that wealth, far-spreading, bright with
    yellow hue.
   Indra is mightiest Lord among the folk.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIV

  

To Agni for protection from enemies

[0603401]Send forth thy voice to Agni, to the manly hero of our homes,
   So may he bear us past our foes.
 [0603402]That Agni who with sharpened flame of fire consumes the
   Rakshasas,
   So may he bear us past our foes.
 [0603403]He who from distance far remote shineth across the tracts of
    land,
   May he transport us past our foes.
 [0603404]He who beholds all creatures, who observes them with a careful
    eye,
   May he transport us past our foes.
 [0603405]That brilliant Agni who was born beyond this region of the air,
   May he transport us past our foes!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXV

  

To Agni Vaisvanara

[0603501]Forth from the distance far away Vaisvanara come to succour
    us! Agni approach our eulogies!
 [0603502]Vaisvanara with friendly thoughts hath come to this our sacrifice,
   Agni who saves from woe, to lauds.
 [0603503]Vaisvanara hath formed the hymn and laud of the Angirases. To
    these may he bring glorious right.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a216]

  

HYMN XXXVI

  

In praise of Agni Vaisvanara

[0603601]Holy Vaisvanara we seek, the Lord of light and endless life, the
    burning One who fadeth not.
 [0603602]He hath directed all things; he sends forth the Seasons in his
    might, furthering sacrifice's power.
 [0603603]Agni Kama in other homes shines forth the sole imperial Lord
    of all that is and is to be.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVII

  

A charm to divert Imprecation personified

[0603701]Hitherward, having yoked his steeds, came Imprecation,
    thousand-eyed,
   Seeking my curser, as a wolf the home of one who owneth sheep.
 [0603702]Avoid us, Imprecation! as consuming fire avoids the lake.
   Smite thou the man who curses us, as the sky's lightning strikes
    the tree.
 [0603703]Who curses us, himself uncursed, or, cursed, who curses us
    again,
   Him cast I as a sop to Death, as to a dog one throws a bone.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVIII

  

A prayer for surpassing strength and energy

[0603801]What energy the lion hath, the tiger, adder, and burning fire,
   Brahman, or Surya,
   And the blest Goddess who gave birth to Indra, come unto us
    conjoined with strength and vigour!
 [0603802]All energy of elephant and panther, all energy of gold, men, kine,
    and waters, [p. a217]
   And the blest Goddess who gave birth to Indra come unto us
    conjoined with strength and vigour.
 [0603803]Might in car, axles, in the strong bull's courage, in Varuna's
    breath, in Vata, in Parjanya,
   In Warrior, in the war-drum stretched for battle, in the man's
    roar and in the horse's mettle,
   May the blest Goddess who gave birth to Indra come unto us
    conjoined with strength and vigour.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIX

  

A priest's prayer for power and glory

[0603901]Let sacrifice, like fame, thrive sped by Indra, inspired, well-
    ordered, with a thousand powers.
   To highest rank raise me who bring oblation, me who move
    forth to far-extended vision.
 [0603902]We will pay sacrifice and serve with worship our glorious Indra,
    famous for his glories.
   Give thou us sway which Indra hath promoted, and in this boon
    of thine may we be famous.
 [0603903]Indra was glorious at his birth; Agni, Soma were born
    renowned.
   And glorious am I, the most illustrious of all that is.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XL

  

A prayer for peace and security

[0604001]Here may we dwell, O Heaven and Earth, in safety. May Savitar
    and Soma send us safety.
   Our safety be the wide air: ours be safety through the oblation
    of the Seven Rishis. [p. a218]
 [0604002]May the Four Quarters give this hamlet power: Savitar favour
    us and make us happy!
   May Indra make us free from foes and danger: may wrath of
   Kings be turned to other places.
 [0604003]Make thou us free from enemies both from below and from
    above.
   O Indra, give us perfect peace, peace from behind and from be-
    fore.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLI

  

A prayer for protection, long life, and various blessings

[0604101]For mind, for intellect, for thought, for purpose, for intelligence,.
   For sense, for hearing, and for sight, let us adore with sacrifice.
 [0604102]For expiration, vital air, and breath that amply nourishes,
   Let us with sacrifice adore Sarasvati whose reach is wide.
 [0604103]Let not the Rishis, the divine, forsake us, our own, our very
    selves, our lives' protectors.
   Do ye, immortal, still attend us mortals, and give us vital power
    to live the longer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLII

  

A charm to reconcile estranged friends

[0604201]I loose the anger from thy heart as 'twere the bowstring from a
    bow,
   That we, one-minded now, may walk together as familiar
    friends.
 [0604202]Together let us walk as friends: thy wrathful feeling I remove.
   Beneath a heavy stone we cast thy wrath away and bury it.
 [0604203]I trample on thine anger thus, I tread it down with heel and toe:
   So dost thou yield thee to my will, to speak no more rebelliously.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a219]

  

HYMN XLIII

  

The same

[0604301]For stranger and for friend alike this Darbha-grass removeth
    wrath.
   Soother of Anger is it called because it calms the angry man.
 [0604302]This Plant that hath abundant roots spreads to the place where
    waters meet.
   Soother of anger is the name Darbha-grass that springs from
    earth.
 [0604303]We draw thine obstinacy forth, set in thy mouth and in thy jaw:
   So dost thou yield thee to my will. to speak no more rebelli-
    ously.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIV

  

A charm to remove disease

[0604401]Firm stood the heaven, firm stood the earth, firm stood this
    universal world.
   Firm stood the trees that sleep erect: let this thy malady be still.
 [0604402]Of all thy hundred remedies, a thousand remedies combined.
   This is the surest cure for flux, most excellent to heal disease.
 [0604403]Thou art the stream that Rudra pours, the closest kin of Amrita.
   Thy name is called Vishanaka: thou sprangest from the Fathers'
    root, removing illness caused by wind.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a220]

  

HYMN XLV

  

A prayer for preservation from mental sin and evil promptings

[0604501]Sin of the Mind, avaunt! begone! Why sayest thou what none
    should say?
   Go hence away, I love thee not. Go to the forests and the trees.
   My heart is in our homes and cows.
 [0604502]Whatever wrong we have committed, sleeping or waking, by
    ill-wish, dislike, or slander,
   All these offences, which deserve displeasure, may Agni take
    from us and keep them distant.
 [0604503]Indra and Brahmanaspati! whatever foolish deed we plan,
   May provident Angirasa preserve us from the sin and woe.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVI

  

A charm against evil dreams

[0604601]Thou, neither quick nor dead, O Sleep, art fraught with Amrit
    of the Gods.
   Thy name is Araru: thy sire is Yama; Varunani bare thee.
 [0604602]We know thy birth, O Sleep, thou art son of the sisters of the
   Gods; the minister of Yama thou, thou art Antaka, thou art
   Death.
   So well we know thee who thou art. Sleep, guard us from the
    evil dream.
 [0604603]As men discharge a debt, as they pay up an eighth and half-an-
    eighth,
   So the whole evil dream do we pay and assign unto our foe.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a221]

  

HYMN XLVII

  

To accompany the three daily libations

[0604701]Dear to all men, all-prosperer, all-creating, may Agni, guard us*
    at the morn's libation.
   May he, the brightly pure one, give us riches: may we have life
    enjoying food together.
 [0604702]At this our second offering may Indra, Maruts, and Visve Devas
    never fail us.
   Still may the favour of the Gods be with us, blest with long life
    and speaking words that please them.
 [0604703]We pour this third libation of the Sages who fashioned forth
    the cup in proper order.
   Winners of heaven, may they, Sudhanvan's children, lead our
    fair sacrifice to happy fortune.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVIII

  

Formulas to be used at the three daily libations

[0604801]Thou art the Hawk, Gayatri's lord: I hold thee fast. Happily
    bear me to the goal of this my sacrifice. All hail!
 [0604802]Thou art the Ribhu, lord of Jagati: I hold thee fast. Happily
    bear me to the goal of this my sacrifice. Al I hail!
 [0604803]Thou art the Bull, the Trishtup's lord: I hold thee fast. Happily
    bear me to the goal of this my sacrifice. All hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a222]

  

HYMN XLIX

  

In praise of Agni

[0604901]O Agni, in thy body man hath never found a wounded part.
   The Ape devours the arrow's shaft as a cow eats her after-
    birth.
 [0604902]Thou like a fleece contractest and expandest thee what time the
    upper stone and that below devour.
   Closely compressing head with head and breast with breast he
    crunches up the tendrils with his yellow jaws.
 [0604903]The Eagles have sent forth their voice aloud to heaven: in the
    sky's vault the dark impetuous ones have danced.
   When they come downward to repair the lower stone, they,
    dwellers with the Sun, have gained abundant seed.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a223]

  

HYMN L

  

A charm for the destruction of vermin

[0605001]Destroy the rat, the mole, the boring beetle, cut off their heads
    and crush their ribs, O Asvins.
   Bind fast their mouths; let them not eat our barley: so guard,
    ye twain, our growing corn from danger.
 [0605002]Ho! boring beetle, ho! thou worm, ho! noxious grub and
    grasshopper!
   As a priest leaves the unfinished sacrifice, go hence devouring
    not, injuring not this corn.
 [0605003]Hearken to me, lord of the female borer, lord of the female
    grub! ye rough-toothed vermin!
   Whate'er ye be, dwelling in woods, and piercing, we crush and
    mangle all those piercing insects.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LI

  

A prayer for purification and forgiveness of sins

[0605101]Cleansed by the filter of the Wind comes Soma past all our
    enemies, meet friend of Indra.
 [0605102]May the maternal Waters make us ready: cleanse us with fat-
    ness they who cleanse with fatness!
   The Goddesses bear off each blot and tarnish: I come forth
    from the waters cleansed and stainless.
 [0605103]O Varuna, whatever the offence may be, the sin which men
    commit against the heavenly folk-- [p. a224]
   When, through our want of thought we violate thy laws, punish
    us not, O God, for that iniquity.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LII

  

A charm against noxious reptiles and insects

[0605201]Slaying the Rakshasas, the Sun mounts upward in the front of
    heaven,
   Aditya, from the mountains, seen of all, destroying things
    unseen.
 [0605202]The kine had settled in their pen, wild animals sought their lairs
   The wavelets of the brooks had passed away, and were beheld
    no more.
 [0605203]I have brought Kanva's famous Plant, life-giving, and itself
    inspired,
   The medicine that healeth all: may it suppress my hidden foes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIII

  

A prayer for recovery and preservation of health and security

[0605301]May Heaven and Earth, wise pair, may lofty Sukra grant me
    this thing by reason of the guerdon.
   May Agni, Soma mark through this libation: may Vayu,
   Savitar, and Bhaga guard us.
 [0605302]Again return to us our breath and spirit, again come back to us
    our life and vision!
   Vaisvanara, unscathed, our bodies' guardian, stand between us
    and every woe and danger!
 [0605303]We are again united with our bodies, with happy mind, with
    spirit, strength, and splendour. [p. a225]
   May Tvashtar here make room for us, and freedom and smooth
    whate'er is injured in our bodies.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIV

  

A benediction on a newly elected King

[0605401]Win the love of Indra that his friend may reach yet higher state.
   Increase, as rain the grass, this man's dominion and his lofty
    fame.
 [0605402]Confirm the princely power in him, Agni and Soma! grant him
    wealth.
   In all the circuit of his rule make him yet higher for your
    friend.
 [0605403]The man who shows us enmity, whether a stranger or akin,
   Thou wilt give up entire to me who sacrifice and press the juice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LV

  

A prayer for general protection and prosperity

[0605501]Of all the many God-frequented pathways that traverse realms
    between the earth and heaven,
   Consign me, all ye Gods to that which leadeth to perfect and
    inviolable safety.
 [0605502]Maintain us in well-being Summer, Winter Dew-time and Spring,
   Autumn, and Rainy Season
   Give us our share of cattle and of Children. May we enjoy
    your unassailed protection.
 [0605503]Pay to the Year your lofty adoration, to the first Year, the
    second, and the present.
   Many we abide in the auspicious favour and gracious love of
    these who claim our worship.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a226]

  

HYMN LVI

  

A charm against snakes

[0605601]Let not the serpent slay us, O Gods, with our children and our
    folk.
   Let it not close the opened mouth nor open that which now is
    closed.
 [0605602]Be worship paid unto the black, worship to that with stripes
    across!
   To the brown viper reverence, reverence to the demon brood!
 [0605603]I close together fangs with fang, I close together jaws with jaw.
   I close together tongue with tongue, I close together mouth
    with mouth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LVII

  

A charm for a wound or bruise

[0605701]This is a medicine indeed, Rudra's own medicine is this,
   Wherewith he warns the arrow off one-shafted, with a hundred
    tips.
 [0605702]Besprinkle it with anodyne, bedew it with relieving balm:
   Strong, soothing is the medicine: bless us therewith that we
    may live.
 [0605703]Let it be health and joy to us. Let nothing vex or injure us.
   Down with the wound! Let all to us be balm, the whole be
    medicine.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a227]

  

HYMN LVIII

  

A priest's prayer for power and glory

[0605801]May Indra Maghavan give me name and glory. May Heaven
    and Earth, this couple, make me famous.
   May Savitar the deity make me honoured. Here may the man
    who gives the guerdon love me.
 [0605802]Indra from Heaven and Earth receiveth glory among the plants
    the Waters have their glory;
   Even so may we be glorious'mid all the Universal Gods.
 [0605803]Indra and Agni were renowned, famous was Soma at his birth;
   So too am I illustrious, most glorious of all that is.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIX

  

A charm to protect cattle and men

[0605901]First, O Arundhati, protect our oxen and milky kine:
   Protect each one that is infirm, each quadruped that yields no
    milk.
 [0605902]Let the Plant give us sheltering aid, Arundhati allied with Gods;
   Avert Consumption from our men and make our cow-pen rich
    in milk.
 [0605903]I welcome the auspicious Plant, life-giving, wearing every hue.
   Far from our cattle may it turn the deadly dart which Rudra
    casts.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LX

  

The wooing of a bride

[0606001]With forelock loosened o'er his brow here comes the wooer of
    the bride, [p. a228]
   Seeking a husband for this maid, a wife for this unmarried man.
 [0606002]Wooer! this girl hath toiled in vain, going to others' marriages.
   Now to her wedding, verily, wooer! another maid shall come.
 [0606003]Dhatar upholds the spacious earth, upholds the sky, upholds the
   Sun.
   Dhatar bestow upon this maid a husband suited to her wish!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXI

  

A prayer for prosperity and greatness

[0606101]The Waters send me what is sweet and pleasant, Sura bring all
   I need for light and vision!
   The deities, and all of pious nature, and Savitar the God afford
    me freedom!
 [0606102]I set the heaven and the earth asunder, I brought all seven sea-
    sons into being.
   My word is truth, what I deny is falsehood, above celestial Vak,
    above the nations.
 [0606103]I gave existence to the earth and heaven, I made the seasons and
    the seven rivers.
   My word is truth; what I deny is falsehood, I who rejoice in
   Agni's, Soma's friendship.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXII

  

A prayer for purification and riches

[0606201]Cleanse us Vaisvanara with rays of splendour! With breath and
    clouds let quickening Vayu cleanse us. [p. a229]
   And, rich in milky rain, let Earth and Heaven, worshipful, holy,
    cleanse us with their water.
 [0606202]Lay hold on Sunrita whose forms and regions have fair smooth
    backs, her who is all men's treasure.
   Through her may we, in sacrificial banquets singing her glory, be
    the lords of riches.
 [0606203]For splendour, seize on her whom all men worship, becoming
    pure yourselves, and bright, and brilliant.
   Here, through our prayer rejoicing in the banquet, long may we
    look upon the Sun ascending.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIII

  

The symbolical liberation of a sacrificial victim

[0606301]That collar round thy neck, not to be loosened, which Nirriti
    the Goddess bound and fastened,
   I loose for thy long life and strength and vigour. Eat, liberated,
    food that brings no sorrow.
 [0606302]To thee, sharp-pointed Nirriti, be homage! Loose thou the
    binding fetters wrought of iron.
   To me, in truth, again doth Yama give thee. To him, to Yama,
    yea, to Death, be homage!
 [0606303]Compassed by death which comes in thousand manners, here
    art thou fastened to the iron pillar.
   Unanimous with Yama and the Fathers, make this man rise and
    reach the loftiest heaven.
 [0606304]Thou, mighty Agni, good and true, gatherest up all precious
    things.
   Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled at libation's place.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a230]

  

HYMN LXIV

  

To promote unanimity in an assembly

[0606401]Agree and be united: let your minds be all of one accord,
   Even as the Gods of ancient days, unanimous, await their share.
 [0606402]The rede is common, common the assembly, common the law,
    so be their thoughts united.
   I offer up your general oblation: together entertain one common
    purpose.
 [0606403]One and the same be your resolve, be all your hearts in har-
    mony:
   One and the same be all your minds that all may happily con-
    sent.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXV

  

A sacrificial charm against enemies

[0606501]The angry spirit hath relaxed: loose are the arms that act with
    mind.
   Do thou, destroyer, overcome and drive these foemen's might
    away, and then bring opulence to us.
 [0606502]The shaft for handless fiends which, Gods! ye cast against the
    handless ones,
   With this, in shape of sacrifice, I rend the arms of enemies.
 [0606503]Indra made first for Asuras the shaft designed for handless foes:
   Victorious shall my heroes be with Indra as their constant
    friend.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a231]

  

HYMN LXVI

  

A charm for the destruction and plunder of enemies

[0606601]Handless be every foeman who assaileth, they who with missiles
    come to fight against us!
   Dash them together with great slaughter, Indra! and let their
    robber chief run pierced with arrows.
 [0606602]Ye who run hither bending bows, brandishing swords and cast-
    ing darts.
   Handless be ye, O enemies! Let Indra mangle you to-day.
 [0606603]Handless be these our enemies! We enervate their languid
    limbs.
   So let us part among ourselves, in hundreds, Indra! all their
    wealth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVII

  

A charm for the destruction and plunder of enemies

[0606701]Indra and Pushan have gone forth along the ways on every side.
   To-day those hosts of enemies must flee bewildered far away.
 [0606702]Ye foes, come hitherward dismayed like serpents when their
    heads are gone.
   Let Indra slay each bravest one of you whom Agni hath con-
    fused.
 [0606703]Gird thou a bullock's hide on these, make those as timid as the
    deer.
   Let the foe flee away, and let his kine come hither-ward to us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVIII

  

A charm to accompany the shaving of the beard

[0606801]Savitar hath come hither with the razor: come thou, O Vayu,
    with the heated water.
   One-minded let Adityas, Rudras, Vasus moisten the hair: shave
    ye who know King Soma.
 [0606802]Let Aditi shave the beard, and let the Waters bathe it with their
    strength: [p. a232]
   Prajapati restore his health for sight and days of lengthened life!
 [0606803]The razor used by Savitar, for shaving, who knoweth Varuna
    and royal Soma,
   Even with this shave ye this man, O Brahman. Let him be rich
    in horses, kine, and children.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIX

  

A priest's prayer for power and glory

[0606901]Mine be the glory in the hill, in vales, in cattle, and in gold,
   Mine be the sweetness that is found in nectar and in flowing
    wine!
 [0606902]With your delicious honey balm me, Asvins, Lords of splendid
    light!
   That clear and resonant may be the voice I utter to mankind.
 [0606903]In me be strength, in me be fame, in me the power of sacrifice:
   Prajapati establish this in me as firm as light in heaven!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXX

  

A benediction on cow and calf

[0607001]As wine associates with flesh, as dice attend the gaming-board,
   As an enamoured man's desire is firmly set upon a dame,
   So let thy heart and soul, O Cow, be firmly set upou thy calf.
 [0607002]As the male elephant pursues with eager step his female's track,
   As an enamoured man's desire is firmly set upon a dame,
   So let thy heart and soul, O Cow, be firmly set upon the calf.
 [0607003]Close as the felly and the spoke, fixt as the wheel-rim on the
    nave,
   As an enamoured man's desire is firmly set upon a dame,
   So let thy heart and soul, O Cow, be firmly set upon thy calf.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a233]

  

HYMN LXXI

  

A priest's benediction after meat

[0607101]What food I eat of varied form and nature, food whether gold,
    or horse, sheep, goat, or bullock,
   Whatever gift I have received, may Agni the Hotar make it
    sacrifice well-offered.
 [0607102]Whatever, sacrificed or not, hath reached me, bestowed by men
    and sanctioned by the Fathers,
   Whereby my heart seems to leap up, may Agni the Hotar make
    that sacrifice well-offered.
 [0607103]What food I eat unjustly, Gods! or, doubtful between bestow-
    ing and refusing, swallow,
   Through greatness of Vaisvanara the mighty may that same food
    be sweet to me and blessed!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXII

  

A charm to restore or increase virile power

[0607201]Sicut anguis niger ad voluntatem se extendit, Asurarum arte
    magica formas novas efficiens, sic fascinum tuum, partem cum
    parte, conjunctum, hic hymnus efficiat.
 [0607202]Velut penis (tayadarus quem ventus permagnum fecit, quantus.
    est onagri penis, tantus penis tuus increscat.
 [0607203]Quantum estonagri membrum masculinum, elephanti, asinique,
    quantum est fortis equi, tantus penis tuus increscat.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXIII

  

A King's charm to conciliate his discontented kinsmen

[0607301]Let Varuna come hither, Soma, Agni, Brihaspati come hither
    with the Vasus!
   Unanimous, ye kinsmen, come united, come to the glory of this
    mighty guardian.
 [0607302]The inclination which your hearts have harboured, the purpose
    which hath occupied your spirits,
   This I annul with sacrifice and butter. In me be your sweet
    resting-place, O kinsmen.
 [0607303]Stand even here; forsake me not. Before us may Pushan make
    your path unfit to travel.
   Vastoshpati incessantly recall you! In me be your sweet resting-
    place, O kinsmen!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a234]

  

HYMN LXXIV

  

A King's charm to secure the fidelity of his people

[0607401]Close gathered be your bodies: be your minds and vows in.
    unison!
   Here present Brahmanaspati and Bhaga have assembled you.
 [0607402]Let there be union of your minds, let there be union of your
    hearts:
   All that is troubled in your lot with this I mend and harmonize.
 [0607403]As, free from jealousy, the strong Adityas have been the Vasus'
    and the Rudras' fellows.
   So free from jealousy, Lord of Three Titles! cause thou these
    people here to be one-minded.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXV

  

A charm to effect the removal of an enemy

[0607501]Forth from his dwelling drive that man, the foeman who
    assaileth us:
   Through the Expellent sacrifice hath Indra rent and mangled
    him.
 [0607502]Indra, Foe-Slayer, drive him forth into the distance most
    remote,
   Whence never more shall be return in all the years that are to
    come.
 [0607503]To the three distances, beyond mankind's Five Races, let him go,
   Beyond the three skies let him go, whence he shall never come-
    again
   In all the years that are to be, long as the Sun is in the heaven.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a235]

  

HYMN LXXVI

  

A benediction on a new-born Kshatriya child

[0607601]Those who are sitting round this babe prepare him to be looked
    upon.
   Let Agni thoroughly inflamed with all his tongues rise from his-
    heart.
 [0607602]For length of life I use the name of Agni the Consuming God,
   Whose smoke the sage who knows the truth beholds proceeding.
    from his mouth.
 [0607603]The man who knows his fuel laid in order by the Kshatriya
   Sets not his foot upon the steep declivity that leads to Death.
 [0607604]Those who encompass slay him not: he goes not near his lurk--
    ing foes
   The Kshatriya who, knowing well, takes Agni's name for length
    of life.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXVII

  

A charm to bring the cattle home

[0607701]Firm stands the heaven, firm stands the earth, firm stands this
    universal world,
   Firm stand the rooted mountains. I have put the horses in the
    stall.
 [0607702]I call the Herdsman, him who knows the way to drive the
    cattle forth,
   Who knows the way to drive them home, to drive them back
    and drive them in.
 [0607703]O Jatavedas turn them back: a hundred homeward ways be
    thine!
   Thou hast a thousand avenues: by these restore our kine to us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a236]

  

HYMN LXXVIII

  

A nuptial benediction

[0607801]Let this man be again bedewed with this presented sacrifice.
   And comfort with the sap of life the bride whom they have
    brought to him.
 [0607802]With life's sap let him comfort her, and raise her high with
    princely sway.
   In wealth that hath a thousand powers, this pair be inexhausti-
    ble!
 [0607803]Tvashtar formed her to be thy dame, Tvashtar made thee to be
    her lord.
   Long life let Tvashtar give you both. Let Tvashtar give a
    thousand lives.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXIX

  

A prayer for seasonable rain and prosperity

[0607901]May this our Lord of Cloudy Sky, bedewed with liquid drops
    preserve unequalled riches in our homes.
 [0607902]Lord of the Cloudy Sky, bestow vigour and strength on our
    abodes. Let wealth and treasure come to us.
 [0607903]Thou, God bedewed with drops, art Lord of infinite prosperity.
   Grant us thereof, give us thereof: may we enjoy this boon of
    thine.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXX

  

A prayer for help and protection

[0608001]He flieth in the firmament observing all the things that be:
   We with this offering will adore the greatness of the Heavenly
   Hound. [p. a237]
 [0608002]The three, the Kalakanjas, set aloft in heaven as they were
   Gods
   All these I call to be our help and keep this man secure from
    harm.
 [0608003]In waters is thy birth, in heaven thy station, thy majesty on
    earth and in the ocean.
   We with this offering will adore the greatness of the Heavenly
   Hound.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXI

  

A charm to facilitate child-birth

[0608101]Thou art a grasper, holding fast both hands: drivest fiends
    away.
   A holder both of progeny and riches hath this Ring become.
 [0608102]Prepare accordantly, O Ring, the mother for the infant's birth.
   On the right way bring forth the boy. Make him come hither.
   I am here.
 [0608103]The Amulet which Aditi wore when desirous of a son,
   Tvashtar hath bound upon this dame and said, Be mother of a
    boy.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXII

  

A charm to win a bride

[0608201]I call the name of him who comes, hath come, and still draws-
    nigh to us. [p. a238]
   Foe-slaying Indra's name I love, the Vasus' friend with hundred
    powers.
 [0608202]Thus Bhaga spake to me: Let him bring thee a consort by the
    path.
   Whereon the Asvins brought the bride Surya the child of
   Savitar.
 [0608203]Great, Indra. is that hook of thine, bestowing treasure, wrought
    of gold:
   Therewith, O Lord of Might, bestow a wife on me who long to
    wed.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXIII

  

A charm against sores and pustules (apachitas)

[0608301]Hence, Sores and Pustules, fly away even as the eagle from his
    home.
   Let Surya bring a remedy, the Moon shine forth and banish
    you.
 [0608302]One bright with variegated tints, one white, one black, a couple
    red:--
   The'names of all have I declared. Begone, and injure not our
    men.
 [0608303]Hence, childless, shall the Pustule flee, grand-daughter of the
    dusky one.
   The Boil shall fly away from us, the morbid growth shall vanish
    hence.
   Taste, happy in thy mind, thine own oblation, as I with Svaha
    with my heart present it.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a239]

  

HYMN LXXXIV

  

A charm to accompany the symbolical loosing of sacrificial victims

[0608401]Thou in whose dread mouth I present oblation, that these bound
    victims may obtain their freedom,
   The people deem that thou art Earth: I know thee thoroughly,
    and I say thou art Destruction.
 [0608402]Be thou enriched, O Welfare, with oblations, here among us is
    thine allotted portion.
   Free--Hail to thee!--from sin those here and yonder.
 [0608403]Do thou, Destruction, thus, without a rival, release us from the
    iron bonds that hind us.
   To me doth Yama verily restore thee. To him, to Yama, yea, to
   Death be worship!
 [0608404]Thou hast been fastened to an iron pillar, here compassed with
    a thousand deaths around thee.
   In full accord with Yama and the Fathers, send this man up-
    ward to the loftiest heaven.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXV

  

A charm against Consumption

[0608501]Let Varana the heavenly tree here present keep disease away.
   The Gods have driven off Decline that entered and possessed
    this man. [p. a240]
 [0608502]We with the speech of Indra and of Mitra and of Varuna.
   We with the speech of all the Gods will drive Decline away from
    thee.
 [0608503]Even as Vritra checked and stayed these waters flowing every
    way,
   With Agni, God of all mankind. I check and banish thy Decline.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXVI

  

A glorification of a newly consecrated King

[0608601]This is the Lord of Indra, this the Lord of Heaven, the Lord of
   Earth,
   The Lord of all existing things: the one and only Lord be thou,
 [0608602]The Sea is regent of the floods, Agni is ruler of the land,
   The Moon is regent of the stars: the one and only Lord be
    thou.
 [0608603]Thou art the King of Asuras, the crown and summit of man-
    kind:
   Thou art the partner of the Gods: the one and only Lord be
    thou.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXVII

  

A benediction addressed to a newly elected King

[0608701]Here art thou: I have chosen thee. Stand stedfast and immov-
    able.
   Let all the clans desire thee: let not thy kingdom fall away.
 [0608702]Be even here: fall not away: be like a mountain unremoved.
   Stand stedfast here like Indra's self, and hold the kingship in
    the grasp.
 [0608703]This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by constant sacri-
    fice.
   Soma, and Brahmanaspati here present bless and comfort him!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a241]

  

HYMN LXXXVIII

  

A benediction addressed to a newly elected King

[0608801]Firm is the sky, firm is the earth, and firm is all this living
    world;
   Firm are these mountains on their base, and stedfast is this King
    of men.
 [0608802]Stedfast may Varuna the King, stedfast the God Brihaspati,
   Stedfast may Indra stedfast, too, may Agni keep thy stedfast
    reign.
 [0608803]Firm, never to be shaken, crush thy foemen, under thy feet lay
    those who strive against thee.
   One-minded, true to thee be all the regions: faithful to thee, the
    firm, be this assembly!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXIX

  

A man's love charm

[0608901]This strength that Soma hath bestowed, the head of her who
    gladdeneth,--
   With that which thence hath been produced we make thy spirit
    sorrowful.
 [0608902]We make thy spirit sorrowful, we fill thy mind with pain and
    grief.
   As smoke accompanies the wind, so let thy fancy follow me.
 [0608903]May Varuna and Mitra, may Sarasvati the Goddess,
   May the centre of the earth, and both her limits bring thee close
    to me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a242]

  

HYMN XC

  

A charm to cure a poisoned man

[0609001]The shaft that Rudra hath shot forth against thy members and
    thy heart,
   Here do we draw from thee to-day, and turn it hence to every
    side.
 [0609002]From all the hundred vessels spread throughout the members of
    thy frame.
   From all those vessels and canals we call the poisonous matter
    forth.
 [0609003]Worship to thee, the archer, and O Rudra, to thy levelled shaft!
   Yea, worship to thine arrow when it left the bow, and when it
    fell!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCI

  

A charm against disease

[0609101]They made this barley ready with a team of eight, a team of six.
   With this I drive to westward, far away, thy bodily disease.
 [0609102]Vita breathes downward from above, and downward Surya sends
    his heat:
   Downward is drawn the milch-cow's milk: so downward go thy
    malady!
 [0609103]The Waters verily bring health, the Waters drive disease away.
   The Waters cure all malady: may they bring medicine for thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a243]

  

HYMN XCII

  

A charm to strengthen and inspirit a war-horse

[0609201]Be fleet as wind, Strong Steed, when thou art harnessed; go
    forth as swift as thought at lndra's sending.
   Let the possessors of all wealth, the Maruts, yoke thee, and
   Tvashtar in thy feet lay swiftness.
 [0609202]That speed, that lies concealed in thee, O Charger, speed granted
    to the hawk or wind that wandered,
   Therewith, Strong Steed, saving in shock of battle endowed
    with might by might win thou the contest.
 [0609203]Bearing thy body, Charger, may thy body run blessing us and
    winning thee protection.
   May he, unswerving, to uphold the mighty, stablish his lustre as
    a God in heaven.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCIII

  

A prayer for protection from poison

[0609301]Yama, Death direly fatal, the Destroyer, with his black crest,
   Sarva the tawny archer,
   And all the Gods uprisen with their army, may these on every
    side avoid our heroes.
 [0609302]With mind, burnt offerings, butter, and libation, to royal Bhava
    and the archer Sarva,
   To these the worshipful I pay my worship: may they turn else-
    where things with deadly venom.
 [0609303]Save us, All-Gods and all-possessing Maruts, from murderous
    stroke and things that slay with poison.
   Pure is the might of Varuna, Agni, Soma. May Vata's and
   Parjanya's favour bless us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a244]

  

HYMN XCIV

  

A charm to reconcile a King's discontented people

[0609401]We bend your minds in union, bend in harmony your hopes and
    plans:
   You there, who turn to sundered ways, we bend and bow in
    unison.
 [0609402]I with my spirit make your spirits captive: these with their
    thoughts follow my thought and wishes.
   I make your hearts submissive to mine order closely attending
    go where I precede you.
 [0609403]I have invoked both Heaven and Earth, invoked divine
   Sarasvati,
   Indra and Agni have I called: Sarasvati, so may we thrive!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCV

  

A charm to remove disease

[0609501]In the third heaven above us stands the Asvattha tree, the seat
    of Gods.
   There the Gods gained the Kushtha plant, embodiment of end-
    less life.
 [0609502]There moved through heaven a golden ship, a ship with cordage
    wrought of gold.
   There Gods obtained the Kushtha plant, the flower of immor-
    tality.
 [0609503]Thou art the infant of the plants, the infant of the Snowy Hills:
   The germ of every thing that is: free this my friend from his
    disease.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCVI

  

A prayer for deliverance from sin and sorrow

[0609601]The many plants of hundred shapes and forms that Soma rules
    as King, [p. a245]
   Commanded by Brihaspati, deliver us from grief and woe!
 [0609602]Let them release me from the curse and from the noose of
   Varupa,
   Free me from Yama's fetter, and from every sin against the
   Gods!
 [0609603]From every fault in look, in word, in spirit that we, awake or
    sleeping, have committed,
   May Soma, with his godlike nature, cleanse us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCVII

  

A prayer for the success and prosperity of a King

[0609701]The sacrifice is victor, Agni victor, victorious is Soma, Indra
    conquers:
   So will we bring oblation unto Agni, this sacrifice that I may
    win all battles.
 [0609709]Praise to you, Mitra-Varupa, hymn-singers! Here swell with
    meath dominion blest with children.
   Far into distant regions drive Destruction, and even from
    committed sin absolve us.
 [0609703]In this strong hero be ye glad and joyful: cleave ye to him even
    as ye cleave to Indra.
   Victorious, kine-winner, thunder-wielder, who quells a host and
    with his might destroys it.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCVIII

  

Praise of Indra

[0609801]Indra be victor, never to be vanquished, to reign among the
   Kings as sovran ruler! [p. a246]
   Here be thou meet for praise and supplication, to be revered
    and waited on and worshipped.
 [0609802]Thou fain for glory, an imperial ruler, hast won dominion over
    men, O Indra,
   Of these celestial tribes be thou the sovran: long-lasting be thy
    sway and undecaying!
 [0609803]Thou governest the north and eastern regions, Indra! fiend-
    slayer! thou destroycst foemen.
   Thou hast won all, far as the rivers wander. Bull, called to
    help, on our right hand thou goest.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCIX

  

A prayer for protection in battle

[0609901]Indra, before affliction comes, I call thee from the wide expanse.
   The mighty guardian, born alone, wearer of many names, I call.
 [0609902]Whatever deadly missile launched to-day flies forth to slaughter
    us.
   We take both arms of Indra to encompass us on every side.
 [0609903]We draw about us both the arms of Indra, our deliverer. May
    they protect us thoroughly.
   O Savitar, thou God, O royal Soma, make thou me pious-
    minded for my welfare.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN C

  

A charm against poison

[0610001]The Gods and Surya gave the gift, the Earth and Heaven best-
    owed the boon.
   The three Sarasvatis in full accord bestowed the antidote.
 [0610002]That water, Upajikas! which Gods poured for you on thirsty land,
   With that same water sent by Gods, drive ye away this poison
    here. [p. a247]
 [0609803]The daughter of the Asuras art thou, and sister of the Gods.
   Thou who hast sprung from heaven and earth hast robbed the
    poison of its power.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CI

  

A charm to promote virile vigour

[0610101]Taurum age, palpita, incresce et teipsum extende: per totum
    membrum increscat penis: hoc tu caede feminam.
 [0610102]Quo debilem stimulant, quo aegrum excitant (homines), hoc, O
   Brahmanaspatis, hujus penem in arcus modum extende.
 [0610103]Velut nervum in arcu ego tuum fascinum extendo. Aggredere
   (mulierem) semper indefessus velut cervus damam.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CII

  

A man's love charm

[0610201]Even as this ox, O Asvins, steps and turns together with his
    mate,
   So let thy fancy turn itself, come nearer, and unite with me.
 [0610202]I, as the shaft-horse draws the mare beside him, draw thee to
    myself.
   Like grass that storm and wind have rent, so be thy mind at-
    tached to me!
 [0610203]Swiftly from Bhaga's hands I bear away a love-compelling charm
   Of ointment and of sugar-cane, of Spikenard and the Kushtha
    plant.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a248]

  

HYMN CIII

  

A charm to check the approach of a hostile army

[0610301]Brihaspati and Savitar prepare a rope to bind you fast!
   Let Bhaga, Mitra, Aryaman, and both the Asvins make the
    bond.
 [0610302]I bind together all of them, the first, the last, the middlemost.
   Indra hath girded these with cord: bind them together, Agni,
    thou!
 [0610303]Those yonder who approach to fight, with banners raised along
    their ranks,
   Indra hath girded these with cord: bind them together, Agni,
    thou!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CIV

  

The same

[0610401]We bind our foemen with a bond that binds them close and
    holds them fast.
   Their breath and respiration I dissever, and their lives from
    life.
 [0610402]This bond, made keen by Indra, I have formed with heat of holy
    zeal.
   Securely bind our enemies, O Agni, who are standing here.
 [0610403]Indra and Agni bind them fast, Soma the King, and both the
   Friends!
   May Indra, girt by Maruts, make a bond to bind our enemies.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a249]

  

HYMN CV

  

A charm to cure cough

[0610501]Rapidly as the fancy flies forth with conceptions of the mind.
   So following the fancy's flight, O Cough, flee rapidly away.
 [0610502]Rapidly as an arrow flies away with keenly-sharpened point,
   So swiftly flee away, O Cough, over the region of the earth!
 [0610503]Rapidly as the beams of light, the rays of Surya, fly away,
   So, Cough! fly rapidly away over the current of the sea!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CVI

  

A charm to protect a house from fire

[0610601]Let flowery Durva grass grow up about thine exit and
    approach.
   There let a spring of water rise, or lake with blooming lotuses.
 [0610602]This is the place where waters meet, here is the gathering of the
    flood.
   Our home is set amid the lake: turn thou thy jaws away from
    it.
 [0610603]O House, we compass thee about with coolness to envelop thee.
   Cool as a lake be thou to us. Let Agni bring us healing balm!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CVII

  

A charm to protect men and cattle

[0610701]Entrust me, Visvajit, to Trayamana.
   Guard, Trayamana, all our men, guard all our wealth of
    quadrupeds.
 [0610702]To Visvajit entrust me, Trayamana.
   O Visvajit, guard all our men, etc.
 [0610703]To Visvajit entrust me, O Kalyani.
   Guard, O Kalyani, all our men, etc. [p. a250]
 [0610704]To Sarvavid entrust me, O Kalyani.
   O Sarvavid, guard all our men, guard all our wealth of
    quadrupeds.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CVIII

  

A prayer for wisdom

[0610801]Intelligence, come first to us with store of horses and of kine!
   Thou with the rays of Surya art our worshipful and holy one.
 [0610802]The first, devout Intelligence, lauded by sages, sped by prayer,
   Drunk by Brahmacharis, for the favour of the Gods I call.
 [0610803]That excellent Intelligence which Ribhus know, and Asuras,
   Intelligence which sages know, we cause to enter into me.
 [0610804]Do thou, O Agni, make me wise this day with that Intelligence.
   Which the creative ishis, which the men endowed with wisdom
    knew.
 [0610805]Intelligence at eve, at morn, Intelligence at noon of day,
   With the Sun's beams, and by our speech we plant in us
   Intelligence.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CIX

  

A charm to heal punctured wounds

[0610901]The Berry heals the missile's rent, it heals the deeply-piercing
    wound.
   The Gods prepared and fashioned it. This hath sufficient power
    for life.
 [0610902]When from their origin they came, the Berries spake among
    themselves:
   The man whom we shall find alive shall never suffer injury. [p. a251]
 [0610903]Asuras buried thee in earth: the Gods again uplifted thee.
   Healer of sickness caused by wounds and healer of the missile's
    rent.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CX

  

A benediction on a new-born child

[0611001]Yea, ancient, meet for praise at sacrifices, ever and now thou
    sittest down as Hotar.
   And now, O Agni, make thy person friendly, and win felicity
    for us by worship.
 [0611002]Neath Jyaishthaghni and Yama's Two Releasers this child was
    born: preserve him from uprooting.
   He shall conduct him safe past all misfortunes to lengthened
    life that lasts a hundred autumns.
 [0611003]Born on the Tiger's day was he, a hero, the Constellations'
    child, born brave and manly.
   Let him not wound, when grown in strength, his father, nor
    disregard his mother, her who bare him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXI

  

A charm for insanity

[0611101]Unbind and loose for me this man, O Agni, who bound and
    well restrained is chattering folly. [p. a252]
   Afterward he will offer thee thy portion when he hath been
    delivered from his madness.
 [0611102]Let Agni gently soothe thy mind when fierce excitement troubles
    it.
   Well-skilled I make a medicine that thou no larger mayst be
    mad.
 [0611103]Insane through sin against the Gods, or maddened by a demon's
    power--
   Well-skilled I make a medicine to free thee from insanity.
 [0611104]May the Apsarases release, Indra and Bhaga let thee go.
   May all the Gods deliver thee that thou no longer mayst be
    mad.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXII

  

A health-charm for man, woman, and son

[0611201]Let not this one, O Agni, wound the highest of these: preserve
    thou him from utter ruin.
   Knowing the way do thou untie the nooses of the she-fiend: let
    all the Gods approve thee.
 [0611202]Rend thou the; bonds of these asunder, Agni! the, threefold
    noose whereby the three were fastened.
   Knowing the way untie the she-fiend's nooses: free all, the son,
    the father, and the mother.
 [0611203]The elder brother's bonds, still left unwedded, fettered in every
    limb and bound securely,
   Loose these, for they are bonds for loosing: Pushan, turn woes
    away upon the babe-destroyer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a253]

  

HYMN CXIII

  

A charm to banish the fiend Grahi

[0611301]This sin the Gods wiped off and laid on Trita, and Trita wiped
    it off on human beings.
   Thence if the female fiend hath made thee captive, the Gods by
    prayer shall banish her and free thee.
 [0611302]Enter the particles of light and vapours, go to the rising fogs or
    mists, O Evil!
   Hence! vanish in the foams of rivers. Pushan, wipe woes away
    upon the babe-destroyer!
 [0611303]Stored in twelve separate places lies what Trita hath wiped away,
    the sins of human beings.
   Thence if the female fiend hath made thee captive, the Gods by
    prayer shall banish her and free thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXIV

  

A prayer for pardon of faults and errors in sacrificing

[0611401]Whatever God-provoking wrong we priests have done, O
   Deities.
   Therefrom do ye deliver us, Adityas! by the right of Law.
 [0611402]Here set us free, O holy ones, Adityas, by the right of Law.
   When striving, bringing sacrifice, we failed to offer it aright.
 [0611403]With ladle full of fatness we, worshippers, pouring holy oil,
   Striving, have failed, O all ye Gods, against our will, to offer it.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a254]

  

HYMN CXV

  

A prayer for forgiveness of sins

[0611501]Whatever wrong we wittingly or in our ignorance have done,
   Do ye deliver us therefrom, O all ye Gods, of one accord.
 [0611502]If I, a sinner, when awake or sleeping have committed sin,
   Free me therefrom as from a stake, from present and from
    future guilt.
 [0611503]As one unfastened from a stake, or cleansed by bathing after
    toil,
   As butter which the sieve hath cleansed, so all shall purge me
    from the sin.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXVI

  

A prayer for pardon of sin against mother, father, son, or brother

[0611601]The wealth which husbandmen aforetime, digging, like men who
    find their food with knowledge, buried,
   This to the King, Vivasvan's son, I offer, Sweet be our food and
    fit for sacrificing!
 [0611602]May he, Vaivasvata, prepare our portion; May he whose share
    is mead with mead besprinkle.
   Our sin in hasty mood against our mother, or guilt whereby a
    sire is wronged and angered.
 [0611603]Whether this sin into our heart hath entered regarding mother,
    father, son or brother,
   Auspicious be to us the zeal and spirit of all the fathers who are
    here among us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXVII

  

A prayer for freedom from debt

[0611701]That which I eat, a debt which still is owing, the tribute due to
   Yama, which supports me, [p. a255]
   Thereby may I be free from debt, O Agni. Thou knowest how
    to rend all bonds asunder.
 [0611702]Still dwelling here we give again this present; we send it forth,
    the living from the living.
   Throwing away the grain whence I have eaten, thereby shall I
    be free from debt, O Agni.
 [0611703]May we be free in this world and that yonder, in the third
    world may we be unindebted.
   May we, debt-free, abide in all the pathways, in all the worlds
    which Gods and Fathers visit.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXVIII

  

A prayer for pardon of cheating at play

[0611801]If we have sinned with both our hands, desiring to take the host
    of dice for our possession,
   May both Apsarases to-day forgive us that debt, the fiercely-
    conquering, fiercely-looking.
 [0611802]Stern viewers of their sins who rule the people, forgive us what
    hash happened as we gambled.
   Not urging us to pay the debt we owed him, he with a cord
    hath gone to Yama's kingdom.
 [0611803]My creditor, the man whose wife I visit, he, Gods! whom I
    approach with supplication,
   Let not these men dominate me in speaking. Mind this, ye two
   Apsarases, Gods' Consorts!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXIX

  

A prayer for release from debts incurred without intention of payment

[0611901]The debt which I incur, not gaming, Agni! and, not intending
    to repay, acknowledge, [p. a256]
   That may Vaisvanara, the best, our sovran, carry away into the
    world of virtue.
 [0611902]I cause Vaisvanara to know, confessing the debt whose payment
    to the Gods is promised.
   He knows to tear asunder all these nooses: so may we dwell
    with him the gentle-minded.
 [0611903]Vaisvanara the Purifier purge me when I oppose their hope and
    break my promise,
   Unknowing in my heart. With supplication, whatever guilt there
    is in that, I banish.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXX

  

A prayer for pardon of sins and felicity hereafter

[0612001]If we have injured Air, or Earth, or Heaven, if we have wronged
    our Mother or our Father,
   May Agni Garhapatya here absolve us, and bear us up into the
    world of virtue.
 [0612002]Earth is our Mother, Aditi our birth-place: our brother Air save
    us from imprecation!
   Dyaus, Father, save us, from the world of Fathers! My world
    not lost, may I approach my kindred.
 [0612003]There where our virtuous friends, who left behind them their
    bodily infirmities, are happy,
   Free from distortion of the limbs and lameness, may we behold,
    in heaven, our sons and parents.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a257]

  

HYMN CXXI

  

A prayer for happiness in heaven

[0612101]Spreading them out, untie the snares that hold us, Varuna's
    bonds, the upper and the lower.
   Drive from us evil dream, drive off misfortune; then let us go in-
    to the world of virtue.
 [0612102]If thou art bound with cord or tied to timber, fixt in the earth,
    or by a word imprisoned,
   Our Agni Garhapatya here shall free thee, and lead thee up into
    the world of virtue.
 [0612103]The two auspicious stars whose name is called Releasers have
    gone up.
   Send Amrit hither, let it come freeing the captive from his
    bonds!
 [0612104]Open thyself, make room: from bonds thou shalt release the
    prisoner.
   Freed, like an infant newly born, dwell in all pathways where
    thou wilt.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXII

  

A prayer for happiness in heaven

[0612201]This portion I who understand deliver to Visvakarman first-born
    son of Order.
   So may we follow to the end, unbroken, beyond old age, the
    thread which we have given.
 [0612202]This long-drawn thread some follow who have offered in order-
    ed course oblation to the Fathers:
   Some, offering and giving to the friendless, if they can give:
    herein they find their heaven.
   3, Stand on my side and range yourselves in order, ye two! The
    faithful reach this world of Svarga. [p. a258]
   When your dressed food hath been bestowed on Agni, to guard
    it, wife and husband, come together!
 [0612204]Dwelling with zeal I mount in spirit after the lofty sacrifice as it
    departeth.
   Agni, may we, beyond decay, invited, in the third heaven, feast
    and enjoy the banquet.
 [0612205]These women here, cleansed, purified, and holy, I place at rest
    singly, in hands of Brahmans.
   May Indra, Marut-girt, grant me the blessing I long for as I
    pour you this libation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXIII

  

A prayer for happiness in heaven

[0612301]Ye who are present, unto you I offer this treasure brought to
    us by Jatavedas
   Happily will the sacrificer follow: do ye acknowledge him in
    highest heaven.
 [0612302]Do ye acknowledge him in highest heaven: ye know the world
    here present in assembly.
   In peace will he who sacrifices follow: show him the joy which
    comes from pious actions.
 [0612303]Gods are the Fathers, and the Fathers Gods. I am the very man
   I am.
 [0612304]I cook, I give, I offer up oblation. From what I gave let me
    not be disparted.
 [0612305]O King, take thou thy stand in heaven, there also let that gift
    be placed. [p. a259]
   Recognize, King, the gift which we have given, and be gracious,
   God!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXIV

  

An Omen from the sky

[0612401]From the high firmament, yea, out of heaven a water-drop with
    dew on me hath fallen.
   I, Agni! share the merit of the pious, with vigour, milk, and
    hymns and sacrifices.
 [0612402]If from a tree that fruit hath fallen downward if, aught from air
    that is vayu.
   Where it hath touched my body or my garment, thence may the
   Waters drive Destruction backward.
 [0612403]It is a fragrant ointment, happy fortune, sheen all of gold, yea,
    purified from blemish.
   Spread over us are all purifications. Death and Malignity shall
    not subdue us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXV

  

Glorification of a war-chariot

[0612501]Mayst thou, O Tree, be firm indeed in body, our friend that
    furthers us, a goodly hero.
   Put forth thy strength, compact with thongs of leather, and let
    thy rider win all spoils of battle.
 [0612502]Its mighty strength was borrowed from the heaven and earth:
    its conquering force was brought from sovrans of the wood.
   Honour with sacrifice the Car like Indra's bolt, the Car girt
    round with straps, the vigour of the floods.
 [0612503]Thou bolt of Indra, vanguard of the Maruts, close knit to
   Varuna and child of Mitra,
   As such, accepting gifts which here we offer, receive, O godlike
   Chariot, these oblations.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a260]

  

HYMN CXXVI

  

Glorification of the war drum

[0612601]Send forth thy voice aloud through earth and heaven, and let
    the world in all its breadth regard thee.
   O Drum, accordant with the Gods and Indra, drive thou afar,
    yea, very far, our foemen.
 [0612602]Thunder out strength and fill us full of vigour, yea, thunder
    forth and drive away misfortunes.
   Drive hence, O Drum, drive thou away mischances. Thou art
    the fist of Indra, show thy firmness.
 [0612603]Conquer those yonder and let these be victors. Let the Drum
    speak aloud as battle's signal.
   Let our men, winged with horses, fly together. Let our car-
    warriors, Indra! be triumphant.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXVII

  

A charm to banish various diseases

[0612701]Of abscess, of decline, of inflammation of the eyes. O Plant,
   Of penetrating pain, thou Herb, let not a particle remain.
 [0612702]Those nerves of thine, Consumption! which stand closely hidden
    in thy groin
   I know the balm for that disease: the magic cure is Sipudru.
 [0612703]We draw from thee piercing pain that penetrates and racks thy
    limbs,
   That pierces ears, that pierces eyes, the abscess, and the heart's
    disease.
   Downward and far away from thee we banish that unknown.
    decline.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a261]

  

HYMN CXXVIII

  

A charm for fair weather

[0612801]What time the heavenly bodies chose the Weather Prophet as
    their King,
   They brought him favouring weather, and, Let this be his do-
    main, they said.
 [0612802]May we have weather fair at noon, May we have weather fair
    at eve,
   Fair weather when the morning breaks, fair weather when the
    night is come.
 [0612803]Fair weather to the day and night, and to the stars and sun and
    moon.
   Give favourable weather thou, King, Weather Prophet, unto us.
 [0612804]Be worship ever paid to thee, O Weather Prophet, King of
   Star s,
   Who gavest us oo weather in the evening and by night and
    day!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a262]

  

HYMN CXXIX

  

A charm for success and happiness

[0612901]With fortune of the Sisu tree--with Indra as my friend to aid
   I give myself a happy fate. Fly and begone, Malignities!
 [0612902]That splendour and felicity wherewith thou hast excelled the
    trees
   Give me therewith a happy fate. Fly and begone, Malignities
 [0612903]Blind fortune, with reverted leaves that is deposited in trees--
   Give me therewith a happy fate. Fly and begone, Malignities.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXX

  

A woman's love-charm

[0613001]This is the Apsarases' love-spell, the conquering, resistless ones'.
   Send the spell forth, ye Deities! Let him consume with love of
    me.
 [0613002]I pray, may he remember me, think of me, loving and beloved.
   Send forth the spell, ye Deities! Let him consume with love
    of me.
 [0613003]That he may think of me, that I may never, never think of him,.
   Send forth the spell, ye Deities! Let him consume with love
    of me.
 [0613004]Madden him, Maruts, madden him. Madden him, madden him,
   O Air.
   Madden him, Agni, madden him. Let him consume with love
    of me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a263]

  

HYMN CXXXI

  

A woman's love-charm

[0613101]Down upon thee, from head to foot, I draw the pangs of long-
    ing love.
   Send forth the charm, ye Deities! Let him consume with love
    of me.
 [0613102]Assent to this, O Heavenly Grace! Celestial Purpose, guide it
    well!
   Send forth the charm, ye Deities! Let him consume with love
    of me.
 [0613103]If thou shouldst run three leagues away, five leagues, a horse's
    daily stage,
   Thence thou shalt come to me again and be the father of our
    sons.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXII

  

The same

[0613201]The Philter, burning with the pangs of yearning love, which
   Gods have poured within the bosom of the floods,
   That spell for thee I heat by Varuna's decree.
 [0613202]The charm which, burning with the pangs of love, the General
   Gods have poured within the bosom of the floods,
   That spell for thee I heat by Varuna's decree.
 [0613203]The Philter, burning with the pangs of longing, which Indrani
    hath effused within the waters' depth,
   That spell for thee I heat by Varuna's decree.
 [0613204]The charm, aglow with longing, which Indra and Agni have
    effused within the bosom of the floods,
   That spell for thee I heat by Varuna's decree.
 [0613205]The charm aglow with longing which Mitra and Varuna have
    poured within the bosom of the floods,
   That spell for thee I heat by Varuna's decree.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a264]

  

HYMN CXXXIII

  

A glorification of the sacred girdle

[0613301]By the direction of that God we journey, he will seek means to
    save and he will free us;
   The God who hath engirt us with this Girdle, he who hath fast-
    ened it, and made us ready.
 [0613302]Thou, weapon of the Rishis, art adored and served with
    sacrifice.
   First tasting of the votive milk, Zone, be a hero-slayer thou!
 [0613303]As I am now Death's Brahmachari claiming out of the living
    world a man for Yama,
   So with Austerity and Prayer and Fervour I bind this Girdle
    round the man before me.
 [0613304]She hath become, Faith's daughter, sprung from Fervour, the
    sister of the world-creating Rishis;
   As such, O Girdle, give us thought and wisdom, give us religious
    zeal and mental vigour.
 [0613305]Thou whom primeval Rishis girt about them, they who made the
    world,
   As such do thou encircle me, O Girdle, for long days of life.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXIV

  

A priest's prayer for power to punish wrong-doers

[0613401]This Thunderbolt shall take its fill of Order, scare life away and
    overthrow the kingdom.
   Tear necks in pieces. rend napes asunder, even as the Lord of
   Might the neck of Vritra.
 [0613402]Down, down beneath the conquerors, let him not rise, concealed
    in earth, but lie down-smitten with the bolt.
 [0613403]Seek out the fierce oppressor, yea, strike only the oppressor
    dead. [p. a265]
   Down on the fierce oppressor's head strike at full length, O
   Thunderbolt!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXV

  

A priest's fulmination against an enemy

[0613501]Whate'er I eat I turn to strength, and thus I grasp the Thunder-
    bolt,
   Rending the shoulders of that man as Indra shattered Vritra's
    neck.
 [0613502]I drink together what I drink, even as the sea that swallows all.
   Drinking the life-breath of that man, we drink that man and
    swallow him.
 [0613503]Whate'er I eat I swallow up, even as the sea that swallows all.
   Swallowing that man's vital breath, we swallow him completely
    up.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXVI

  

A charm to promote the growth of hair

[0613601]Born from the bosom of wide Earth the Goddess, godlike Plant,
    art thou:
   So we, Nitatni! dig thee up to strengthen and fix fast the hair.
 [0613602]Make the old firm, make new hair spring, lengthen what has
    already grown.
 [0613603]Thy hair where it is falling off, and with the roots is torn away,
   I wet and sprinkle with the Plant, the remedy for all disease.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a266]

  

HYMN CXXXVII

  

A charm to promote the growth of hair

[0613701]The Plant which Jamadagni dug to make his daughter's locks.
    grow long,
   This same hath Vitahavya brought to us from Asita's abode.
 [0613702]They might be measured with a rein, meted with both extended
    arms.
   Let the black locks spring thick and strong and grow like reeds
    upon thy head.
 [0613703]Strengthen the roots, prolong the points, lengthen the middle
    part, O Plant.
   Let the black locks spring thick and strong and grow like reeds
    upon thy head.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXVIII

  

A woman's imprecation on her unfaithful lover

[0613801]O Plant, thy fame is spread abroad as best of all the herbs that
    grow.
   Unman for me to-day this man that he may wear the horn of
    hair.
 [0613802]Make him a eunuch with a horn, set thou the crest upon his-
    head.
   Let Indra with two pressing-stones deprive him of his manly
    strength.
 [0613803]I have unmanned thee, eunuch! yea, impotent! made thee-
    impotent, and robbed thee, weakling! of thy strength.
   Upon his head we set the horn, we set the branching ornament.
 [0613804]Duas tuas venas, a Diis factas, in quibus stat vigor virilis,
    paxillo ligneo in testiculis ob istam mulierem tibi findo.
 [0613805]Ut mulieres mattam (tegetem) facturae arundinem lapide findunt,
    sic fascinum tuum cum testiculis ob istam mulierem findo.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a267]

  

HYMN CXXXIX

  

A woman's love-charm

[0613901]Thou hast grown up, a source of joy to bless me with pros-
    perity.
   A hundred are thy tendrils, three-and-thirty thy descending
    shoots.
   With this that bears a thousand leaves I dry thy heart and
    wither it.
 [0613902]Let thy heart wither for my love and let thy month be dry for
    me.
   Parch and dry up with longing, go with lips that love of me
    hath dried.
 [0613903]Drive us together, tawny! fair! a go-between who wakens
    love.
   Drive us together, him and me, and give us both one heart and
    mind.
 [0613904]Even as his mouth is parched who finds no water for his burn-
    ing thirst,
   So parch and burn with longing, go with lips that love of me
    hath dried.
 [0613905]Even as the Mungoose bites and rends and then restores the
    wounded snake,
   So do thou, Mighty one, restore the fracture of our severed
    love.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a268]

  

HYMN CXL

  

A blessing on a child's first two teeth

[0614001]Two tigers have grown up who long to eat the mother and the
    sire:
   Soothe, Brahmanaspati, and thou, O Jatavedas, both these
    teeth.
 [0614002]Let rice and barley be your food, eat also beans and sesamum.
   This is the share allotted you, to be your portion, ye two Teeth.
   Harm not your mother and your sire.
 [0614003]Both fellow teeth have been invoked, gentle and bringing happi-
    ness.
   Else whither let the fierceness of your nature turn away, O
   Teeth! Harm not your mother or your sire.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXLI

  

A blessing on cattle

[0614101]Vayu collected these: to find their sustenance be Tvashtar's
    care:
   May Indra bless and comfort them, and Rudra look that they
    increase.
 [0614102]Take thou the iron axe and make a pair by marks upon their
    ears.
   This sign the Asvins have impressed: let these increase and
    multiply.
 [0614103]Even as Gods and Asuras, even as mortal men have done,
   Do ye, that these may multiply in thousands, Asvins! make the
    mark.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXLI

  

A blessing on cattle

[0614201]Spring high, O Barley, and become much through thine own
    magnificence: [p. a269]
   Burst all the vessels; let the bolt from heaven forbear to strike
    thee down.
 [0614202]As we invite and call to thee, Barley, a God who heareth us,
   Raise thyself up like heaven on high and be exhaustless as the
    sea.
 [0614203]Exhaustless let thine out-turns be, exhaustless be thy gathered
    heaps,
   Exhaustless be thy givers, and exhaustless those who eat of
    thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a270]

  

BOOK VII

  

HYMN I

  

Glorification of the power of prayer and to Agni

[0700101]They who by thought have guided all that Speech hath best, or
    they who with their heart have uttered words of truth,
   Made stronger by the strength which the third prayer bestows,
    have by the fourth prayer learned the nature of the Cow.
 [0700102]Well knows this son his sire, he knows his mother well: he hath
    been son, and he hath been illiberal.
   He hath encompassed heaven, and air's mid-realm, and sky; he
    hath become this All; he hath come nigh to us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN II

  

Praise of Atharvan

[0700201]Invoke for us, proclaim in sundry places, the kinsman of the
   Gods, our sire Atharvan,
   His mother's germ, his father's breath, the youthful, who with
    his mind hath noticed this oblation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

To Vayu God of the Wind

[0700401]With thine eleven teams, to aid our wishes, yea, with thy two-
    and-twenty teams, O Vayu,
   With all thy three-and-thirty teams for drawing, here loose these
    teams, thou who art prompt to listen!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

To Vayu God of the Wind

[0700401]With thine eleven teams, to aid our wishes, yea, with thy two-
    and-twenty teams, O Vayu,
   With all thy three-and-thirty teams for drawing, here loose these
    teams, thou who art prompt to listen!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

  

A glorification of sacrifice

[0700501]The Gods adored the Sacrifice with worship: these were the
    statutes of primeval ages.
   Those mighty ones attained the cope of heaven, there where the
   Sadhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling.
 [0700502]Sacrifice was, was manifest among us: it sprang to life and then
    in time grew stronger.
   Then it became thedeities' lord and ruler: may it bestow on us
    abundant riches.
 [0700503]Where the Gods worshipped Gods with their oblation, worship-
    ped immortals with immortal spirit, [p. a272]
   There in the loftiest heaven may we be happy, and look upon
    that light when Surya rises.
 [0700504]With their oblation, Purusha, the Gods performed a sacrifice.
   A sacrifice more potent still they paid with the invoking hymn.
 [0700505]With dog the Gods, perplexed, have paid oblation, and with
    cow's limbs in sundry sacrifices.
   Invoke for us, in many a place declare him who with his mind.
    hath noticed this our worship.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

A prayer to Aditi for help and protection

[0700601]Aditi is sky, and air's mid-region, Aditi is the father, son, and
    mother,
   Aditi all the Gods and the Five Nations, Aditi what is now and
    what is future.
 [0700602]We call for help the Queen of Law and Order, great mother of
    all those whose ways are righteous,
   Far-spread, unwasting strong in her dominion, Aditi wisely lead-
    ing, well protecting. [p. a273]
 [0700603]Sinless may we ascend, for weal, the vessel, rowed with good
    oars, divine, that never leaketh,
   Earth, our strong guard, incomparable Heaven, Aditi wisely lead-
    ing, well protecting.
 [0700604]Let us bring hither, in pursuit of riches, Aditi with our word,
    the mighty mother,
   Her in whose lap the spacious air is lying: may she afford us
    triply-guarding shelter!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

  

Praise of the Adityas

[0700701]I have sung praise to Diti's sons and Aditi's, those very lofty and
    invulnerable Gods.
   For far within the depths of ocean is their home and in the wor-
    ship paid them none excelleth these.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

  

Godspeed to a departing traveller

[0700801]Go forward on thy way from good to better: Brihaspati pre-
    cede thy steps and guide thee! [p. a274]
   Place this man here, within this earth's enclosure, afar from foes
    with all his men about him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

  

A prayer to Pushan for protection and the recovery of lost property

[0700901]Pushan was born to move on distant pathways, on roads remote
    from earth, remote from heaven.
   To both most lovely places of assembly he travels and returns
    with perfect knowledge.
 [0700902]Pushan knows all these realms: may he conduct us by ways that
    are most free from fear and danger.
   Giver of blessings, glowing, all heroic, may he the wise and
    watchful go before us.
 [0700903]We are thy praisers here, O Pushan: never let us be injured
    under thy protection.
 [0700904]From out the distance, far and wide, may Pushan stretch his
    right hand forth.
   Let him drive back our lost to us, let us return with what is lost.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN X

  

A prayer for the favour of Sarasvati

[0701001]That breast of thine, exhaustless and delightful, good to invoke,
    beneficent, free giver.
   Wherewith thou feedest all things that are choicest, bring that,
   Sarasvati, that we may drain it.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a275]

  

HYMN XI

  

A prayer to protect corn from lightning and drought

[0701101]That far-spread thunder, sent from thee, which cometh on all
    this world, a high celestial signal
   Strike not, O God, our growing corn with lightning, not kill it
    with the burning rays of Surya.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XII

  

A prayer for influence at deliberative and religious meetings

[0701201]In concord may Prajapati's two daughters, Gathering and As-
    sembly, both protect me.
   May every man I meet respect and aid me. Fair be my words,
   O Fathers, at the meetings.
 [0701202]We know thy name, O Conference: thy name is interchange of
    talk.
   Let all the company who join the Conference agree with me.
 [0701203]Of these men seated here I make the splendour and the lore
    mine own.
   Indra, make me conspicuous in all this gathered company.
 [0701204]Whether your thoughts are turned away, or bound and fastened
    here or there,
   We draw them hitherward again: let your mind firmly rest on
    me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a276]

  

HYMN XIII

  

A charm to win superiority over foes and rivals

[0701301]As the Sun, rising, taketh to himself the brightness of the stars,.
   So I assume the glory of women and men mine enemies.
   All ye amang my rivals who behold me as I come to you,
   I seize the glory of my foes as the Sun, rising, theirs who sleep.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIV

  

A prayer to Savitar for prosperity

[0701401]I praise this God, parent of heaven and earth, exceeding wiser
    possessed of real energy, giver of treasure, thinker dear to all,.
 [0701402]Whose splendour is sublime, whose light shone brilliant in crea-
    tion, who, wise, and golden-handed, in his beauty made the
    sky.
 [0701403]As thou, God! quickening, for our ancient father, sentest him
    height above and room about him,
   So unto us, O Savitar, send treasures, abundant, day by day, in
    shape of cattle.
 [0701404]Savitar, God, our household friend, most precious, hath sent
    our fathers life and power and riches.
   Let him drink Soma and rejoice when worshipped. Under his
    law even the Wanderer travels.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a277]

  

HYMN XV

  

A charm to win divine favour and felicity

[0701501]I choose, O Savitar, that glorious favour, with fruitful energy
    and every blessing,
   Even this one's teeming cow, erst milked by Kanva, thousand-
    streamed, milked for happiness by the mighty.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVI

  

A prayer for prosperity

[0701601]Increase this man Brihaspati! Illume him, O Savitar, for high
    and happy fortune.
   Sharpen him thoroughly though already sharpened: with glad
    acclaim let all the Gods receive him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVII

  

A prayer for wealth and children

[0701701]May the Ordainer give us wealth, Lord, ruler of the world of
    life: with full hand may he give to us.
 [0701702]May Dhatar grant the worshipper henceforth imperishable life.
   May we obtain the favour of the God who giveth every boon.
 [0701703]To him may Dhatar grant all kinds of blessings who, craving
    children, serves him in his dwelling.
   Him may the Gods invest with life eternal, yea, all the Gods and
   Aditi accordant.
 [0701704]May this our gift please Savitar, Rati, Dhatar, Prajapati, and
   Agni Lord of Treasures.
   May Tvashtar, Vishnu, blessing him with children, give store ot
    riches to the sacrificer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a278]

  

HYMN XVIII

  

A prayer for rain

[0701801]Burst open, Prithvi, and cleave asunder this celestial cloud.
   Untie, O Dhatar--for thou canst--the bottle of the breast of
    heaven.
 [0701802]Let not the Sun's heat burn, nor cold destroy her. Let Earth
    with all her quickening drops burst open.
   Even for her the waters flow, and fatness: where Soma is even
    there is bliss for ever.
 
 

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIX

  

A prayer for prosperity

[0701901]Prajapati engenders earthly creatures: may the benevolent
   Ordainer form them,
   Having one common womb, and mind, and spirit. He who is.
   Lord of Plenty give me plenty!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XX

  

A prayer for prosperity and happiness

[0702001]Anumati approve to-day our sacrifice among the Gods!
   May Agni bear mine offerings away for me the worshipper.
 [0702002]Do thou, Anumati! approve, and grant us health and happiness.
   Accept the offered sacrifice, and, Goddess, give us progeny. [p. a279]
 [0702003]May he approving in return accord us wealth inexhaustible with
    store of children.
   Never may we be subject to his anger, but rest in his benevo-
    lence and mercy.
 [0702004]Thy name is easy to invoke, good leader! approved, Anumati
    and rich in bounty.
   Source of all bonds! fill up therewith our worship, and, Blest
   One! grant us wealth with goodly heroes.
 [0702005]Anumati hath come to this our worship well-formed to give
    good lands and valiant heroes:
   For her kind care hath blessed us. God-protected, may she assist
    the sacrifice we offer.
 [0702006]Anumati became this All, whatever standeth or walketh, every-
    thing that moveth.
   May we enjoy thy gracious love, O Goddess. Regard us, O Anu-
    mati, with favour.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXI

  

A funeral stanza

[0702101]With prayer come all together to the Lord of Heaven: he is the
    peerless one, far-reaching, guest of men.
   He, God of ancient time, hath gained a recent thrall; to him
    alone is turned the path which all must tread.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXII

  

To Savitar, or Yama invested with Savitar's attributes

[0702201]Unto a thousand sages he hath given sight: thought, light is he
    in ranging all.
 [0702202]The Bright One hath sent forth the Dawns, a closely gathered
    band,
   Immaculate, unanimous, brightly refulgent in their homes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a280]

  

HYMN XXIII

  

A charm to banish fiends and troubles

[0702301]The fearful dream, and indigence, the monster, the malignant
    hags.
   All female fiends of evil name and wicked tongue we drive afar.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIV

  

A prayer for riches

[0702401]What treasure hath been dug for us by Indra, by Agni, Visve-
    devas, tuneful Maruts,
   On us may Savitar whose laws are faithful, Prajapati, and
   Heavenly Grace bestow it.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXV

  

Praise of Vishnu and Varuna

[0702501]The early morning prayer hath come to Vishnu and Varuna,
   Lords through might, whom none hath equalled,
   Gods by whose power the realms of air were stablished, strongest
    and most heroic in their vigour.
 [0702502]The early prayer hath ever come to Vishnu and Varuna by that
   God's high power and statute.
   In whose control is all this world that shineth, all that hath
    powers to see and all that breatheth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVI

  

Praise of Vishnu

[0702601]I will declare the mighty deeds of Vishnu, of him who measured
    out the earthly regions, [p. a281]
   Who propped the highest place of congregation, thrice setting
    down his footstep, widely striding.
 [0702602]Loud boast doth Vishnu make of this achievement, like some
    wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming.
   May he approach us from the farthest distance.
 [0702603]Thou within whose three wide-extended paces all worlds and
    creatures have their habitation,
   Drink oil, thou homed in oil! promote the sacrificer more and
    more.
 [0702604]Through all this world strode Vishnu: thrice his foot he planted,
    and the whole
   Was gathered in his footstep's dust.
 [0702605]Vishnu the guardian, he whom none deceiveth, made three steps,
    thenceforth.
   Establishing these high decrees.
 [0702606]Look ye on Vishnu's works, whereby the friend of Indra, close-
    allied,
   Hath let his holy ways be seen.
 [0702607]The princes evermore behold that loftiest place where Vishnu is,
   Like an extended eye in heaven,
 [0702608]From heaven, O Vishnu, or from earth, O Vishnu, or from the
    great far-spreading air's mid-region,
   Fill both thy hands full of abundant treasures, and from the
    right and left bestow them freely.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a282]

  

HYMN XXVII

  

A prayer to Ida, Goddess of devotion

[0702701]May Ida with her statute dwell beside us, she in whose place the
    pious purge and cleanse them.
   She, mighty, Soma-decked, whose foot drops fatness, meet for
   All-Gods, hath come to aid our worship.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

Praise of the sacrificial utensils

[0702801]Blest be the Broom, may the Mace bring a blessing, and may the
   Altar and the Hatchet bless us.
   Worshipful Gods, may they accept this worship, lovers of sacri-
    fice, and sacrificers.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  

To Agni and Vishnu

[0702901]This is your glorious might, Agni and Vishnu! Ye drink the
    essence of the mystic butter.
   Placing in every home seven costly treasures. Let your tongue
    stretch to take the offered fatness.
 [0702902]Ye love the great law, Agni Vishnu! joying, ye feast on mystic
    essences of butter,
   Exalted in each house with fair laudation. Let your tongue
    stretch to take the offered fatness.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXX

  

A charm to be used when the eyes are anointed

[0703001]Heaven, Earth, and Mitra here have caused mine eyes to be-
    anointed well,
   Savitar, Brahmanaspati take care that they be duly balmed!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a283]

  

HYMN XXXI

  

A prayer for the overthrow of enemies

[0703101]Rouse us to-day O Indra, Maghavan, hero, with thy best pos-
    sible and varied succours,
   May he who hateth us fall low beneath us, and him whom we
    detest let life abandon.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXII

  

A prayer to Agni for long life

[0703201]We bringing homage have approached the friend who seeks our
    wondering praise,
   Young, strengthener of the sacrifice. May he bestow long life on
    me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIII

  

A prayer for long life, children, and riches

[0703301]Let Pushan, let the Maruts, let Brihaspati pour forth on me;
   This present Agni pour on me children and riches in a stream!
   May he bestow long life on me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIV

  

A prayer for freedom from sin and the overthrow of enemies

[0703401]Agni, drive off my rivals born and living, repel those yet unborn,
   O Jatavedas.
   Cast down beneath my feet mine adversaries. In Aditi's regard
    may we be sinless.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a284]

  

HYMN XXXV

  

A prayer for the prosperity of a King and his kingdom

[0703501]Subdue with conquering might his other rivals, those yet unborn
    repel, O Jatavedas.
   For great felicity protect this kingdom, and in this man let all
    the Gods be joyful.
 [0703502]Hae quot tibi sunt venae atque arteriae harum omnium os tibi
    lapide occlusi.
 [0703503]Uteri tui summam partem inferam facio: ne tibi soboles neque
    filius eveniat. Sterilem et infecundam te facio: lapidem tuum,
    operimentum facio.

 

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVI

  

A charm to be pronounced by bride and bridegroom

[0703601]Sweet are the glances of our eyes, our faces are as smooth as
    balm,
   Within thy bosom harbour me; one spirit dwell in both of us!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVII

  

A nuptial charm to be spoken by the bride

[0703701]With this my robe, inherited from Manu, I envelop thee,
   So that thou mayst be all mine own and give no thought to other
    dames.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVIII

  

A maiden's love-charm

[0703801]I dig this Healing Herb that makes my lover look on me and
    weep;
   That bids the parting friend return and kindly greets him as he
    comes.
 [0703802]This Herb wherewith the Asuri drew Indra downward from the
   Gods,
   With this same Herb I draw thee close that I may be most dear
    to thee.
 [0703803]Thou art the peer of Soma, yea, thou art the equal of the Sun, [p. a285]
   The peer of all the Gods art thou: therefore we call thee hither--
    ward.
 [0703804]I am the speaker here, not thou: speak thou where the assembly
    meets.
   Thou shalt be mine and only mine, and never mention other
    dames.
 [0703805]If thou art far away beyond the rivers, far away from men,
   This Herb shall seem to bind thee fast and bring thee back my
    prisoner.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIX

  

A sacrificial charm for rain and prosperity

[0703901]May he establish in our home the master of riches, gladdening
    with rain in season,
   Mighty, strong-winged, celestial, dropping moisture, Bull of the
     plants and embryo of waters.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a286]

  

HYMN XL

  

A prayer for prosperity

[0704001]We call Sarasvan, under whose protection all cattle wander, to
    preserve and aid us,
   Him in whose ordinance abide the waters, to whose command
    the Lord of Plenty listens.
 [0704002]Abiding here let us invoke Sarasvan, the seat of riches, glorious,
    wealth-increaser,
   Him who inclines and gives to him who worships, the rich pos-
    sessor and the Lord of Fulness.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLI

  

A prayer for prosperity

[0704101]Observing men, and viewing home, the Falcon hath cleft his swift
    way over wastes and waters.
   May he, with Indra for a friend, auspicious, traversing all air's
    lower realms, come hither.
 [0704102]The heavenly Falcon, viewing men, well-pinioned, strength-giver,
    hundred-footed, hundred-nested,
   Shall give us treasure which was taken from us. May it be rich
    in food among our Fathers.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLII

  

A prayer for delivery from sin and sickness

[0704201]Scatter and drive away, Soma and Rudra, the sickness that hath
    come within our dwelling, [p. a287]
   Afar into the distance chase Destruction, and even from commit-
    ted sin release us.
 [0704202]Lay on our bodies, O ye twain, O Soma and Rudra, all those
    balms that heal diseases.
   Set free and draw away the sin committed, which we have still
    inherent in our persons.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIII

  

A charm against lightning

[0704301]Some of thy words bode weal and some misfortune: thou scat-
    terest them all with friendly feeling.
   Deep within this three words are laid: among them one hath
    flown off even as the sound was uttered.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIV

  

In praise of Indra and Vishnu

[0704401]Ye twain have conquered, and have not been vanquished: not
    either of the pair hath been defeated.
   Ye, Indra Vishnu, when ye fought your battle; produced this
    infinite with three divisions.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a288]

  

HYMN XLV

  

A charm against jealousy

[0704501]Brought hitherward from Sindhu, from a folk of every mingled
    race,
   Fetched from afar, thou art I deem, a balm that cureth.
    jealousy.
 [0704502]As one with water quencheth fire, so calm this lover's
    jealousy,
   Like heat of fire that burneth here, or flame that rageth through
    the wood.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVI

  

A charm for offspring and prosperity

[0704601]O broad-tressed Sinivali, thou who art the sister of the Gods,
   Accept the offered sacrifice, and, Goddess, grant us progeny.
 [0704602]Present the sacrifice to her, to Sinivali, Queen of men, Beauti-
    ful-fingered, lovely-armed, prolific, bearing many a child.
 [0704603]Thou who as Queen of men art Indra's equal, a Goddess
    coming with a thousand tresses,
   To thee our sacrifices are performed, O Consort of Vishnu
   Goddess, urge thy Lord to bounty!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVII

  

A prayer for wealth and birth of a son

[0704701]Oft in this sacrifice with favoured cry I call Kuhu, beneficent
   Goddess, skilled in all her works.
   May she vouchsafe us wealth with every boon, and give a, hero
    meet for praise who gives a hundred gifts.
 [0704702]Kuhl), the Queen of Gods and immortality, called to assist,
    enjoy this sacrifice of' ours!
   Let her, desirous of our worship, hear to-day: may she,
    intelligent, give increase of our wealth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a289]

  

HYMN XLVIII

  

A prayer for prosperity and the birth of a son

[0704801]I call on Raka with hair laud and reverent cry: may she,
    auspicious, hear us and herself observe.
   With never-breaking needle may she sew her work, and send a
    glorious man who gives a hundred gifts.
 [0704802]All thy kind favours, Raka! lovely in their form, wherewith
    thou grantest treasures to the man who gives,
   With these come thou to us this day benevolent, O blessed one,
    bestowing wealth of thousand sorts.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIX

  

A prayer for children and booty

[0704901]May the Gods' Consorts aid us of their own free will, help us
    to offspring and the winning of the spoil.
   May Goddesses who quickly listen shelter us, both those on
    earth and they within the waters' realm.
 [0704902]May the Dames, wives of Gods, enjoy our presents, Rat, Asvini
   Indrani and Agnayi;
   May Rodasi and Varunani hear us, and Goddesses come at the
    matrons' season.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN L

  

A gambler's prayer for success in gaming

[0705001]As evermore the lightning flash strikes, irresistible, the tree,
   So, irresistible, may I conquer the gamblers with the dice. [p. a290]
 [0705002]From every side, from hale and sick, impotent to defend them-
    selves,
   May all the fortune of the folk as winnings pass into my hands.
 [0705003]I pray to Agni, him who guards his treasure: here, won by
    homage, may he pile our winnings.
   As 'twere with racing cars I bring my presents: duly with
    reverence, let me laud the Maruts.
 [0705004]With thee to aid us may we win the treasure: do thou assist
    our side in every battle.
   Give us wide room and easy way, O Indra; break down, O
   Maghavan, the foemen's valour.
 [0705005]I have completely cleaned thee out, won from thee what thou
    keptest back.
   As a wolf tears and rends a sheep, so do I tear thy stake away.
 [0705006]Yea, by superior play one gains advantage: in time he piles his
    spoil as doth a gambler.
   He overwhelms with wealth's inherent powers the devotee who
    keeps not back his riches.
 [0705007]May we all, much-invoked! repel with cattle want that brings
    sin, hunger with store of barley.
   May we uninjured, first among the princes, obtain possessions
    by our own exertions.
 [0705008]My right hand holds my winnings fast, and in my left is
    victory.
   I would that I were winner of cattle and horses, wealth and
    gold.
 [0705009]Dice, give me play that bringeth fruit as 'twere a cow with
    flowing milk!
   And, as the bowstring binds, the bow, unite me with a stream of
    gains.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a291]

  

HYMN LI

  

A prayer for Brihaspati's and Indra's protection

[0705101]Brihaspati protect us from the sinner, from rearward, from
    above, and from below us!
   May Indra from the front and from the centre, as friend to
    friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LII

  

A prayer for peace and concord

[0705201]Give us agreement with our own, with strangers give us unity:
   Do ye, O Asvins, in this place join us in sympathy and love.
 [0705202]May we agree in mind, agree in purpose: let us not fight against
    the heavenly spirit.
   Around us rise no din of frequent slaughter, nor Indra's arrow
    fly, for day is present!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIII

  

A charm to recover a sick man at the point of death

[0705301]As thou, Brihaspati, from the curse hast saved us, from dwel-
    ling yonder in the realm of Yama,
   The Asvins, leeches of the Gods, O Agni, have chased Death
    far from us with mighty powers.
 [0705302]Move both together; do not leave the body. Let both the
    breathings stay for thee united.
   Waxing in strength live thou a hundred autumns. Thy noblest
    guardian and thy lord is Agni. [p. a292]
 [0705303]Return, thy life now vanished into distance! Return, the breath
    thou drawest and exhalest!
   Agni hath snatched it from Destruction's bosom: into thyself
    again I introduce it.
 [0705304]Let not the vital breath he draws forsake him, let not his
    expiration part and leave him.
   I give him over to the Seven Rishis: let them conduct him to
    old age in safety.
 [0705305]Enter him, both ye breaths, like two draught-oxen entering their
    stall.
   Let him, the treasure of old age, still wax in strength, uninjured,.
    here.
 [0705306]I send thee back thy vital breath; I drive Consumption far from
    thee,
   May Agni here, most excellent, sustain our life on every side.
 [0705307]From out the depth of darkness, we, ascending to the highest
    heaven,
   Have come to the sublimest light, to Surya, God among the.
   Gods.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIV

  

A charm to obtain knowledge of the Veda

[0705401]We worship holy Verse and Song, by which they carry out their
    acts,
   Shining in order's seat these twain present the sacrifice to Gods.
 [0705402]As I have asked about Verse, Song, Sacrifice, strength, force,.
   Yajus-text,
   So never let this lore that I have sought forsake me, Lord of
   Might!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a293]

  

HYMN LV

  

A charm to ensure a prosperous journey

[0705501]Thy downward paths from heaven, whereby thou hast raised all
    the world to life,
   Give us in gracious love, good Lord!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LVI

  

A charm against poisonous bites and stings

[0705601]Whether it came from viper, from black snake or snake with
    transverse stripes,
   Or Kankaparvan's bite, this herb hath made the poison power-
    less.
 [0705602]Honey-born, honey-dropping, rich in honey, honeysweet, this
    herb,
   Is medicine that heals the wound and kills the gnat that bites
    and stings.
 [0705603]Whatever bit, or sucked thy blood, we summon thence away
    from thee
   The ineffectual poison of the little sharply-stinging gnat.
 [0705604]Thou here who crookest wicked jaws, thou tortuous, jointless,
    limbless thing,
   These jaws thou, Brahmanaspati! shalt bend together like a
    reed.
 [0705605]This scorpion here that creeps along, low on the ground and
    powerless-- [p. a294]
   I have removed his poison and then utterly demolished him.
 [0705606]No strength in thy two arms hast thou, nor in thy head, nor in
    thy waist:
   Then what is that small thing thou so viciously bearest in thy
    tail?
 [0705607]The emmets make a meal of thee and peahens tear and mangle
    thee:
   All ye are crying out, In sooth the scorpion's poison hath no
    strength.
 [0705608]Thou creature who inflictest wounds both with thy mouth and
    with thy tail,
   No poison in thy mouth hast thou: what at thy tail's root will
    there be?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LVII

  

A charm for some physical disorder

[0705701]Whatever trouble hath disturbed and shaken me--I speak with
    hope, I move, imploring, 'mid the folk
   What harm my body in myself hath suffered, now let Sarasvati
    relieve with fatness.
 [0705702]Seven flow for him, the youth on whom the Maruts wait: the
    sons have taught the Father everlasting laws.
   Both worlds are his: both shine belonging unto him. Both
    move together: both, as his possession thrive.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a295]

  

HYMN LVIII

  

An invitation to Indra and Varuna

[0705801]True to laws, Indra Varuna, drinkers of the juice, quaff this
    pressed Soma which shall give you rapturous joy!
   Let sacrifice, your car, to entertain the Gods, approach its rest-
    ing-place that they may drink thereof.
 [0705802]O Indra Varuna, drink your fill, ye heroes, of this effectual and
    sweetest Soma.
   This juice was shed by us that ye might quaff it. On this trimmed
    grass be seated and rejoice you.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIX

  

An imprecation

[0705901]Like a tree struck by lightning may the man be withered from
    the root.
   Who curseth us who curse not him, or, when we curse him.
    curseth us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LX

  

A parting traveller's address to the houses of his village

[0706001]I, prudent, bringing power, a treasure-winner, with amicable
    eye that strikes no terror,
   Come, praising and kind-thoughted, to these houses: be not
    afraid of me, be glad and joyful.
 [0706002]Let these delightful Houses that are rich in power and store of
    milk,
   Replete with wealth and standing firm, become aware of our
    approach.
 [0706003]These Houses we invoke, whereon the distant exile sets his
    thought, [p. a296]
   Wherein dwells many a friendly heart: let them beware of our
    approach.
 [0706004]Thus greeted, ye of ample wealth, friends who enjoy delightful
    sweets.
   Be ever free from hunger, free from thirst! Ye Houses, fear us
    not.
 [0706005]Kind greeting to the cattle here, kind greeting to the goats and
    sheep!
   Then, of the food within our homes, kind greeting to the plea-
    sant drink!
 [0706006]Full of refreshment, full of charms, of laughter and felicity,
   Be ever free from hunger, free from thirst! Ye Houses, fear us
    not.
   Stay here, and come not after me: prosper in every form and
    shape.
   With happy fortune will I come! Grow more abundant still
    through me!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXI

  

A prayer for sacred knowledge and its fruits

[0706101]Since, Agni, with our fervent zeal we undergo austerity,
   May we be dear to Sacred Lore, may we be wise and live long
    lives.
 [0706102]Agni, we practise acts austere, we undergo austerity.
   So listening to Holy Lore may we grow wise and full of days.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a297]

  

HYMN LXII

  

A prayer for the overthrow of enemies

[0706206]Like a car-warrior, Agni here, grown mighty, Lord of the brave,
   Chief Priest, hath conquered footmen.
   Laid on earth's centre he hath flashed and glittered. Low may
    he lay our enemies beneath us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIII

  

A prayer for deliverance from affliction

[0706301]We call with lauds from his most lofty dwelling victorious Agni,
    conqueror in battles.
   May he conveyus over all distresses, may the God Agni bear us
    past our troubles.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIV

  

A charm to avert an evil omen

[0706401]From all that woe and trouble may the Waters save and rescue
    me,
   Whate'er the Raven, black of hue, flying out hither ward, hath
    dropped.
 [0706402]May Agni Garhapatya save and set me free from all this guilt.
   Which the black Raven with thy mouth, O Nirriti, hath wiped
    away.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a298]

  

HYMN LXV

  

A charm against imprecation and threatened evils

[0706501]With retroverted fruit hast thou, O Apamarga, sprung and
    grown.
   Hence into distance most remote drive every curse away from,
    me.
 [0706502]Whatever evil we have done, whatever vile or sinful act,
   With thee, O Apamarga, who lookest all ways, we wipe it off.
 [0706503]If with the cripple we have lived, whose teeth are black and
    nails deformed,
   With thee, O Apamarga, we wipe all that ill away from us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVI

  

A prayer to Vak

[0706601]If it was in the wind or air's mid-region, if it was in the trees or
    in the bushes,
   To meet whose utterance forth streamed the cattle, may that.
   Celestial Power again approach us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVII

  

A priest's prayer to the Agnayo Dhishnyah

[0706701]May sense return to me again, and spirit, return my Sacred
   Power and my possessions!
   Again let fires, aflame on lesser altars, each duly stationed, here
    succeed and prosper.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a299]

  

HYMN LXVIII

  

A prayer for children and prosperity

[0706801]Sarasvati, in thy decrees, Goddess, in thy celestial laws,
   Accept the offered sacrifice, and, Goddess, grant us progeny.
 [0706802]Here is, Sarasvati, thy fat libation, this sacrifice passing to the
    mouth of Fathers.
   These most auspicious offerings have ascended to thee: through,
    these may we be full of sweetness.
 [0706803]Be kind and most auspicious, be gracious to us, Sarasvati, May
    we be ever in thy sight.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIX

  

A prayer for prosperity

[0706901]May the wind kindly breathe on us, may the Sun warm us.
    pleasantly.
   May days pass happily for us, may night draw near delightfully,
    may dawn break joyfully for us!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXX

  

A charm to frustrate an enemy's sacrifice

[0707001]Whatever sacrifice that man performeth with voice, mind, sacred
    formula, oblation,
   May, in accord with Death, Destruction ruin his offering before
    it gain fulfilment.
 [0707002]For him may sorcerers, Destruction, demons strike and prevent
    fulfilment through their falsehood.
   Let Gods, by Indra sent, destroy his butter, and let his sacrifice
    be ineffective.
 [0707003]Let the two Sovrans, swift to come, like falcons swooping on
    their prey,
   Destroy the butter of the foe whoever plots to injure us.
 [0707004]I seize thine arms and draw them back, I bind a bandage on thy
    mouth.
   I with the anger of the God Agni have killed thy sacrifice. [p. a300]
 [0707005]Behind thy back I tie thine arms, I bind a bandage on thy
    mouth:
   With the terrific Agni's wrath have I destroyed thy sacrifice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXI

  

In praise of Agni

[0707101]We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni! thee a sage,
   Bold in thy colour day by day, destroyer of the treacherous foe.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXII

  

An invitation to Indra

[0707201]Rise up and look upon the share of Indra fixt by ritual use.
   Whether ye poured libation dressed or took delight in it un-
    cooked.
 [0707202]Libation is prepared. Come to us, Indra: the Sun hath travelled
    over half his journey.
   Friends with their treasures sit around thee, waiting like heads
    of houses for their wandering chieftain.
 [0707203]Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy; well dressed, I fancy,
    is this new oblation.
   Quaff thickened milk of noon's libation, Indra, well pleased, O
   Thunderer, famed for many an exploit!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXIII

  

An invitation to the Asvins

[0707301]Inflamed is Agni, Heroes! charioteer of heaven. The caldron
    boils: the meath is drained to be your food.
   For we, O Asvins, singers sprung from many a house, invite you
    to be present at our banquetings. [p. a301]
 [0707302]Asvins, the fire is all aglow: your caldron hath been heated;.
    come!
   Here, even now, O Heroes, are the milch-kine milked. The
    priests, ye mighty ones! rejoice.
 [0707303]Pure with the Gods is sacrifice with cry of Hail! That is the
   Asvins' cup whence Gods are wont to drink.
   Yea, the Immortal Ones accept it, one and all, and come to kiss
    that cup with the Gandharva's mouth.
 [0707304]Milk, molten butter offered when the mornings break,--this is
    your portion, Asvins! Come ye hitherward.
   Lords of the brave, balm-lovers, guards of sacrifice, drink ye the
    warm libation in the light of heaven.
 [0707305]Let the warm drink approach you with its Hotar-priest: let the
   Adhvaryu come to you with store of milk.
   Come, O ye Asvins, taste the meath that hath been drained,
    drink of the milk provided by this radiant cow.
 [0707306]Come hither, quickly come, thou milker of the kine; into the
    caldron pour milk of the radiant cow.
   Most precious Savitar hath looked upon the heaven. After
   Dawn's going-forth he sends his light abroad.
 [0707307]I invocate this milch-cow good for milking, so that the milker,
    deft of hand, may milk her.
   May Savitar give goodliest stimulation. The caldron hath been
    warmed. Let him proclaim it.
 [0707308]She, sovran of all treasures, is come hither yearning in spirit for
    her calf, and lowing.
   May this cow yield her milk for both the Asvins, and may she
    prosper to our great advantage.
 [0707309]As dear house-friend, guest welcome in the dwelling, to this our
    sacrifice come thou who knowest.
   And, Agni, having scattered all assailants, bring to us the posses-
    sions of our foemen.
 [0707310]Show thyself strong for mighty bliss, O Agni! Most excellent be
    thine effulgent splendours!
   Make easy to maintain our household lordship, and overcome
    the might of those who hate us.
 [0707311]Fortunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture, and may we also
    be exceeding wealthy.
   Feed on the grass, O Cow, at every season, and, coming hither,
    drink the limpid water.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a302]

  

HYMN LXXIV

  

A charm to cure pustules, sores, or scrofulous swellings (apachitas)

[0707401]Black is the mother, we have heard, from whom the red-hued
   Pustules sprang.
   With the divine ascetic's root I pierce and penetrate them all.
 [0707402]I pierce the foremost one of these, I perforate the middlemost,
   And here I cut the hindermost asunder like a lock of hair.
 [0707403]With spell that Tvashtar sent to us I have dispelled thy jealousy.
   We mitigate and pacify the anger that thou feltest, Lord!
 [0707404]Lord of religious rites, by law, anointed, shine thou forth here
    for ever friendly-minded.
   So may we all with children, Jatavedas! worship and humbly
    wait on thee enkindled.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXV

  

A blessing on cows

[0707501]Let not a thief or wicked man possess you: let not the dart of
   Rudra come anear you,
   Prolific, shining in the goodly pasture, drinking at pleasant pools
    the limpid water. [p. a303]
 [0707502]Ye know the place and rest content, close-gathered, called by
    many a name. Come to me, Goddesses, with Gods
   Bedew with streams of fatness us, this cattle-pen, and all this
    place.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXVI

  

A charm to cure scrofulous pustules and scrofula

[0707601]Rapidly dropping, quick to drop, more evil than the evil ones,
   More sapless than a dried-up bone, swifter than salt to melt
    away.
 [0707602]Pustules that rise upon the neck, Pustules upon the shoulder-
    joints,
   Pustules that, falling of themselves, spring up on every twofold
    limb:
 [0707603]I have expelled and banished all Scrofula harboured in the head,
   And that which bores the breast-bone through, and that which
    settles in the sole.
 [0707604]Scrofula flies borne on by wings: it penerates and holds the
    man.
   Here is the cure of either kind, the chronic and the transient.
 [0707605]We know thine origin, Scrofula! know whence thou, Scrofula,
    art born.
   How hast thou then struck this man here, him in whose house
    we sacrifice?
 [0707606]Boldly drink Soma from the beaker, Indra! hero in war for
    treasure! Vritra-slayer.
   Fill thyself full at the mid-day libation: thyself possessing riches
    grant us riches.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a304]

  

HYMN LXXVII

  

An incantation against an enemy

[0707701]Ye Maruts, full of fiery heat, accept this offering brought for
    you
   To help us, ye who slay the foe.
 [0707702]Maruts, the man who filled with rage against us beyond our
    thoughts would harm us, O ye Vasus,
   May he be tangled in the toils of Mischief: smite ye him down
    with your most flaming weapon.
 [0707703]Each year come, friends to man, the tuneful Maruts, dwelling in
    spacious mansions, trooped together.
   Exhilarating, gladdening full of fiery heat, may they deliver us
    from binding bonds of sin.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXVIII

  

A charm for a prince's prosperity

[0707801]I free thee from the cord, I loose the bond, I loose the fastening.
   Even here, perpetual, Agni, wax thou strong. [p. a305]
 [0707802]I with celestial prayer appoint thee, Agni, maintainer of this
    man in princely powers.
   Here brightly shine for us with wealth: declare thou to Gods
    this favoured giver of oblations.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXIX

  

A hymn to the New Moon

[0707901]Night of the New-born Moon, whatever fortune the Gods who
    dwell with greatness have assigned thee,
   Therewith fulfil our sacrifice, all-baunteous! Blessed One, grant
    us wealth with manly offspring.
 [0707902]I am the New Moon's Night, the good and pious are my in-
    habitants, these dwell within me.
   In me have Gods of both the spheres, and Sadhyas, with Indra
    as their chief, all met together.
 [0707903]The Night hath come, the gatherer of treasures, bestowing
    strength, prosperity, and riches.
   To New Moon's Night let us present oblation: pouring out
    strength, with milk hath she come hither.
 [0707904]Night of New Moon! ne'er hath been born another than thou
    embracing all these forms and natures,
   May we have what we longed for when we brought thee obla-
    tions: may we be the lords of riches.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXX

  

A hymn to the Full Moon

[0708001]Full in the front, full rearward, from the middle the Full Moon's
   Night hath conquered in the battle.
   In her: may we, dwelling with Gods and greatness, feast in the
    height of heaven, on strengthening viands. [p. a306]
 [0708002]To him, the Full Moon's mighty Bull, we pay our solemn sacri-
    fice.
   May he bestow upon us wealth unwasting, inexhaustible.
 [0708003]No one but thou, Prajapati, none beside thee, pervading, gave
    to all these forms their being.
   Grant us our hearts' desire when we invoke thee: may we have
    store of riches in possession.
 [0708004]First was the Full Moon meet for adoration among the days and
    in the nights' deep darkness.
   Into thy heaven, O Holy One, have entered those pious men
    who honour thee with worship.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXI

  

A hymn to the New Moon

[0708101]Forward and backward by their wondrous power move these
    two youths, disporting, round the ocean.
   One views all living things, and thou, the other, art born again
    arranging times and seasons.
 [0708102]Thou art re-born for ever new: thou marchest, ensign of days,
    in forefront of the mornings.
   Marching thou dealest to the Gods their portion. Thou lengthe-
    nest, Moon! the days of man's existence.
 [0708103]O spray of Soma, Lord of Wars! all-perfect verily art thou.
   Make me all-perfect, Beauteous One! in riches and in progeny.
 [0708104]Thou art the New Moon, fair to see, thou art complete in every
    part.
   May I be perfect, fully blest in every way in steeds and kine, in
    children, cattle, home, and wealth.
 [0708105]Inflate thee with his vital breath who hathes us and whom we
    detest.
   May we grow rich in steeds and kine, in children, cattle, houses,
    wealth.
 [0708145]With that unwasting stalk which Gods, unwasting Gods, in-
    crease and eat, [p. a307]
   May Varuna, Brihaspati, and Indra, the Lords and Guardians of
    the world, increase us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXII

  

In praise of Agni

[0708201]Sing with fair laud the combat for the cattle. Bestow upon us
    excellent possessions.
   Lead to the Gods the sacrifice we offer: let streams of oil flow
    pure and full of sweetness.
 [0708202]Agni I first appropriate with power, with splendour, and with
    might.
   I give myself children and lengthened life, with Hail! take Agni
    to myself.
 [0708203]Even here do thou, O Agni, stablish wealth: let not oppressors
    injure thee by thinking of thee first.
   Light be thy task of ruling, Agni, with, thy power: may he who
    worships thee wax strong, invincible.
 [0708204]Agni hath looked upon the spring of Morning, looked on the
    days, the earliest Jatavedas.
   So, following the gleams of Morning, Surya hath entered heaven
    and earth as his possession.
 [0708205]Agni hath looked upon the spring of Mornings, looked on the
    days, the earliest Jatavedas.
   So he in countless places hath extended, full against heaven and
    earth, the beams of Surya. [p. a308]
 [0708206]Butter to thee in heaven thy home, O Agni! Manu this day hath
    kindled thee with butter.
   Let the Celestial Daughters bring thee butter: Let cows pour
    butter forth for thee, O Agni.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXIII

  

A prayer for deliverance from sin and other evils

[0708301]Stablished amid the waters is, King Varuna, thy golden home.
   Thence let the Sovran who maintains the statutes loose all bind-
    ing cords.
 [0708302]Hence free thou us, King Varuna, from each successive bond
    and tie.
   As we have cried, O Varuna! have said, The Waters, they are
    kine, thence set us free, O Varuna.
 [0708303]Loosen the bonds, O Varuna, that hold us, loosen the bond.
    above, between, and under.
   So before Aditi may we be sinless under thy favouring auspices,
   Aditya!
 [0708304]Varuna, free us from all snares that bind us, Varuna's bonds, the
    upper and the lower.
   Drive from us evil dream, drive off misfortune: then let us pass
    into the world of virtue.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a309]

  

HYMN LXXXIV

  

A prayer for protection

[0708401]Holder of sway, shine here refulgent, Agni! invincible immortal
   Jatavedas.
   With succours friendly to mankind, auspicious, driving away all
    maladies, guard our dwelling.
 [0708402]Thou, Indra, lord and leader of the people, wast born for lovely
    strength and high dominion.
   Thou dravest off the folk who were unfriendly, and madest for
    the Gods wide room and freedom.
 [0708403]Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain, may he.
    approach us from the farthest distance.
   Whetting thy bolt and thy sharp blade, O Indra, crush down our
    foes and scatter those who hate us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXV

  

A charm to ensure victory in battle

[0708501]This very mighty one whom Gods urge onward, the conqueror
    of cars, ever triumphant,
   Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tarkshya for
    our weal will we call hither.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a310]

  

HYMN LXXXVI

  

The same

[0708601]Indra the rescuer, Indra the helper, Indra the brave who hears
    each invocation,
   Sakra I call, Indra invoked of many. May Indra Maghavan pros-
    per and bless us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXVII

  

A prayer to Rudra as Agni

[0708701]To Rudra in the fire, to him who dwells in floods, to Rudra who
    hath entered into herbs and plants,
   To him who formed and fashioned all these worlds, to him this
   Rudra, yea, to Agni, reverence be paid!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXVIII

  

A charm to cure a snake-bite

[0708801]Depart! thou art a foe, a foe. Poison with poison hast thou
    mixt, yea, verily poison hast thou mixt.
   Go to the serpent: strike him dead.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXIX

  

A prayer for purification and prosperity

[0708901]The heavenly Waters have I ranged: we have been sated with
    their dew. [p. a311]
   Here, Agni, bearing milk, am I. Endow me with the gift of
    strength.
 [0708902]Endow me with the gift of strength, with children, and a length-
    ened life.
   May the Gods mark this prayer of mine, may Indra with the
   Rishis mark.
 [0708903]Ye Waters, wash away this stain and whatsoever taint be here,
   Each sinful wrong that I have done and every harmless curse
    of mine.
 [0708904]Thou art the wood, may I succeed! fuel, may I be glorified!
    splendour, give splendour unto me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XC

  

A charm against a rival in love

[0709001]Tear thou asunder, as of old, like tangles of a creeping plant.
   Demolish thou the Dasa's might.
 [0709002]May we with Indra's help divide the gathered treasure of the
    foe.
   I, by the law of Varuna, bring down thy pride and wantonness.
 [0709003]Ut virga abeat et feminis innocua fiat, (virga) membri humidi,
    membri quod verberat penetratque, id quod tentum est laxa,
    id quod sursum tentum est deorsum tende.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCI

  

A Prayer for protection

[0709101]May Indra with his help, Lord of all treasures, be unto us a
    careful protector.
   Drive off our foes and give us peace and safety. May we be lords
    of goodly store of heroes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a312]

  

HYMN XCII

  

A Prayer for protection

[0709201]May this rich Indra as our good protector keep even far away
    the men who hate us.
   May we enjoy his favour, his the holy: may we enjoy his
    blessed loving-kindness.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCIII

  

A prayer for success in battle

[0709301]With Indra's and with Manyu's aid may we subdue our enemies,
    resistlessly destroying foes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCIV

  

A charm to ensure the obedience of subjects

[0709401]We laid the constant Soma on with constant sacrificial gift,
   That Indra may make all the tribes unanimous and only ours.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCV

  

An incantation against an undetected thief

[0709501]To heaven, as 'twere, have soared this man's two vultures,
    staggering, dusky hued.
   The Parcher and the Drier-up, the pair who parch and dry his
    heart.
 [0709502]I verily have stirred them up like oxen resting after toil.
   Like two loud-snarling curs, or like two wolves who watch to
    make their spring:
 [0709503]Like two that thrust, like two that pierce, like two that strike
    with mutual blows.
   I bind the conduit of the man or dame who hence hath taken
    aught.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a313]

  

HYMN XCVI

  

An incantation against an undetected thief

[0709601]The kine are resting in the stall, home to her nest hath flown
    the bird,
   The hills are firmly rooted: I have fixed the kidneys in their
    place.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCVII

  

Sacrificial formulas

[0709701]As we have here elected thee, skilled Hotar! to-day as this our
    sacrifice proceedeth,
   Come to the firm place, mightiest! yea, come firmly. Knowing
    the sacrifice, approach the Soma.
 [0709702]With kine connect us, and with spirit, Indra! Lord of Bay
   Steeds, with princes and with favour,
   With the God-destined portion of the Brahmans,
    and the good-will of Gods who merit worship.
 [0709703]The willing Gods whom, God, thou hast brought hither, send
    thou to their own dwelling-place, O Agni.
   When ye have eaten and have drunk sweet juices, endow this
    man with precious wealth, ye Vasus.
 [0709704]Gods, we have made your seats of easy access, who, pleased
    with me, have come to my libation.
   Bearing and bringing hitherward your treasures, after the rich
    warm beverage mount to heaven.
 [0709705]Go to the sacrifiee, go to its master, Sacrifice! To thy birth-
    place go with Svaha. [p. a314]
 [0709706]This is thy sacrifice with hole hymnal, Lord of the Rite, Svaha!
    and fraught with vigour.
 [0709707]Vashat to paid and yet unpaid oblations! Ye Gods who know
    the way, find and pursue it!
 [0709708]Lord of the Mind, lay this our sacrifice in heaven among the
   Gods. Svaha in heaven! Svaha on earth!
   Svaha in air! In wind have I paid offerings. Hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCVIII

  

Anointing the sacred grass

[0709801]Balmed is the Grass with butter and libation, with Indra.
    gracious Lord, and with the Maruts.
   Hail! let the sacrifice go forth anointed to Indra with the Gods
    and Visve Devas.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCIX

  

The preparation of the altar

[0709901]Strew thou the Grass, and spread it on the Altar: rob not the
    sister who is lying yonder.
   The Hotar's seat is green and golden: these are gold necklets.
    in the plaee of him who worships.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a315]

  

HYMN C

  

A charm against nightmare

[0710001]I turn away from evil dream, from dream of sin, from indigence.
   I make the prayer mine inmost friend. Hence! torturing.
    dreamy phantasies!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CI

  

The same

[0710101]The food that in a dream I eat is not perceived at early morn.
   May all that food be blest to me because it is not seen by day.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CII

  

A charm to obtain pardon for an indecent act

[0710201]When I have worshipped Heaven and Earth, reverenced Firma-
    ment and Death,
   I will make water standing up. Let not the Sovrans injure me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CIII

  

The cry of an unemployed priest

[0710301]What princely warrior, seeking higher fortune, will free us from
    this shameful fiend of mischief?
   What friend of sacrifice? What guerdon-lover? Who winneth:
   'mid the Gods a long existence?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a316]

  

HYMN CIV

  

A prayer for prosperity

[0710401]Who will prepare the dappled Cow, good milker, ne'er without
    calf, whom Varuna gave Atharvan,
   And, joying in Brihaspati's alliance, arrange according to his will
    her body?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CV

  

An initiation formula

[0710501]Leaving humanity behind, making the heavenly word thy choice,
   With all thy friends address thyself to furthering and guiding
    men.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CVI

  

A prayer for pardon of sin

[0710601]Each thoughtless ill that we have done, O Agni, all error in our
    conduct, Jatavedas!
   Therefrom do thou, O sapient God, preserve us. May we thy
    friends, for bliss, have life eternal.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CVII

  

A charm against Cough

[0710701]The seven bright beams of Surya bring the waters downward
    from the sky,
   The streams of ocean: these have made the sting that pained
    thee drop away.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a317]

  

HYMN CVIII

  

A prayer for protection

[0710801]Whoso by stealth or openly would harm us, a friend who knows
    us, or a stranger, Agni!
   May the strange she-fiend armed with teeth attack them: O
   Agni, theirs be neither home nor children!
 [0710802]Whoso oppresseth us O Jatavedas, asleep or waking, standing
    still or moving.
   Accordant with Vaisvanara thy comrade, O Jatavedas, meet
    them and consume them.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CIX

  

A prayer for success in gambling

[0710901]My homage to the strong, the brown, the sovran lord among
    the dice!
   Butter on Kali I bestow: may he be kind to one like me.
 [0710902]Bear butter to the Apsarases, O Agni, and to the Dice bear dust
    and sand and water.
   The Gods delight in both oblations, joying in sacrificial gifts
    apportioned duly.
 [0710903]The Apsarases take pleasure in the banquet between the Sun and.
    the libation-holder.
   With butter let them fill my hands, and give me, to be my prey,
    the man who plays against me.
 [0710904]Evil be mine opponent's luck! Sprinkle thou butter over us.
   Strike, as a tree with lightning flash, mine adversary in the game.
 [0710905]The God who found for us this wealth for gambling, to cast the
    dice and count the winning number,
   May he accept the sacrifice we offer, and with Gandharvas revel
    in the banquet.
 [0710906]Fellow-inhabitants, such is your title, for Dice with looks of
    power support dominion. [p. a318]
   As such with offerings may we serve you, Indus! May we have
    riches in our own possession.
 [0710907]As I invoke the Gods at need, as I have lived in chastity,
   May these, when I have grasped the Dice, the brown, be kind to
    one like me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CX

  

A prayer for success in battle

[0711001]Resistless, Agni, Indra, smite his foemen for the worshipper,
   For best foe-slayers are ye both.
 [0711002]Agni I call, and Indra, foe-destroyers, swift moving, heroes,
   Gods who wield the thunder,
   Through whom they won the light in the beginning, these who
    have made all worlds their habitation.
 [0711003]The God Brihaspati hath won thy friendly favour with the cup.
   With hymns, O Indra, enter us for the juice-pouring worshipper.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXI

  

A prayer for offspring

[0711101]Belly of Indra art thou, Soma-holder! the very soul of Gods
    and human beings.
   Here be the sire of offspring, thine here present! Here be they
    glad in thee who now are elsewhere.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a319]

  

HYMN CXII

  

A prayer for protection and freedom from sin

[0711201]Radiant with light are Heaven and Earth, whose grace is nigh,
    whose sway is vast.
   Seven Goddesses have flowed to us: may they deliver us from
    woe;
 [0711202]Release me from the curse's bond and plague that comes from
   Varuna;
   Free me from Yama's fetter and from every sin against the
   Gods.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXIII

  

A woman's incantation against a rival

[0711301]Rough Plant, thou rough rude parasite, cut thou that man, O
   Rough and Rude,
   That thou mayst hinder from his act that man in all his manly
    strength.
 [0711302]Thou, rugged Plant, art rude and rough, Visha, Vishataki art
    thou.
   That thou mayest be cast off by him, as by a bull a barren cow.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a320]

  

HYMN CXIV

  

A woman's incantation against a rival

[0711401]I have extracted from thy sides, I have extracted from thy heart,
   I have extracted from thy face the strength and splendour that
    were thine.
 [0711402]Let pain and suffering pass away, let cares and curses vanish.
    hence.
   Let Agni slay the fiendish hags, Soma kill bags who trouble us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXV

  

A charm against Misfortune

[0711501]Hence. Evil Fortune! fly away, vanish from this place and from
    that.
   We fix thee with an iron hook unto the man who hateth us.
 [0711502]Granting us riches, Savitar! golden-banded, send thou away
    from us to other regions
   That Fortune who, flying, abominable, hath, as a creeper climbs*
    a tree, assailed me.
 [0711503]One and a hundred Fortunes all together are at his birth born
    with a mortal's body.
   Of these we send away the most unlucky: keep lucky ones for
    us, O Jatavedas.
 [0711504]I have disparted these and those like cows who stray on common
    land.
   Here let auspicious Fortunes stay: hence have I banished evil
    ones.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a321]

  

HYMN CXVI

  

A charm against Fever

[0711601]Homage to him the burning one, shaker, exciter, violent!
   Homage to him the cold who acts according to his ancient will!
 [0711602]May he, the lawless one, who comes alternate or two following
    days, pass over and possess the frog.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXVII

  

A charm to ensure prosperity

[0711701]Come hither, Indra, with bay steeds, joyous, with tails like pea-
    cock plumes.
   Let none impede thy way as fowlers stay the bird: pass o'er
    them as o'er desert lands.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXVIII

  

A benediction on a warrior

[0711801]Thy vital parts I cover with thine armour: with immortality
   King Soma clothe thee!
   Varuna give thee what is more than ample, and in thy triumph
    let the Gods be joyful.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a322]

  

BOOK VIII

  

HYMN I

  

A charm to recover a dying man

[0800101]Homage to Death the Ender! May thy breathings, inward and
    outward, still remain within thee.
   Here stay this man united with his spirit in the Sun's realm, the
    world of life eternal!
 [0800102]Bhaga hath lifted up this man, and Soma with his filaments,
   Indra and Agni, and the Gods the Maruts, raised him up to
    health.
 [0800103]Here is thy spirit, here thy breath, here is thy life, here is thy
    soul:
   By a celestial utterance we raise thee from Destruction's bonds.
 [0800104]Up from this place, O man, rise! sink not downward, casting
    away the bonds of Death that hold thee.
   Be not thou parted from this world, from sight of Agni and the
   Sun.
 [0800105]Purely for thee breathe Wind and Matarisvan, and let the
   Waters rain on thee their nectar.
   The Sun shall shine with healing on thy body; Death shall have
    mercy on thee: do not leave us!
 [0800106]Upward must be thy way, O man, not downward: with life and
    mental vigour I endow thee.
   Ascend this car eternal, lightly rolling; then full of years shalt
    thou address the meeting.
 [0800107]Let not thy soul go thither, nor be lost to us: slight not the
    living, go not where the Fathers are.
   Let all the Gods retain thee here in safety.
 [0800108]Yearn not for the departed ones, for those who lead men far
    away.
   Rise up from darkness into light: come, both thy hands we
    clasp in ours.
 [0800109]Let not the black dog and the brindled seize thee, two warders
    of the way sent forth by Yama.
   Come hither; do not hesitate: with mind averted stay not there. [p. a323]
 [0800110]Forbear to tread this path, for it is awful: that path I speak of
    which thou hast not travelled.
   Enter it not, O man; this way is darkness: forward is danger,
    hitherward is safety.
 [0800111]Thy guardians be the Fires within the Waters, thy guardian be
    the Fire which men enkindle.
   Thy guardian be Vaisvanara Jatavedas; let not celestial Fire with
    lightning burn thee.
 [0800112]Let not the Flesh-Consumer plot against thee: depart thou far
    away from the Destroyer.
   Be Heaven and Earth and Sun and Moon thy keepers, and from
    the dart of Gods may Air protect thee.
 [0800113]May Vigilance and Watchfulness protect thee, Sleepless and
   Slumberless keep guard above thee!
   Let Guardian and let Wakeful be thy warders.
 [0800114]Let these be thy preservers, these thy keepers. All hail to these,
    to these be lowly worship!
 [0800115]May saving Savitar, Vayu, Indra, Dhatar restore thee to com-
    munion with the living.
   Let not thy vigour or thy breath forsake thee: we recall thy life.
 [0800116]Let not the fiend with snapping jaws, nor darkness find thee:
    tongue, holy grass: how shouldst thou perish?
   May the Adityas and the Vasus, Indra and Agni raise thee and
    to health restore thee.
 [0800117]The Sky hath raised thee, and the Earth, Prajapati hath raised
    thee up.
   The Plants and Herbs with Soma as their King have rescued
    thee from Death.
 [0800118]Here let this man, O Gods, remain: let him not go to yonder
    world.
   We rescue him from Mrityu with a charm that hath a thousand
    powers.
 [0800119]I have delivered thee from Death. Strength-givers smelt and
    fashion thee!
   Let not she-fiends with wild loose locks, or fearful howlers yell
    at thee.
 [0800120]I have attained and captured thee: thou hast returned restored
    to youth.
   Perfect in body: so have I found all thy sight and all thy life. [p. a324]
 [0800121]Life hath breathed on thee; light hath come: darkness hath past
    away from thee.
   Far from thee we have buried Death, buried Destruction and:
   Decline.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN II

  

The same

[0800201]Seize to thyself this trust of life for ever: thine be longevity
    which nothing shortens.
   Thy spirit and thy life again I bring thee: die not, nor vanish
    into mist and darkness.
 [0800202]Come to the light of living men, come hither: I draw thee to a
    life of hundred autumns.
   Loosing the bonds of Death, the curse that holds thee, I give thee
    age of very long duration.
 [0800203]Thy breath have I recovered from the Wind, thy vision from the
   Sun.
   Thy mind I stablish and secure within thee: feel in thy members,.
    use thy tongue, conversing.
 [0800204]I blow upon thee with the breath of bipeds and quadrupeds, as
    on a fire new-kindled.
   To thee, O Death, and to thy sight and breath have I paid
    reverence.
 [0800205]Let this man live, let him not die: we raise him, we recover him.
   I make for him a healing balm. O Death, forbear to slay this
    man. [p. a325]
 [0800206]Here for sound health I invocate a living animating plant,
   Preserving, queller of disease, victorious, full of power and
    might.
 [0800207]Seize him not, but encourage and release him: here let him stay,
    though thine, in all his vigour.
   Bhava and Sarva, pity and protect him: give him full life and
    drive away misfortunes.
 [0800208]Comfort him, Death, and pity him: let him arise and pass away,
   Unharmed, with all his members, hearing well, with old, may he
    through hundred years win profit with his soul.
 [0800209]May the Gods' missile pass thee by. I bring thee safe from the
    mist: from death have I preserved thee.
   Far have I banished flesh-consuming Agni: I place a rampart
    for thy life's protection.
 [0800210]Saving him from that misty path of thine which cannot be
    defined.
   From that descent of thine, O Death, we make for him a shield
    of prayer.
 [0800211]I give thee both the acts of breath, health, lengthened life, and
    death by age.
   All Yama's messengers who roam around, sent by Vaivasvata,
   I chase away.
 [0800212]Far off we drive Malignity, Destruction, Pisachas banqueters on
    flesh, and Grahi.
   And all the demon kind, the brood of sin, like darkness, we
    dispel.
 [0800213]I win thy life from Agni, from the living everlasting Jatavedas.
   This I procure for thee, that thou, undying, mayst not suffer
    harm, that thou mayst be content, that all be well with thee.
 [0800214]Gracious to thee be Heaven and Earth, bringing no grief, and
    drawing nigh!
   Pleasantly shine the Sun for thee, the Wind blow sweetly to
    thy heart!
   Let the celestial Waters full of milk flow happily for thee.
 [0800215]Auspicious be the Plants to thee! I have upraised thee, borne
    thee from the lower to the upper earth:
   Let the two Sons of Aditi, the Sun and Moon, protect thee there.
 [0800216]Whatever robe to cover thee or zone thou makest for thyself,
   We make it pleasant to thy frame: may it be soft and smooth
    to touch. [p. a326]
 [0800217]When, with a very keen and cleasing razor, our hair and beards
    thou shavest as a barber,
   Smoothing our face steal not our vital forces.
 [0800218]Auspicious unto thee be rice and barley, causing no painful sick-
    ness or consumption, these deliver from calamity.
 [0800219]Thy food, thy drink, whate'er they be corn grown by cultivation,
    milk,
   Food eatable, uneatable, I make all poisonless for thee.
 [0800220]We give thee over as a charge to Day and Night, in trust to
    both.
   Keep him for me from stingy fiends, from those who fain would
    feed on him.
 [0800221]A hundred, yea, ten thousand years we give thee, ages two,
    three, four.
   May Indra, Agni, all the Gods, with willing favour look on thee.
 [0800222]To Autumn we deliver thee, to Winter, Spring and Summer's
    care.
   We trust thee with auspicious years wherein the plants and herbs
    grow up.
 [0800223]Death is the lord of bipeds, Death is sovran lord of quadrupeds.
   Away I bear thee from that: Death the ruler: be not thou
    afraid.
 [0800224]Thou, still uninjured, shalt not die: be not afraid; thou shalt
    not die.
   Here where I am men do not die or go to lowest depths of
    gloom.
 [0800225]Here verily all creatures live, the cow, the horse, the man, the
    beast,
   Here where this holy prayer is used, a rampart that protecteth
    life.
   Let it preserve thee from thy peers, from incantation, from thy
    friends.
 [0800226]Live very long, be healthy, be immortal: let not the vital breath
    forsake thy body.
 [0800227]One and a hundred modes of death, dangers that may be over-
    come,
   May Gods deliver thee from this when Agni, dear to all men,
    bids.
 [0800228]Body of Agni prompt to save, slayer of fiends and foes art thou,
   Yea, banisher of malady, the healing balm called Putudru.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a327]

  

HYMN III

  

A prayer for the destruction of demons

[0800301]I balm with oil the mighty demon-slayer, to the most famous
    friend I come for shelter.
   Enkindled, sharpened by our rites, may Agni protect us in the
    day and night from evil.
 [0800302]O Jatavedas, armed with teeth of iron, enkindled with thy flame,
    attack the demons.
   Seize with thy tongue the foolish gods' adorers: rend, put with-
    in thy mouth the raw-flesh-eaters.
 [0800303]Apply thy teeth, the upper and the lower, thou who hast both,
    enkindled and destroying.
   Roam also in the air, O King, around us, and with thy jaws
    assail the wicked spirits.
 [0800304]Pierce through the Yatudhana's skin, O Agni; let the destroying
    dart with fire consume him.
   Rend his joints, Jatavedas! let the eater of raw flesh, seeking
    flesh, tear and destroy him.
 [0800305]Where now thou seest, Agni Jatavedas! a Yatudhana, standing
    still or roaming.
   Or one that flieth through the air's mid-region, kindled to fury
    as an archer pierce him. [p. a328]
 [0800306]Bending thy shafts through sacrifices, Agni! dipping thine
    arrows in the hymn to point them,
   Pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudhanas, and break their
    arms uplifted to attack thee.
 [0800307]Rescue the captives also, Jatavedas! yea, those whom Yatudha-
    nas' spears have captured.
   Strike down that fiend, blazing before him, Agni! Let spotted
    carrion-eating kites devour him.
 [0800308]Here tell this forth, O Agni: whosoever is, he himself, or acteth
    as, a demon,
   Grasp him, O thou most youthful, with thy fuel: to the Man-
   Seer's eye give him as booty.
 [0800309]With keen glance guard the sacrifice, O Agni: thou Sage, con-
    duct it onward to the Vasus.
   Let not the fiends, O Man-Beholder, harm thee burning against
    the Rakshasas to slay them.
 [0800310]Look on the fiend, 'mid men, as Man-Beholder: rend thou his
    three extremities in pieces.
   Demolish with thy flame his ribs, O Agni: the Yatudhana's
    root destroy thou triply.
 [0800311]Thrice, Agni, let thy noose surround the demon who with his
    falsehood injures holy Order.
   Loud roaring with thy flame, Jatavedas, fetter him in the pre-
    sense of the singer.
 [0800312]Agni, what curse the pair this day may utter, what rude rough
    word the worshippers have spoken,
   Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit,--pierce to the
    heart therewith the Yatudhanas.
 [0800313]With fervent heat exterminate the demons: destroy the fiends
    with glow and flame, O Agni.
   Destroy with fire the foolish gods' adorers: destroy the insatiate
    fiercely-burning creatures.
 [0800314]May Gods destroy to-day the evil-doer: may uttered curses turn
    again and strike him.
   Let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva's net enclose
    the Yatudhana.
 [0800315]The fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle, with flesh of
    horses and of human bodies,
   Who steals the milch-cow's milk away, O Agni,--tear off the
    heads of such with fiery fury. [p. a329]
 [0800316]Let the fiends steal the poison of the cattle: may Aditi cast off
    the evil-doers.
   May the God Savitar give them up to ruin, and be their share
    of herbs and plants denied them.
 [0800317]The cow gives milk each year, O Man-Beholder: let not the
   Yatudhana ever taste it.
   Agni, if one should glut him with the biestings, pierce with thy
    flame his vitals as he meets thee.
 [0800318]Agni, from days of old thou slayest demons: never have
   Rakshasas in fight o'ercome thee.
   Burn up the foolish ones, the flesh-devourers: let none of them
    escape thy heavenly arrow.
 [0800319]Guard us, O Agni, from above and under, protect us from be-
    hind and from before us;
   And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, glowing
    with fervent heat, consume the sinner.
 [0800320]From rear, from front, from under, from above us, Agni, pro-
    tect us as a sage with wisdom.
   Guard to old age thy friend as friend eternal: O Agni, as im-
    mortal, guard us mortals.
 [0800321]Lend thou the worshipper that eye, O Agni, where with thou
    lookest on the hoof-armed demons.
   With light celestial in Atharvan's manner burn up the fool who
    ruins truth with falsehood.
 [0800322]We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni! thee, a sage,
   In conquering colour day by day, destroyer of the treacherous
    foe.
 [0800323]With deadly poison strike thou back the treacherous brood of
   Rakshasas,
   O Agni, with thy sharpened glow, with rays that flash with
    points of flame.
 [0800324]Agni shines far and wide with lofty splendour, and by his great-
    ness makes all things apparent.
   He conquers godless and malign enchantments, and sharpens
    both his horns to gore the ogres.
 [0800325]Thy two unwasting horns, O Jatavedas, keen-pointed weapons,
    sharpened by devotion
   With these transfix the wicked-souled Kimidin, with fierce flame,
   Jatavedas! when he meets thee. [p. a330]
 [0800326]Bright, radiant, meet to be adored, immortal with refulgent
    glow,
   Agni drives Rakshasas away.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

Imprecations on demons

[0800401]Indra and Soma, burn, destroy the demon foe! Send downward,
   O ye Bulls, those who add gloom to gloom.
   Annihilate the fools, slay them and burn them up: chase them
    away from us, pierce the voracious fiends. [p. a331]
 [0800402]Let sin, Indra and Soma! round the wicked boil, like as a cald-
    ron set amid the flames of fire.
   Against the foe of prayer, eater of gory flesh, the fearful-eyed
   Kimidin, keep perpetual hate.
 [0800403]Indra and Soma, plunge the wicked in the depth, yea, cast them
    into darkness that hath no support,
   So that not one of them may ever thence return: so may your
    wrathful might prevail and conquer them.
 [0800404]Indra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on the
    wicked fiend from heaven and from the earth.
   Yea, fashion from the big clouds your celestial dart wherewith
    ye burn to death the waxing demon race.
 [0800405]Indra and Soma, cast ye downward from the sky your deadly
    bolts of stone burning with fiery flame,
   Eternal, scorching darts. Plunge the voracious fiends within the
    depth, and let them pass without a sound.
 [0800406]Indra and Soma, let this hymn control you both, even as the
    girth encompasses two vigorous steeds
   The song of praise which I with wisdom offer you. Do ye, as
   Lords of men, animate these my prayers.
 [0800407]In your impetuous manner think ye both thereon: destroy those
    evil spirits, kill the treacherous fiends.
   Indra and Soma, let the wicked have no bliss whoso at any time-
    attacks and injures us.
 [0800408]Whoso accuses me with words of falsehood when I pursue my
    way with guileless spirit,
   May he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra! like water which the
    hollowed hand compresses.
 [0800409]Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, and with their
    evil natures harm the righteous,
   May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the lap of
   Nirriti consign them.
 [0800410]O Agni, whosoever seeks to injure the essence of our food, kine,
    steeds, or bodies,
   May he, the adversary, thief, and robber, sink to destruction,.
    both himself and offspring.
 [0800411]May he be swept away, himself and children; may all the three
    earths press him down beneath them.
   May his fair glory, O ye Gods, be blighted, who in the day or
    night would fain destroy us. [p. a332]
 [0800412]The prudent finds it easy to distinguish the true and false: their
    words oppose each other.
   Of these two that which is the true and honest Soma protects,
    and brings the false to nothing.
 [0800413]Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him who falsely
    claims the Warrior's title.
   He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly: both lie entan-
    gled in the noose of Indra.
 [0800414]As if I worshipped deities of falsehood, or thought vain thoughts
    about the Gods, O Agni!
   Why art thou angry with us, Jatavedas? Destruction fall on
    those who lie against thee!
 [0800415]So may I die this day if I have harassed any man's life, or if I
    be a demon.
   Yea, may he lose all his ten sons together who with false tongue
    hath called me Yatudhana.
 [0800416]May Indra slay him with a mighty weapon, and let the vilest of
    all creatures perish,
   The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me a demon
    though devoid of demon nature.
 [0800417]She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her body
    in her guile and malice,
   May she fall downward into endless caverns. May press-stones
    with loud ring destroy the demons.
 [0800418]Spread out, ye Maruts, search among the people: seize ye and
    grind the Rakshasas to pieces,
   Who fly abroad, transformed to birds, at night-time, and sully
    and pollute our holy worship.
 [0800419]Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, O Indra: sharpen it,
   Maghavan, made keen by Soma.
   Forward, behind, and from above and under, smite down the
    demons with thy rocky weapon.
 [0800420]They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, fain would they
    harm indomitable Indra.
   Sakra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked: now let him
    cast his bolt at fiendish wizards.
 [0800421]Indra hath ever been the fiends' destroyer who spoil oblations of
    the Gods' invokers.
   Yea, Sakra, like an axe that splits the timber, assails and sma-
    shes them like earthen vessels. [p. a333]
 [0800422]Destroy the fiend shaped like an owl or owlet, destroy him in.
    the form of dog or cuckoo.
   Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture: as with a stone, O
   Indra, crush the demon.
 [0800423]Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us: may Dawn.
    drive off the couples of Kimidins.
   Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble! From grief
    that comes from heaven Mid-air preserve us!
 [0800424]Indra destroy the demon, male and female, joying and triumph-
    ing in arts of magic!
   Let the fools' gods with bent necks fall and perish, and see no.
    more the Sun when he arises.
 [0800425]Look, each one, hither, look around. Indra and Soma, watch ye
    well.
   Cast forth your weapon at the fiends: against the sorcerers hurl
    your bolt.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a334]

  

HYMN V

  

A charm accompanying investiture with an amulet

[0800501]Upon the strong is bound the strong, this magic cord, this Amu-
    let,
   Potent, foe-slayer, served by valiant heroes, happy and fortu-
    nate defence.
 [0800502]This Charm, foe-slayer, served by many heroes, strong, power-
    ful, victorious, and mighty, goes bravely forth to meet and
    ruin witchcraft.
 [0800503]With this same Amulet wise Indra routed the Asuras, with this
    he slaughtered Vritra,
   With this he won this pair, both Earth and Heaven, and made
    the sky's four regions his possession.
 [0800504]May this encircling magic cord, this Amulet of Sraktya wood,
   Mighty, subduing enemies, keep us secure on every side.
 [0800505]This Agni hath declared, Soma declared it, Brihaspati, and
   Savitar, and Indra.
   So may these Gods whom I have set before me oppose with
    saving charms and banish witchcraft.
 [0800506]I have obscured the heaven and earth, yea, and the daylight and
    the sun.
   So may these Gods whom I have set before me oppose with
    saving charms and banish witchcraft.
 [0800507]Whoever for his armour takes an amulet of the Sraktya tree,
   Like the Sun risen up to heaven, quells witchcraft with superior
    might.
 [0800508]With Amulet of Sraktya wood, as with a thoughtful Rishi's aid,
   In every fight have I prevailed; I smite the foes and Rakshasas.
 [0800509]All witchcraft of Angirases,"all witchcraft wrought by Asuras,
   All witchcraft self-originate, and all that others have prepared,
   May these depart to both remotest spaces, past ninety ample
    water-floods.
 [0800510]May the Gods bind the Charm on him for armour, Indra, and
   Vishnu, Savitar Rudra, Agni,
   Prajapati, sublimest Parameshlhin, Viraj, Vaisvanara, and all
    the Rishis.
 [0800511]Thou art the chief of all the plants, even as a bull among the
    beasts. [p. a335]
   A tiger of the beasts of prey. Him whom we sought for have we
    found, him lying near in wait for us.
 [0800512]A tiger verily is he, he is a lion, and a bull,
   Subduer of his foes is he, the man who wears this Amulet.
 [0800513]No mortal beings slay him, no Gandharvas, no Apsarases;
   O'er all the regions he is king, the man who wears this Amulet.
 [0800514]Kasyapa formed and fashioned thee, Kasyapa raised and sent
    thee forth.
   Indra wore thee, and, wearing thee, won in the wrestling-match
    with man.
    The Amulet of boundless might the Gods have made a coat of
    mail.
 [0800515]Whoever would destroy thee with Diksha-rites, sacrifices, spells,
   Meet him and smite him, Indra! with thy hundred-knotted
    thunderbolt.
 [0800516]Verily let this Amulet, circular, potent, conquering,
   Happy and fortunate defence, preserve thy children and thy
    wealth.
 [0800517]Brave Indra, set before us light, peace and security from below,
   Peace and security from above, peace and security from behind.
 [0800518]My coat of mail is Heaven and Earth, my coat of mail is Day
    and Sun:
   A coat of mail may Indra and Agni and Dhatar grant to me.
 [0800519]Not all the Gods may pierce, all leagued together, the vast
    strong shield which Indra gives, and Agni.
   May that great shield on all sides guard my body, that to full
    old my life may be extended.
 [0800520]Let the Gods' Charm be bound on me to keep me safe from
    every ill.
   Come ye and enter all within this pillar, the safe-guard of the
    body, thrice-defended.
 [0800521]In this let Indra lay a store of valour: approach ye Gods, and
    enter it together,
   For his long life, to last a hundred autumns, that to full age his
    days may be extended.
 [0800522]Lord of the clan who brings, us bliss, fiend-slayer, queller of the
    foe,
   May he, the conqueror, ne'er subdued, may Indra bind the
   Charm on thee, [p. a336]
   Bull, Soma-drinker, he who gives us peace.
   May he protect thee round about, by night and day on every,
    side.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

A charm to exercise evil spirits who beset women

[0800601]Let neither fiend of evil name, Alinsa, Vatsapa, desire
   Thy pair of husband-wooers which thy mother cleansed when,
    thou wast born.
 [0800602]Palala, Anupalala, Sarku, Koka, Malimlucha, Palijaka Vavri-
    vasas and Asresha, Rikshagriva and Pramilin.
 [0800603]Approach not, come not hitherward: creep not thou in-between
    her thighs.
   I set, to guard her, Baja, that which chases him of evil name. [p. a337]
 [0800604]Durnama and Sunama both are eager to converse with her.
   We drive away Arayas: let Sunama seek the women-folk,
 [0800605]The black and hairy Asura, and Stambaja and Tundika,
   Arayas from this girl we drive, from bosom, waist, and parts
    below.
 [0800606]Sniffer, and Feeler, him who eats raw flesh, and him who licks
    his lips,
   Arayas with the tails of dogs, the yellow Baja hath destroyed.
 [0800607]Whoever, in thy brother's shape or father's comes to thee in
    sleep,
   Let Baja rout and chase them like eunuchs with woman's head-
    dress on.
 [0800608]Whoever steals to thee asleep or thinks to harm thee when
    awake,--
   These hath it banished, as the Sun travelling round drives shade
    away.
 [0800609]Whoever causeth her to lose her child or bear untimely fruit,--
   Destroy him, O thou Plant, destroy the slippery fiend who lusts
    for her.
 [0800610]Those who at evening, with the bray of asses, dance around the
    house, Kukshilas, and Kusfilas, and Kakubhas, Srimas,
   Karumas,
   These with thine odour, O thou Plant, drive far away to every
    side.
 [0800611]Kukundhas and Kukurabhas who dress themselves in hides and
    skins,
   Who dance about like eunuchs, who raise a wild clamour in the
    wood, all these we banish far away.
 [0800612]All those who cannot bear the Sun who warms us yonder from
    the sky,
   Arayas with the smell of goats, malodorous, with bloody mouths,
    the Makakas we drive afar.
 [0800613]All those who on their shoulders bear a head of monstrous
    magnitude,
   Who pierce the women's loins with pain,--those demons, Indra
    drive away!
 [0800614]Those, bearing horns upon their hands, who first of all approach
    the brides;
   Standing in ovens, laughing loud, those who in bushes flash forth
    light, all these we banish hence away. [p. a338]
 [0800615]Those who have retroverted toes, and heels and faces in the
    front,
   Khalajas, Sakadhumajas, Urundas, all the Matmatas, impotent
   Kumbhamushkas, these,
   Drive thou, O Brahmanaspati, far from this girl with vigilance.
 [0800616]Sightless and with distorted eyes, impotent. woman less be they.
   O Healing Plant, cast each away who, not her husband, would
    approach this woman wedded to her lord.
 [0800617]The Bristly-haired, the Maniac-haired, the Biter, and the
   Groper-fiend,
   The Creeper-near, the Copper-hued, the Snouty, and the Saluda,
   With foot and heel kick over, as a hasty cow her milking-pan.
 [0800618]If one should touch thy coming babe or kill thine infant newly
    born,
   The yellow Plant with mighty bow shall pierce him even to the
    heart.
 [0800619]Those who kill infants unawares, and near the new-made mothers
    lie,
   Let Pinga chase the amorous Gandharvas as wind chases cloud.
 [0800620]Let it maintain the genial seed: let the laid embryo rest secure.
   Let both strong Healers, to be worn within the girdle, guard the
    babe.
 [0800621]From the Kimidin, for thy lord and children, Pinga shield thee
    well,
   From Sayaka, and Nagnaka, Tangalva, and Pavinasa.
 [0800622]From the five-footed, fingerless, from the four-eyed, the double-
    faced,
   From the Close-creeper, from the Worm, from the Quick-roller
    guard her well.
 [0800623]Those who eat flesh uncooked, and those who eat the bleeding
    flesh of men,
   Feeders on babes unborn, long-haired, far from this place we
    banish these.
 [0800624]Shy slinkers from the Sun, as slinks a woman from her husband's
    sire,
   Deep down into the heart of these let Baja and let Pinga pierce.
 [0800625]Pinga, preserve the babe at birth, make not the boy a female
    child.
   Let not Egg-eaters mar the germs: drive the Kimidins far away. [p. a339]
 [0800626]Sterility, and infants' death, and weeping that announceth
    woe,
   Dear! lay them on the fiend as thou wouldst pluck a garland
    from a tree.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a340]

  

HYMN VII

  

A charm to restore a sick man to health

[0800701]The tawny-coloured, and the pale, the variegated and the red,
   The dusky-tinted, and the black,--all Plants we summon hither-
    ward.
 [0800702]This man let them deliver from Consumption which the Gods
    have sent.
   The father of these Herbs was Heaven, their mother Earth, the
   Sea their root.
 [0800703]The Waters are the best, and heavenly Plants.
   From every limb of thine have they removed Consumption
    caused by sin.
 [0800704]I speak to Healing Herbs spreading, and bushy, to creepers, and
    to those whose sheath is single,
   I call for thee the fibrous and the reed-like, and branching.
   Plants, dear to the Visve Devas, powerful, giving life to men.
 [0800705]The conquering strength, the power and might which ye, victo-
    rious Plants, possess,
   Therewith deliver this man here from this Consumption, O ye
   Plants: so I prepare the remedy.
 [0800706]The living Plant that giveth life, that driveth malady away,
   Arundhatr, the rescuer, strengthening, rich a sweets I call, to free
    this man from scath and harm.
 [0800707]Hitherward let the sapient come, the friendly sharers o f my
    speech. [p. a341]
   That we may give this man relief and raise him from his evil
    plight.
 [0800708]Germ of the Waters, Agni's food, Plants ever growing fresh and
    new,
   Sure, healing, bearing thousand names, let them be all collected
    here.
 [0800709]Let Plants whose soul is water, girt with Avakas, piercing with
    their sharp horns expel the malady.
 [0800710]Strong, antidotes of poison, those releasers, free from Varuna,
   And those that drive away Catarrh, and those that frustrate
    magic arts, let all those Plants come hitherward.
 [0800711]Let purchased Plants of mightier power, Plants that are praised
    for excellence.
   Here in this village safely keep cattle and horses, man and beast.
 [0800712]Sweet is their root, sweet are these Plants' top branches, sweet
    also is their intermediate portion;
   Sweet is their foliage, and sweet their blossom, combined with
    sweetness is their taste of Amrit: food, fatness let them yield,
    with kine preceding.
 [0800713]These Plants that grow upon the earth, whate'er their number
    and their size,
   Let these with all their thousand leaves free me from Death and
    misery.
 [0800714]May the Plants' Tiger-amulet, protective, guardian from the
    curse,
   Beat off the brood of demons, drive all maladies afar from us.
 [0800715]Before the gathered Plants they fly and scatter, as though a lion's
    roar or fire dismayed them.
   Expelled by Plants, let men's and kine's Consumption pass from
    us to the navigable rivers.
 [0800716]Emancipated from the sway of Agni, of Vaisvanara, go, covering
    the earth, ye Plants whose ruler is Vanaspati.
 [0800717]May these be pleasant to our heart, auspicious, rich in store of
    milk,
   These Plants of the Angirases which grow on mountains and on
    plains.
 [0800718]The Plants I know myself, the plants that with mine eye I look
    upon,
   Plants yet unknown, and those we know, wherein we find that
    power is stored, [p. a342]
 [0800719]Let all the congregated Plants attend and mark mine utterance,
   That we may rescue this man here and save him from severe
    distress.
 [0800720]Asvattha, Darbha, King of Plants, is Soma, deathless sacrifice
   Barley and Rice are healing balms, the sons of Heaven who
    never die.
 [0800721]Lift yourselves up, ye Healing Plants, loud is the thunder's crash
    and roar.
   When with full flow Parjanya, ye Children of Prisni! blesseth;
    you.
 [0800722]We give the essence of that stream of nectar of this man to
    drink:
   So I prepare a remedy that he may live a hundred years.
 [0800723]Well doth the wild boar know a Plant, the mungoose knows the
   Healing Herb.
   I call, to aid this man, the Plants which Serpents and Gandhar-
    vas know.
 [0800724]Plants of Angirases which hawks, celestial Plants which eagles.
    know;
   Plants known to swans and lesser fowl, Plants known to all the
    birds that fly.
   Plants that are known to sylvan beasts,--I call them all to aid
    this man.
 [0800725]The multitude of herbs whereon the Cows whom none may
    slaughter feed, all that are food for goats and sheep,
   So many Plants, brought hitherward, give shelter and defence to
    thee!
 [0800726]Hitherward unto thee I bring the Plants that cure all maladies,
   All Plants wherein physicians have discovered health-bestowing
    power.
 [0800727]Let Plants with flower and Plants with bud, the fruitful and the
    fruitless, all,
   Like children of one mother, yield their stores for this man's
    perfeet health.
 [0800728]From the Five-arrowed, from the Ten-arrowed have I delivered
    thee,
   Freed thee from Yama's fetter and from all offence against the
   Gods,

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a343]

  

HYMN VIII

  

Imprecations directed against a hostile army

[0800801]Indra the Shaker shake them up, brave, hero, fortdemolisher,
   That into thousand fragments we may strike the armies of our
    foes!
 [0800802]Let Putirajju with her breath corrupt and putrefy that host,
   And terror smite our foemen's heart when fire and smoke are
    seen afar.
 [0800803]Asvattha, rend those men; do thou devour them quickly,
   Khadira!
   Like reeds let them be broken through, down-smitten by a lifted
    rush.
 [0800804]Let Parushahva make them reeds, and let the bulrush strike
    them down:
   Bound in a mighty net let them break quickly like an arrow's
    shaft.
 [0800805]Air was the net; the poles thereof were the great quarters of the
    sky: [p. a344]
   Sakra therewith enveloped and cast on the ground the Dasyus'
    host.
 [0800806]Verily mighty is the net of mighty Sakra rich in wealth:
   Therewith press all the foemen down so that not one of them
    escape!
 [0800807]Great is thy net, brave Indra, thine the mighty match for a
    thousand, Lord of Hundred Powers!
   Holding them, with his host, therewith hath Indra slaughtered
   Dasyus a hundred, thousand, myriad, hundred millions.
 [0800808]This world so mighty was the net of Sakra, of the Mighty One:
   With this, the net of Indra, I envelop all those men with gloom.
 [0800809]Great weakness and misfortune, pain which words can never
    charm away,
   Languor, fatigue, bewilderment, with these I compass all the
    foes.
 [0800810]I give those foemen up to Death: bound in the bonds of Death
    are they.
   I bind and carry them away to meet Death's wicked messengers.
 [0800811]Bear them away, Death's messengers! envoys of Yama! bind
    them fast.
   More than a thousand be their slain: the club of Bhava pierce
    them through!
 [0800812]Forth go the Sadhyas in their might bearing one netpole raised
    aloft.
   One pole the Rudras carry, one the Vasus, and the Adityas one.
 [0800813]The Visve Devas from above shall come depressing it with
    might,
   And in the midst the Angirases, slaying the mighty host, shall go.
 [0800814]Trees of the forest, trees that bear flower and fruit, and herbs
    and plants,
   Quadruped, biped send I forth that they may strike this army
    dead,
 [0800815]Gandharvas, and Apsarases, Gods, Serpents, Fathers, Holy
   Men,
   Seen and unseen, I send them forth that they may strike this
    army dead.
 [0800816]Here spread are snares of Death wherefrom thou, once within
    them, ne'er art freed:
   Full many a thousand of the host yonder this horn shall smite
    and slay. [p. a345]
 [0800817]The Gharma hath been warmed with fire: this Homa slays a
    thousand men.
   Let Bhava, Prisnibahu, and Sarva destroy that armament.
 [0800818]Their portion be the fire of Death, hunger, exhaustion, slaughter,
    fear.
   With your entangling snares and nets, Sarva and Indra! slay that
    host.
 [0800819]Fly, conquered, in alarm, ye foes, run driven by the spell away!
   Let not one man escape of those when routed by Brihaspati.
 [0800820]Down fall their weapons on the ground: no strength be theirs
    to point a shaft:
   Then in their dreadful terror let their arrows wound their vital
    parts.
 [0800821]Let Heaven and Earth roar out in wrath against them, and Air
    with all the Deities in concert,
   Let them not find a surety or a refuge, but torn away go down
    to Death together.
 [0800822]The mules of the Gods' car are heaven's four quarters; their
    hooves are sacred cakes, the air its body.
   Its sides are Heaven and Earth, its reins the Seasons, Voice is its
    hood, its grooms are sky's mid-regions.
 [0800823]Year is the car, Full Year the seat for driving, Viraj the pole,
    the chariot's front is Agni, Indra the warrior, and the Moon
    the driver.
 [0800824]Hence conquer, conquer, Hail! be thou the victor! Let these be
    conquerors and those be conquered.
   Good luck to these, ill luck to those men yonder! With the
    dark-blue-and-red our foes I cover.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a346]

  

HYMN IX

  

An enunciation of cosmogonical, ritual, and metrical doctrine

[0800901]Whence were these two produced? which was that region?'
   From what world, from which earth had they their being?
   Calves of Viraj, these two arose from water. I ask thee of these
    twain, who was their milker.
 [0800902]He who prepared a threefold home, and lying there made the
    water bellow through his greatness,
   Calf of Viraj, giving each wish fulfilment, made bodies for him-
    self far off, in secret.
 [0800903]Which are the three, the mighty three, whereof the fourth divides
    the voice,
   This may the Brahman know by prayer and fervour, whereto
    belongs the one, whereto the other.
 [0800904]Out of the Brihat as the sixth five Salmons have been fashioned
    forth:
   From Brihati was Brihat formed: whence was the Brihati com-
    posed?
 [0800905]On measure Brihati is based, and measure on the measurer:
   From magic might came magic might, from magic might came
   Matali.
 [0800906]Vaisvanara's image is the sky above us, so far as Agni forced
    both spheres asunder. [p. a347]
   Thence from that region as the sixth come praise-songs, and
    every sixth day hence again go upward.
 [0800907]We, Kagyapa! six present Rishis, ask thee--for thou hast prov-
    ed things tried and meet for trial
   They call Viraj the Father of Devotion: tell her to us thy
    friends in all her figures.
 [0800908]She whom, advancing, sacrifices follow, and when she takes her
    station stand beside her,
   By whose control and hest the spirit moveth, she is Viraj, in
    highest heaven, O Rishis.
 [0800909]Breathless, she moves by breath of living creatures, Svaraj pre-
    cedes, Viraj comes closely after.
   Some men behold her not, and some behold her, Viraj meet-
    shaped, who thinks of all existence.
 [0800910]Who hath perceived Viraj's duplication, perceived her seasons
    and her rule and practice?
   Who knows her steps, how oft, how far extended, who knows
    her home and number of her dawnings?
 [0800911]She here who first of all sent forth her lustre moves onward
    resting on these lower creatures.
   Exalted power and might are stored within her: the woman
    hath prevailed, the new-come mother.
 [0800912]Both Dawns on wings of song, with rich adornment, move on
    together to their common dwelling.
   Surya's two wives, unwasting, most prolific, knowing their way,
    move, rich in light, together.
 [0800913]The three have passed along the path of Order--three warm
    libations have regarded offspring
   One quickens progeny, one strengthens vigour, and one protects
    the kingdom of the pious.
 [0800914]She who was fourth was made by Agni, Soma, and Rishis as.
    they formed both halves of worship,
   Gayatri, Trishtup, Jagati, Anushtup, Brihadarki lightening the
    sacrificer.
 [0800915]Five milkings answer to the fivefold dawning, five seasons to
    the cow who bears five titles.
   The five sky-regions made fifteen in number, one head have
    these to one sole world directed.
 [0800916]Six Elements arose, first-born of Order: the six-day time is
    carried by six Samans. [p. a348]
   Six-yoked the plough is, as each trace is numbered: they call
    both broad ones six; six, Earth and Heaven.
 [0800917]They call the cold months six, and six the hot ones. Which, tell
    us, of the seasons is redundant?
   Seven sages, eagles, have sat down together: seven metres
    match the seven Consecrations.
 [0800918]Seven are the Homas, seven the logs for burning, seven are the
    streams of mead, and seven the seasons.
   Into the world have come seven streams of butter; those we
    have heard of as the Seven Vultures.
 [0800919]Seven metres, by four syllables increasing, each of the seven
    founded upon another
   How are the hymns of praise on these supported, and how are
    these imposed upon the praise-songs?
 [0800920]How hath the Gayatri filled out three triads? On the fifteen
    how is the Trishtup moulded,
   Jagati fashioned on the three-and-thirty? How is Anushtup
    formed? how Ekavinsa?
 [0800921]Eight Elements sprang up, first born of Order: the Priests
    divine are eight in number, Indra!
   Eight are the wombs of Aditi, eight her children; for the eighth
    night is the libation destined.
 [0800922]So planning bliss for you have I come hither to win your
    friendship: kind am I, and gracious.
   Born from one source, propitious is your wisdom: knowing
    full well to all of you it cometh.
 [0800923]To Indra eight, to Yama six, seven to the Rishis, seven to
    each:
   The number five accompanies waters and men and healing
    herbs.
 [0800924]The Heifer, all his own, poured forth for Indra control and
    milk at her first time of milking;
   And he then satisfied the four divisions, the Gods and men and
   Asuras and Rishis.
 [0800925]Who is the Cow? Who is the Single Rishi? What is the law,
    what are the benedictions?
   What on the earth is the one only Spirit? Which of the number
    is the Single Season?
 [0800926]One is the Cow, one is the Single Spirit, one is the law, single
    are benedictions. [p. a349]
   The Spirit dwelling on the earth is single: the Single Season
    never is transcended.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a350]

  

HYMN X

  

A glorification of the mystical abstraction Viraj

[0801001]Viraj at first was This. At birth all feared her; the thought, She
    will become this All, struck terror.
 [0801002]She rose, the Garhapatya fire she entered. He who knows this
    becomes lord of a household, performer of domestic sacri-
    fices.
 [0801003]She mounted up, the Eastward fire she entered. He who knows
    this becomes the Gods' beloved, and to his call they come
    when she invokes them.
 [0801004]She mounted up, the Southward fire she entered.
   He who knows this becomes a fit performer of sacrifice, meet
    for honour, shelter-giver.
 [0801005]She mounted up, she entered the Assembly. He who knows this
    becomes polite and courtly, and people come as guests to his
    assembly.
 [0801006]She mounted up, she passed within the meeting. He who knows
    this becomes fit for the meeting, and to his hall of meeting
    come the people. [p. a351]
 [0801007]She mounted up, she entered Consultation. Whoso knows this
    is fit to be consulted, and to his consultation come the
    people.
 [0801008]She mounted up, and, into four divided, she took her station in
    the air's mid-region.
 [0801009]Of her the Gods and men said, This she knoweth. That we may
    both have life let us invoke her.
 [0801010]Thus did they cry to her:
 [0801011]Come, Strength! come, Food! come, Charmer! come, Free-
    giver!
 [0801012]Her calf, her well-beloved calf, was Indra: Gayatri was her
    rope, the cloud her udder.
 [0801013]Two teats she had, Rathantara and Brihat, two, Yajnayajniya
    and Vamadevya.
 [0801014]With the Rathantara the Gods milked from her the Plants, and
    all the wide expanse with Brihat.
 [0801015]They drew the Waters forth with Vamadevya, with Yajnayaj-
    niya they milked out worship.
 [0801016]For him who knoweth this, Rathantara poureth out Plants,
    and Brihat yieldeth wide expansion.
 [0801017]Waters from Vamdevya come, from Yajnayajniya sacrifice.
 [0801018]She rose, she came unto the tress: they killed her. A year went
    by and she again existed.
   Hence in a year the wounds of trees heal over. He who knows
    this sees his loathed rival wounded.
 [0801019]She mounted up, she came unto the Fathers: they killed her:
    in a month she re-existed.
   Hence men give monthly offerings to the Fathers: who knows
    this, knows the path which they have trodden.
 [0801020]She rose, she came unto the Gods: they killed her: but in a
    fortnight she again was living.
   Fortnightly, hence, men serve the Gods with Vasat! Who
    knows this knows the way which Gods pass over.
 [0801021]She mounted up, she came to men: they killed her Presently
    she regained her life and being.
   Hence on both days to men they bring and offer--who knows
    this--near-seated in the dwelling.
 [0801022]She rose, approached the Asuras: they called her: their cry was,
   Come, O Maya, come thou hither. [p. a352]
   Her dear calf was Virochana Prahradi: her milking vessel was a.
    pan of iron.
   Dvimurdha Artvya milked her, yea, this Maya, The Asuras
    depend for life on Maya. He who knows this becomes a fit
    supporter.
 [0801023]She mounted up, she came unto the Fathers. The Fathers called.
    to her, O Food, come hither.
   King Yama was her calf, her pail was silvern. Antaka, Mrityu's.
    son, milked her, this Svadha.
   This Food the Fathers make their lives' sustainer. He who*
    knows this becomes a meet supporter.
 [0801024]She mounted up, she came to men. They called her, Come unto-
    us, come hither thou Free-giver!
   Earth was her milking-pail, the calf beside her Manu Vaivasvata,
   Vivasvan's offspring.
   Prithi the son of Vena was her milker: he milked forth hus-
    bandry and grain for sowing.
   These men depend for life on corn and tillage. He who knows
    this becomes a meet supporter, successful in the culture of his_
    corn-land.
 [0801025]She rose, she came unto the Seven Rishis. They called her,.
   Come, Rich in Devotion! hither.
   King Soma was her calf. the Moon her milk-pail. Brihaspati.
   Angirasa, her milker,
   Drew from her udder Prayer and Holy Fervour. Fervour and
   Prayer maintain the Seven Rishis.
   He who knows this becomes a meet supporter, a priest illustri-
    ous for his sacred knowledge.
 [0801026]She rose, she came unto the Gods. They called her, crying, O
   Vigour, come to us, come hither!
   God Savitar milked her, he milked forth Vigour. The Gods
    depend for life upon that Vigour. He who knows this becomes
    a meet supporter.
 [0801027]She rose approached the Apsarases and Gandharvas. They called
    her, Come to us, O Fragrant-scented!
   The son of Suryavarchas, Chitraratha, was her dear calf, her pail.
    a lotus-petal.
   The son of Suryavarchas, Vasuruchi, milked and drew from her
    most delightful fragrance.
   That scent supports Apsarases and Gandharvas. He who knows [p. a353]
    this becomes a meet supporter, and round him ever breathes
    delicious odour.
 [0801028]She mounted up, she came to Other People. They called her,
    crying, Come, Concealment! hither.
   Her dear calf was Vaisravana Kubera, a vessel never tempered
    was her milk-pail.
   Rajatanabhi, offspring of Kubera, milked her, and from her
    udder drew concealment.
   By that concealment live the Other People. He who knows this
    becomes a meet supporter, and makes all evil disappear and
    vanish.
 [0801029]She mounted up, she came unto the Serpents. The Serpents
    called her, Venomous! come hither.
   Her calf was Takshaka, Visala's offspring: a bottlegourd suppli-
    ed a milking-vessel.
   Iravan's offspring, Dhritarashtra milked her, and from her udder
    drew forth only poison.
   That poison quickens and supports the Serpents: He who knows
    this becomes a meet supporter.
 [0801030]One would ward off, for him who hath this knowledge, if with a
    bottle-gourd he sprinkled water.
 [0801031]And did he not repel, if in his spirit he said, I drive thee back,
    he would repel it.
 [0801032]The poison that it drives away, that poison verily repels.
 [0801033]The man who hath this knowledge pours its venom on his hated
    foe.

[p. a354] [p. a355]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a356]

  

BOOK IX

  

HYMN I

  

A glorification of the Asvins' whip and a prayer for blessings

[0900101]The Asvins' Honey-whip was born from heaven and earth, from
    middle air, and ocean, and from fire and wind.
   All living creatures welcome it with joyful hearts, fraught with
    the store of Amrit it hath gathered up.
 [0900102]They call thee earth's great strength in every form, they call
    thee too the ocean's genial seed.
   Whence comes the Honey-whip bestowing bounty, there Vital
   Spirit is, and Amrit treasured.
 [0900103]In sundry spots, repeatedly reflecting, men view upon the earth:
    her course and action;
   For she, the first-born daughter of the Maruts, derives her
    origin from Wind and Agni.
 [0900104]Daughter of Vasus, mother of Adityas, centre of Amrit breath
    of living creatures.
   The Honey-whip, gold-coloured, dropping fatness, moves as a
    mighty embryo 'mid mortals.
 [0900105]The deities begat the Whip of Honey: her embryo assumed all
    forms and fashions.
   The mother nourishes that tender infant which at its birth
    looks on all worlds and beings.
 [0900106]Who understandeth well, who hath perceived it, her heart's un-
    injured Soma-holding beaker?
   Let the wise Brahman priest therein be joyful.
 [0900107]He understandeth them, he hath perceived them, her breasts
    that pour a thousand streams, uninjured.
   They unreluctantly yield strength and vigour.
 [0900108]She who with voice upraised in constant clamour, mighty, life-
    giving, goes unto her function,
   Bellowing to the heated three libations, suckles with streams of
    milk, and still is lowing. [p. a357]
 [0900109]On whom, well-fed, the Waters wait in worship, and steers and
    self-refulgent bulls attend her.
   For thee, for one like thee down pour the Waters, and cause
    desire and strength to rain upon thee.
 [0900110]The thunder is thy voice, O Lord of Creatures: a Bull, thou
    castest on the earth thy vigour.
   The Honey-whip, the Manus' first-born daughter, derives her
    origin from Wind and Agni.
 [0900111]As at the morning sacrifice the Asvins twain love Soma well,
   Even so may both the Asvins lay splendour and strength within
    my soul.
 [0900112]As at the second sacrifice Indra and Agni love him well,
   Let the pair, Indra Agni, lay splendour and strength within my
    soul.
 [0900113]As at third sacrifice Soma is the Ribhus' well-beloved one,
   Even so may they, the Ribhus, store splendour and strength
    within my soul.
 [0900114]Fain would I bring forth sweetness, fain would make it mine.
   Bringing milk, Agni! have I come: splendour and strength
    bestow on me!
 [0900115]Grant me, O Agni, splendid strength, and progeny, and length-
    ened life.
   May the Gods know me as I am, may Indra with the Rishis
    know.
 [0900116]As honey-bees collect and add fresh honey to their honey store,
   Even so may both the Asvins lay splendour and strength within
    my soul.
 [0900117]As over honey flies besmear this honey which the bees have
    made,
   So may both Asvins lay in me splendour and strength and
    power and might.
 [0900118]May all the sweetness that is found in hills and mountains,
    steeds and kine,
   And wine that floweth from the cup,--may all that sweetness
    be in me.
 [0900119]May both the Asvins, Lords of Light, balm me with honey of
    the bees,
   That I may speak among the folk words full of splendour and
    of strength. [p. a358]
 [0900120]The thunder is thy voice, O Lord of Creatures: a Bull, thou
    castest strength on earth and heaven.
   To that all cattle look for their existence: with this she nourishes
    their force and vigour.
 [0900121]The Whip itself is Heaven, Earth is the handle, the point of
    juncture is the Air's mid-region.
   The lash is lightning, and the tip is golden.
 [0900122]Whoever knows the Whip's seven kinds of honey, becomes
    himself a man endowed with sweetness.
   Brahman and King, the draught-ox and the milch-cow, barley
    and rice, and honey is the seventh.
 [0900123]Sweet is the man, sweet are his goods and chattels: he who
    knows this conquers the worlds of sweetness.
 [0900124]The thundering of Prajapati in heaven is verily manifest to living
    creatures.
   Therefore I stand from right to left invested, and, O Prajapati,
   I cry, regard me!
   The man who hath this knowledge is regarded by living beings
    and the Lord of Creatures.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a359]

  

HYMN II

  

A glorification of Kama as God of desire of all that is good

[0900201]Kama the Bull, slayer of foes, I worship with molten butter,
    sacrifice, oblation.
   Beneath my feet cast down mine adversaries with thy great
    manly power, when I have praised thee.
 [0900202]That which is hateful to mine eye and spirit, that harasses and
    robs me of enjoyment,
   The evil dream I loose upon my foemen. May I rend him when
   I have lauded Kama.
 [0900203]Kama, do thou, a mighty Lord and Ruler, let loose ill dream,
    misfortune, want of children,
   Homelessness, Kama! utter destitution, upon the sinner who
    designs my ruin.
 [0900204]Drive them away, drive them afar, O Kama; indigence fall on
    those who are my foemen!
   When they have been cast down to deepest darkness, consume
    their dwellings with thy fire, O Agni.
 [0900205]She, Kama! she is called the Cow, thy daughter, she who is
    named Vak and Viraj by sages.
   By her drive thou my foemen to a distance. May cattle, vital
    breath, and life forsake them.
 [0900206]By Kama's might, King Varuna's and Indra's, by Vishnu's
    strength, and Savitar's instigation,
   I chase my foes with sacrifice to Agni, as a deft steersman drives
    his boat through waters.
 [0900207]May Kama, mighty one, my potent warder, give me full free-
    dom from mine adversaries.
   May all the Deities be my protection, all Gods come nigh to
    this mine invocation.
 [0900208]Accepting this oblation rich with fatness, be joyful here, ye
   Gods whose chief is Kama,
   Giving me freedom from mine adversaries.
 [0900209]Ye, Indra, Agni, Kama! come together and cast mine adver-
    saries down beneath me.
   When they have sunk into the deepest darkness, O Agni, with
    thy fire consume their dwellings. [p. a360]
 [0900210]Slay those who are mine enemies, O Kama: headlong to depth
    of blinding darkness hurl them.
   Reft be they all of manly strength and vigour! Let them not
    have a single day's existence.
 [0900211]Kama hath slain those who were mine opponents, and given me
    ample room to grow and prosper.
   Let the four regions bow them down before me, and let the
    six expanses bring me fatness.
 [0900212]Let them drift downward like a boat torn from the rope that
    held it fast.
   There is no turning back for those whom our keen arrows have
    repelled.
 [0900213]Agni averts, Indra averts, and Soma: may the averting Gods
    avert this foeman.
 [0900214]To be avoided by his friends, detested, repelled, with few men
    round him, let him wander.
   Yea, on the earth descend the lightning-flashes: may the strong
   God destroy your adversaries.
 [0900215]This potent lightning nourishes things shaken, and things un-
    shaken yet, and all the thunders.
   May the Sun, rising with his wealth and splendour, drive in
    victorious might my foemen downward.
 [0900216]Thy firm and triply-barred protection, Kama! thy spell, made
    weapon-proof extended armour
   With that drive thou my foemen to a distance. May cattle, vital
    breath, and life forsake them.
 [0900217]Far from the world wherein we live, O Kama, drive thou my
    foemen with that selfsame weapon
   Wherewith the Gods repelled the fiends, and Indra cast down
    the Dasyus into deepest darkness.
 [0900218]As Gods repelled the Asuras, and Indra down to the lowest
    darkness drove the demons,
   So, Kama, from this world, to distant places, drive thou the
    men who are mine adversaries.
 [0900219]First before all sprang Kama into being. Gods, Fathers, mortal
    men have never matched him.
   Stronger than these art thou, and great for ever. Kama, to thee,
    to thee I offer worship.
 [0900220]Wide as the space which heaven and earth encompass, far as
    the flow of waters, far as Agni, [p. a361]
   Stronger than these art thou, and great for ever. Kama, to thee,
    to thee I offer worship.
 [0900221]Vast as the quarters of the sky and regions that lie between
    them spread in all directions, vast as celestial tracts and views
    of heaven,
   Stronger than these art thou, and great for ever. Kama, to thee,
    to thee I offer worship.
 [0900222]Many as are the bees, and bats, and reptiles, and female serpents
    of the trees, and beetles,
   Stronger art thou than these, and great for ever. Kama, to thee,
    to thee I offer worship.
 [0900223]Stronger art thou than aught that stands or twinkles, stronger
    art thou than ocean, Kama! Manyu!
   Stronger than these art thou, and great for ever. Kama, to thee,
    to thee I offer worship.
  [0900224]Not even Vata is the peer of Kama, not Agni, Chandramas
    the Moon, nor Surya.
   Stronger than these art thou, and great for ever. Kama, to thee,
    to thee I offer worship.
 [0900225]Thy lovely and auspicious forms, O Kama, whereby the thing
    thou wilt becometh real,
   With these come thou and make thy home among us, and make
    malignant thoughts inhabit elsewhere.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a362]

  

HYMN III

  

On the consecration of a newly built house

[0900301]We loose the ties and fastenings of the house that holds all
    precious things,
   The bands of pillars and of stays, the ties of beams that form
    the roof.
 [0900302]All-wealthy House! each knot and band, each cord that is
    attached to thee
   I with my spell untie, as erst Brihaspati disclosed the cave.
 [0900303]He drew them close, he pressed them fast, he made thy knotted.
    bands secure:
   With Indra's help we loose them as a skilful Slaughterer severs
    joints.
 [0900304]We loose the bands of thy bamboos, of bolts, of fastening, of
    thatch,
   We loose the ties of thy side-posts, O House that holdest all we
    prize.
 [0900305]We loosen here the ties and bands of straw in bundles, and of
    clamps,
   Of all that compasses and binds the Lady Genius of the Home.
 [0900306]We loose the loops which men have bound within thee, loops
    to tie and hold.
   Be gracious, when erected, to our bodies, Lady of the Home.
 [0900307]Store-house of Soma, Agni's hall, the ladies' bower, the resi-
    dence,
   The seat of Gods art thou, O Goddess House. [p. a363]
 [0900308]We with our incantation loose the net that hath a thousand.
    eyes.
   The diadem, securely tied and laid upon the central beam.
 [0900309]The man who takes thee as his own, and he who was thy builder,.
   House!
   Both these, O Lady of the Home, shall live to long-extended'
    years.
 [0900310]There let her come to meet this man. Firm, strongly fastened,.
    and prepared
   Art thou whose several limbs and joints we part and loosen one
    by one.
 [0900311]He who collected timber for the work and built thee up, O
   House,
   Made thee for coming progeny, Prajapati, the Lord Supreme.
 [0900312]Homage to him! We worship too the giver and the Mansion's
    lord:
   Homage to Agni! to the man who serves at holy rites for thee.
 [0900313]Homage to kine and steeds! to all that shall be born within the
    house
   We loose the bonds that fasten thee, mother of multitudes to
    come!
 [0900314]Agni thou shelterest within, and people with domestic beasts.
   We loose the bonds that fasten thee, mother of multitudes to
    come!
 [0900315]All space that lies between the earth and heaven, therewith I
    take this house for thy possession,
   And all that measures out the air's mid-region I make a hollow
    to contain thy treasures. Therewith I take the house for his
    possession.
 [0900316]Rich in prosperity, rich in milk, founded and built upon the
    earth,
   Injure not thy receivers, House who holdest food of every sort!'
 [0900317]Grass-covered, clad with straw, the house, like Night, gives rest
    to man and beast.
   Thou standest, built upon the earth, like a she-elephant, borne
    on feet.
 [0900318]I loosen and remove from thee thy covering formed by mats of
    reed.
   What Varuna hath firmly closed Mitra shall ope at early morn. [p. a364]
 [0900319]May Indra, Agni, deathless Gods, protect the house where
   Soma dwells,
   House that was founded with the prayer, built and erected by
    the wise.
 [0900320]Nest upon nest hath been imposed, compartment on compart-
    ment laid:
   There man shall propagate his kind, and there shall everything
    born.
 [0900321]Within the house constructed with two side-posts, or with four,
    or six.
   Built with eight side-posts, or with ten, lies Agni like a babe
    unborn.
 [0900322]Turned to thee, House! I come to thee, innocent, turned to
    welcome me:
   For Fire and Water are within, the first chief door of sacrifice.
 [0900323]Water that kills Consumption, free from all Consumption, here
   I bring.
   With Agni, the immortal one, I enter and possess the house.
 [0900324]Lay thou no cord or noose on us: a weighty burthen, still be
    light!
   Withersoever be our will, O House, we bear thee like a bride.
 [0900325]Now from the east side of the house to the Great Power be
    homage paid!
   Hail to the Gods whose due is Hail!
 [0900326]Now from the south side of the house, etc.
 [0900327]Now from the west side of the house, etc.
 [0900328]Now from the north side of the house, etc.
 [0900329]So from the mansion's every side to the Great Power be homage
    paid!
   Hail to the Gods whose due is Hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a365]

  

HYMN IV

  

A glorification of the typical sacrificial bull

[0900401]The Bull, fierce, thousandfold, filled full of vigour, bearing
    within his flanks all forms and natures,
   Brihaspati's Steer, hath stretched the thread, bestowing bliss on
    the worshipper, the liberal giver.
 [0900402]He who at first became the Waters' model, a match for everyone,
    like Earth the Goddess;
   The husband of the cows, the young calves' father, may be
    secure us thousandfold abundance.
 [0900403]Masculine, pregnant, stedfast. full of vigour, the Bull sustains a
    trunk of goodly treasure.
   May Agni Jatavedas bear him offered, on pathways traversed by
    the Gods, to Indra. [p. a366]
 [0900404]The husband of the cows, the young calves' father, father is he
    of mighty water-eddies.
   Calf, after-birth, new milk drawn hot, and biestings, curds, butter,
    that is his best genial humour.
 [0900405]He is the Gods' allotted share and bundle, essence of waters,
    and of plants, and butter.
   Sakra elected him, the draught of Soma. What was his body
    was a lofty mountain.
 [0900400]6. A beaker filled with Soma juice thou bearest. framer of forms,
    begetter of the cattle.
   Kindly to us be these thy wombs here present, and stay for us,
   O Axe, those that are yonder.
 [0900407]He bears oblation, and his seed is butter. Thousand-fold plenty;
    sacrifice they call him.
   May he, the Bull, wearing the shape of Indra, come unto us, O
   Gods, bestowed, with blessing.
 [0900408]Both arms of Varuna, and Indra's vigour, the Maruts' hump is
    he, the Asvins' shoulders.
   They who are sages, bards endowed with wisdom, call him
   Brihaspati compact and heightened.
 [0900409]Thou, vigorous, reachest to the tribes of heaven. Thee they call
   Indra, thee they call Sarasvan.
   Turned to one aim, that Brahman gives a thousand who offers
    up the Bull as his oblation.
 [0900410]Brihaspati, Savitar gave thee vital vigour: thy breath was
    brought from Tvashtar and from Vayu.
   In thought I offer thee in air's mid-region. Thy sacrificial grass
    be Earth and Heaven!
 [0900411]Let the priest joyfully extol the limbs and members of the Bull
   Who moved and roared among the kine as Indra moves among
    the Gods.
 [0900412]The sides must be Anumati's, and both rib-pieces Bhaga's share,
   Of the knee-bones hath Mitra said, Both these are mine, and
    only mine.
 [0900413]The Adityas claim the hinder parts, the loins must be Brihas-
    pati's.
   Vata, the God, receives the tail: he stirs the plants and herbs
    therewith,
 [0900414]To Surya they assigned the skin, to Sinivali inward parts. [p. a367]
   The Slaughterer hath the feet, they said, when they distributed
    the Bull.
 [0900415]They made a jest of kindred's curse: a jar of Soma juice was set,
   What time the deities, convened, assigned the Bull's divided
    parts.
 [0900416]They gave the hooves to tortoises, to Sarama scraps of the feet:
   His undigested food they gave to worms and things that creep
    and crawl.
 [0900417]That Bull, the husband of the kine, pierces the demons with his
    horns,
   Banishes famine with his eye, and hears good tidings with his
    ears.
 [0900418]With hundred sacrifices he worships: the fires consume him not:
   All Gods promote the Braman who offers the Bull in sacrifice.
 [0900419]He who hath given away the Bull to Brahmans frees and cheers
    his soul.
   In his own cattle-pen he sees the growth and increase of his
    cows.
 [0900420]Let there be cattle, let there be bodily strength and progeny:
   All this may the Gods kindly grant to him who gives away the
   Bull.
 [0900421]Indra here verily hath rejoiced: let him bestow conspicuous
    wealth.
   May he draw forth at will from yonder side of heaven a deft
    cow, good to milk, whose calf is never wanting.
 [0900422]With close connexion mingle with the cows in this our cattle-
    pen:
   Mingle, the Bull's prolific flow, and, Indra! thine heroic
    strength!
 [0900423]Here we restore this Bull, your youthful leader: sporting with
    him, go, wander at your pleasure.
   Ne'er, wealthy ones! may he be reft of offspring; and do ye
    favour us with growth of riches.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a368]

  

HYMN V

  

A glorification of a sacrificial goat

[0900501]Seize him and bring him hither. Let him travel. foreknowing, to
    the regions of the pious.
   Crossing in many a place the mighty darkness, let the Goat
    mount to the third heaven above us.
 [0900502]I bring thee hither as a share for Indra; prince, at this sacrifice,.
    for him who worships.
   Grasp firmly from behind all those who hate us: so let the sacri-
    ficer's men be sinless.
 [0900503]Wash from his feet all trace of evil-doing: foreknowing, with
    cleansed hooves let him go upward.
   Gazing on many a spot, crossing the darkness, let the Goat
    mount to the third heaven above us.
 [0900504]Cut up this skin with the grey knife, Dissector! dividing joint
    from joint, and mangle nothing
   Do him no injury: limb by limb arrange him, and send him up
    to the third cope of heaven.
 [0900505]With verse upon the fire I set the caldron: pour in the water;
    lay him down within it! [p. a369]
   Encompass him with fire, ye Immolators. Cooked, let him reach
    the world where dwell the righteous.
 [0900506]Hence come thou forth, vexed by no pain or torment. Mount to
    the third heaven from the heated vessel.
   As fire out of the fire hast thou arisen. Conquer and win this
    lucid world of splendour.
 [0900507]The Goat is Agni: light they call him, saying that living man
    must give him to the Brahman.
   Given in this world by a devout believer, the Goat dispels and
    drives afar the darkness.
 [0900508]Let the Panchaudana Goat, about to visit the three lights, pass
    away in five divisions.
   Go midst the pious who have paid their worship, and parted,
    dwell on the third cope of heaven.
 [0900509]Rise to that world, O Goat, where dwell the righteous: pass, like
    a Sarabha veiled, all difficult places.
   The Goat Panchaudana, given to a Brahman, shall with all ful-
    ness satisfy the giver.
 [0900510]The Goat Panchaudana, given to a Brahman, sets the bestower
    on the pitch of heaven,
   In the third vault, third sky, third ridge. One only Cow omni-
    form art thou, that yields all wishes.
 [0900511]That is the third light that is yours, ye Fathers. He gives the
   Goat Panchaudana to the Brahman.
   Given in this world by the devout believer, the Goat dispels and
    drives afar the darkness.
 [0900512]Seeking the world of good men who have worshipped, he gives
    the Goat Panchaudana to the Brahman.
   Win thou this world as thy complete possession. Auspicious
    unto us be he, accepted!
 [0900513]Truly the Goat sprang from the glow of Agni, inspired as sage
    with all a sage's power.
   Sacrifice, filled, filled full, offered with Vashat--this let the Gods
    arrange.at proper seasons.
 [0900514]Home-woven raiment let him give, and gold as guerdon to the
    priests.
   So he obtains completely all celestial and terrestrial worlds.
 [0900515]Near to thee, Goat! approach these streams of Soma, divine,
    distilling meath, bedecked with butter! [p. a370]
   Stay thou the earth and sky and fix them firmly up on the seven-
    rayed pitch and height of heaven.
 [0900516]Unborn art thou, O Goat: to heaven thou goest. Though thee
   Angirases knew that radiant region.
   So may I know that holy world.
 [0900517]Convey our sacrifice to heaven, that it may reach the Gods, with
    that
   Whereby thou, Agni, bearest wealth in thousands, and all pre-
    cious things.
 [0900518]The Goat Panchaudana, when cooked, transporteth, repelling
   Nirriti, to the world of Svarga.
   By him may we win worlds which Surya brightens.
 [0900519]The droppings of the Odanas attending the Goat which I have
    lodged with priest or people
   May all this know us in the world of virtue, O Agni, at the
    meeting of the pathways.
 [0900520]This Unborn cleft apart in the beginning: his breast became the
    earth, his back was heaven.
   His middle was the air, his sides the regions; the hollows of his
    belly formed both oceans.
 [0900521]His eyes were Truth and Right. The whole together was Truth:
   Viraj his head and Faith his breathing.
   This Goat Panchaudana was indeed a sacrifice unlimited.
 [0900522]A boundless sacrifice he performs, he wins himself a boundless
    world:
   Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with a priestly fee.
 [0900523]Let him not break the victim's bones, let him not suck the
    marrow out.
   Let the man, taking him entire, here, even here deposit him.
 [0900524]This, even this is his true form: the man uniteth him therewith.
   Food, greatness, strength he bringeth him who giveth the Goat
   Panchaudana illumed with guerdon.
 [0900525]The five gold pieces, and the five new garments, and the five
    milch-kine yield him all his wishes.
   Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with a priestly
    fee.
 [0900526]The five gold pieces, area light to light him, robes become armour
    to defend his body;
   He winneth Svarga as his home who giveth the Goat Panchaud-
    ana illumed with bountry. [p. a371]
 [0900527]When she who hath been wedded finds a second husband after-
    ward,
   The twain shall not be parted if they give the Goat Panchaud-
    ana.
 [0900528]One world with the re-wedded wife becomes the second hus-
    band's home.
   Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with the priestly fee.
 [0900529]They who have given a cow who drops a calf each season, or an
    ox,
   A coverlet, a robe, or gold, go to the loftiest sphere of heaven.
 [0900530]Himself, the father and the son, the grandson, and the father's
    sire,
   Mother, wife, her who bore his babes, all the beloved ones I call.
 [0900531]The man who knows the season named the Scorching--the Goat
   Pafichaudana is this scorching season
   He lives himself, he verily burns up his hated rival's fame,
   Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with the priestly
    fee.
 [0900532]The man who knows the season called the Working takes to
    himself the active fame, his hated rival's active fame.
   The Goat Panchaudana is this Working season.
   He lives himself, etc.
 [0900533]The man who knows the season called the Meeting takes to him-
    self the gathering fame, his hated rival's gathering fame.
   The Goat Panchaudana is this Meeting season.
 [0900534]The man who knows the called the Swelling takes to himself the
    swelling fame, his hated rival's swelling fame.
   The Goat Panchaudana is this Swelling season.
   He lives himself, etc.
 [0900535]The man who knows the season called the Rising takes to him-
    self the rising fame, his hated rival's rising fame.
   The Goat Panchaudana in this Rising season.
 [0900536]The man who knows the season called Surpassing takes to him-
    self the conquering fame, his hated rival's conquering fame.
   The Goat Panchaudana is this Conquering season.
   He lives himself, he verily burns up his hated rival's fame
   Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with a priestly fee.
 [0900537]He cooks the Goat and the five boiled rice messes. May the uni-
    ted Quarters, all accordant, and intermediate points, accept
    him from thee. [p. a372]
 [0900538]May these preserve him for thee. Here I offer t o these the molten
    butter as oblation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a373]

  

HYMN VI

  

A glorification of hospitable reception of guests

[0900601]Whoso will know Prayer with immediate knowledge, whose mem-
    bers are the stuff, whose spine the verses:
 [0900602]Whose hairs are psalms, whose heart is called the Yajus, whose
    coverlet is verily oblation--
 [0900603]Verily when a host looks at his guests he looks at the place of
    sacrifice to the Gods.
 [0900604]When he salutes them reverently he undergoes preparation for
    a religious ceremony: when he calls for water, he solemnly
    brings sacrificial water.
 [0900605]The water that is solemnly brought at a sacrifice is this same
    water.
 [0900606]The libation which they bring; the sacrificial victim dedicated
    to Agni and Soma which is tied to the post, that, verily, is
    this man.
 [0900607]When they arrange dwelling-rooms they arrange the sacred
    chamber and the shed for housing the Soma cars.
 [0900608]What they spread upon the floor is just Sacrificial Grass.
 [0900609]With the couch that the men bring, he wins for himself the
    world of Svarga.
 [0900610]The pillow-coverings that they bring are the green sticks that
    surround the sacrificial altar.
 [0900611]The ointment that they bring for injunction is just clarified
    liquid butter.
 [0900612]The food they bring before the general distribution represents
    the two sacrificial cakes of rice meal. [p. a374]
 [0900613]When they call the man who prepares food they summon the
    preparer of oblation.
 [0900614]The grains of rice and barley that are selected are just filaments
    of the Soma plant.
 [0900615]The pestle and mortar are really the stones of the Soma press.
 [0900616]The winnowing-basket is the filter, the chaff the Soma dregs,
    the water, the pressing-gear.
 [0900617]Spoon, ladle, fork, stirring-prong are the wooden Soma tubs;
    the earthen cooking-pots are the mortar-shaped Soma
    vessels; this earth is just the black-antelope's skin.
 [0900618]Or the host acts in this way to a Yajamana's Brahman: when
    he looks at the furniture and utensils he says, More here t
    yet more here.
 [0900619]When he says, Bring out more, he lengthens his life thereby.
 [0900620]He brings oblations: he makes the men sit down.
 [0900621]As the guest of the seated company he himself offers up
    sacrifice.
 [0900622]With ladle, with hand, in life, at the sacrificial post, with cry of
   Ladle! with exclamation of Vashat!
 [0900623]Now these guests, as priests beloved or not beloved, bring one
    to the world of Svarga.
 [0900624]He who hath this knowledge should not eat hating, should not
    eat the food of one who hates him, nor of one who is doubt-
    ful, nor of one who is undecided.
 [0900625]This man whose food they eat hath all his wickedness blotted
    out.
 [0900626]All that man's sin whose food they do not eat remains unblot-
    ted out.
 [0900627]The man who supplies food hath always pressing stones adjusted,
    a wet Soma filter, well prepared religious rites, and mental
    power to complete the arranged sacrifice.
 [0900628]The arranged sacrifice of the man who offers food is a sacrifice
    to Prajapati.
 [0900629]The man who offers food follows the steps of Prajapati.
 [0900630]The fire of the guests is the Ahavaniya, the fire in the dwelling
    is the Garhapatya, that whereon they cook food is the South-
    ern Sacrificial Fire.
 [0900631]Now that man who eats before the guest eats up the sacrifice
    and the merit of the house.
 [0900632]He devours the milk and the sap: [p. a375]
 [0900633]And the vigour and prosperity.
 [0900634]And the progeny and the cattle:
 [0900635]And the fame and reputation.
 [0900636]The man who eats before the guest eats up the glory and the
    understanding of the house.
 [0900637]The man should not eat before the guest who is a Brahman
    versed in holy lore.
 [0900638]When the guest hath eaten he should eat. This is the rule for
    the animation of the sacrifice and the preservation of its
    continuity.
 [0900639]Now the sweetest portion, the produce of the cow, milk, or
    flesh, that verily he should not eat.
 [0900640]The man who having this knowledge pours out milk and offers
    it wins for himself as much thereby as he gains by the perfor-
    mance of a very successful Agnishtoma sacrifice.
 [0900641]The man who having this knowledge pours out clarified butter
    and offers it wins for himself thereby as much as he gains by
    the performance of a very successful Atiratra sacrifice.
 [0900642]He who pours out mead and offers it wins for himself thereby
    as much as he gains by the performance of a very successful
   Sattrasadya sacrifice.
 [0900643]He who having this knowledge besprinkles flesh and offers it
    wins for himself thereby as much as he gains by the perfor-
    mance of a very successful Twelve-Day sacrifice.
 [0900644]The man who having this knowledge pours out water and offers
    it obtains a resting-place for the procreation of living beings
    and becomes dear to living beings, even the man who having
    this knowledge pours out water and offers it.
 [0900645]For him Dawn murmurs, and Savitar sings the prelude; Brihas-
    pati chants with vigour, and Tvashtar joins in with increase;
    the Visve Devah take up conclusion. He who hath this know-
    ledge is the abiding-place of welfare, of progeny, and of
    cattle.
 [0900646]For him the rising Sun murmurs, and Early Morning sings the
    prelude; Noon chants the psalm, Afternoon joins in; the
    setting Sun takes up the conclusion. He who hath this know-
    ledge is the abiding place of welfare, of progeny, and of
    cattle.
 [0900647]For him the Rain-cloud murmurs when present, sings the pre-
    lude when thundering, joins in when lightening, chants the [p. a376]
    psalm when raining, and takes up the conclusion when it stays
    the downpour. He who hath this knowledge is the abiding-
    place of welfare, of progeny, and of cattle.
 [0900648]He looks at the guests, he utters a gentle sound; he speaks, he
    signs the prelude; he calls for water, he chants the psalm; he
    offers the residue of the sacrifice, he takes up the conclusion.
 [0900649]When he summons the door-keeper he gives instruction.
 [0900650]He (the door-keeper) pronounces the sacrificial formula in his
    answer to what he hears.
 [0900651]When the attendants with vessels in their hands, foremost and
    hindmost, come in, they are just the priests who manage the
   Soma cups.
 [0900652]Not one of them is incompetent to sacrifice.
 [0900653]Or if the host, having offered food to his guest, goes up to the
    house, he virtually enters the bath of purification.
 [0900654]When he distributes food he distributes priestly fees; what he
    performs he asks as favour.
 [0900655]He having been invited on earth, regales, invited in that, which
    wears all various forms on earth.
 [0900656]He, having been invited in air, regales, invited, in that which
    wears all various forms in air.
 [0900657]He having been invited in the sky, regales, invited, in that which
    wears all various forms in the sky.
 [0900658]He, having been invited among the gods, regales, invited in that
    which wears all various forms among the Gods.
 [0900659]He, having been invited in the worlds, regales, invited, in that
    which wears all various forms in the worlds.
 [0900660]He, having been invited hath been invited.
 [0900661]He gains this world and the world yonder.
 [0900662]He who hath this knowledge wins the luminous spheres.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a377]

  

HYMN VII

  

A glorification of the typically bull and cow

[0900701]Prajapati and Parameshthin are the two horns, Indra is the
    head, Agni the forehead, Yama the joint of the neck.
 [0900702]King Soma is the brain, Sky is the upper jaw, Earth is the
    lower jaw.
 [0900703]Lightning is the tongue, the Maruts are the teeth, Revati is the
    neck, the Krittikas are the shoulders, the Gharma s the
    shoulder-bar.
 [0900704]His universe is Vayu, Svarga is his world, Krishpadram is the
    tendons and Vertebrae. [p. a378]
 [0900705]The Syena ceremony is the breast, Air is the region of the belly,.
   Brihaspati is the hump, Brihati the breast-bone and cartilages
    of the ribs.
 [0900706]The consorts of the Gods are the ribs, the attendants are ribs.
 [0900707]Mitra and Varuna are the shoulder-blades. Tvashtar and Arya-
    man the fore-arms, Mahadeva is the arms.
 [0900708]Indrani is the hinder parts, Vayu the tail, Pavamana the hair.
 [0900709]Priestly rank and princely power are the hips, and strength is.
    the thigh.
 [0900710]Dhatar and Savitar are the two knee-bones, the Gandharvas are
    the legs the Apsarases are bits of the feet, Aditi is the hooves.
 [0900711]Thought is the heart, intelligence is the liver, law the pericar-
    dium.
 [0900712]Hunger is the belly, refreshing drink is the rectum, mountains.
    are the inward parts.
 [0900713]Wrath is the kidneys, anger the testes, offspring the generative
    organ.
 [0900714]The river is the womb, the Lords of the Rain are the breasts,.
    the thunder is the udder.
 [0900715]The All-embracing (Aditi) is the hide, the herbs are her hair,.
    and the Lunar Mansions her form.
 [0900716]The hosts of Gods are her entrails, man are her bowels, and
    demons her abdomen.
 [0900717]Rakshasas are the blood, the Other Folk are the contents of the
   Stomach.
 [0900718]The rain-cloud is her fat, her resting-place her marrow.
 [0900719]Sitting he is Agni, when he hath stood up he is the Asvins.
 [0900720]Standing east-wards he is Indra, standing southwards, Yama.
 [0900721]Standing westwards he is Dhatar, standing northwards Savitar.
 [0900722]When he hath got his grass he is King Soma.
 [0900723]He is Mitra when he looks about him, and when he hath turned
    round he is joy.
 [0900724]When he is yoking he belongs to the All-Gods, when yoked he
    is Prajapati, when unyoked he is All.
 [0900725]This verily is omniform, wearing all forms, bovine-formed.
 [0900726]Upon him wait omniform beasts, wearing every shape, each one
    who hath this knowledge.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a379]

  

HYMN VIII

  

A charm for the cure of various diseases connected with Consumption

[0900801]Each pain and ache that racks the head, earache, and erysipelas,.
   All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with this our
    spell.
 [0900802]From both thine ears, from parts thereof, thine earache, and the
    throbbing pain,
   All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with this our
    spell.
 [0900803]So that Consumption may depart forth from thine ears and from.
    thy mouth,
   All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with this our
    spell.
 [0900804]The malady that makes one deaf, the malady that makes one
    blind,
   All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with this our
    spell.
 [0900805]The throbbing pain in all thy limbs that rends thy frame with
    fever-throes,
   All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with this our
    spell.
 [0900806]The malady whose awful look makes a man quiver with alarm,
   Fever whom every Autumn brings we charm away with this our
    spell. [p. a380]
 [0900807]Disease that creeps about the thighs and, after, reaches both the
    groins,
   Consumption from thine inward parts we charm away with this
    our spell.
 [0900808]If the disease originates from love, from hatred, from the heart,
   Forth from the heart and from the limbs we charm the wasting
    malady.
 [0900809]The yellow Jaundice from thy limbs, and Colic from the parts
    within,
   And Phthisis from thine inward soul we charm away with this
    our spell.
 [0900810]Let wasting malady turn to dust, become the water of disease.
   I have evoked the poison-taint of all Consumptions out of thee.
 [0900811]Forth from the hollow let it run, and rumbling sounds from
    thine inside.
   I have evoked the poison-taint of all Consumptions out of thee.
 [0900812]Forth from thy belly and thy lungs, forth from thy navel and
    thy heart.
   I have evoked the poison taint of all Consumptions out of thee.
 [0900813]The penetrating stabs of pain which rend asunder crown and
    head,
   Let them depart and pass away, free from disease and harming
    not.
 [0900814]The pangs that stab the heart and reach the breast-bone and
    connected parts,
   Let them depart and pass away, free from disease and harming
    not.
 [0900815]The stabs that penetrate the sides and pierce their way along the
    ribs,
   Let them depart and pass away, free from disease and harming
    not.
 [0900816]The penetrating pangs that pierce thy stomach as they shoot
    across,
   Let them depart and pass away, free from disease and harming
    not.
 [0900817]The pains that through the bowels creep, disordering the inward
    parts,
   Let them depart and pass away, free from disease and harming
    not. [p. a381]
 [0900818]The pains that suck the marrow out, and rend and tear the bones
    apart,
   May they speed forth and pass away, free from disease and
    harming not.
 [0900819]Consumptions with their Colic pains which make thy limbs
    insensible
   I have evoked the poison-taint of all Consumptions out of thee.
 [0900820]Of piercing pain, of abscesses, rheumatic ache, ophthalmia--
   I have evoked the poison-taint of all Consumptions out of thee.
 [0900821]I have dispelled the piercing pains from feet, knees, hips, and
    hinder parts,
   And spine, and from the neck and nape the malady that racked
    the head.
 [0900822]Sound are the skull-bones of thy head and thy heart's beat is
    regular.
   Thou, Sun, arising with thy beams hast chased away the head's
    disease, hast stilled the pain that racked the limbs.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a382]

  

HYMN IX

  

Enunciation of mystico-theological and cosmological doctrine

[0900901]The second brother of this lovely Hotar, hoary with eld, is the
    voracious Lightning.
   The third is he whose back is balmed with butter. Here have I
    seen the King with seven male children.
 [0900902]The seven make the one-wheeled chariot ready: bearing seven
    names the single Courser draws it.
   The wheel, three-naved, is sound and undecaying: thereon these
    worlds of life are all dependent.
 [0900903]The seven who on this seven-wheeled car are mounted have
    horses, seven in tale, who draw them onward.
   Seven sisters utter songs of praise together, in whom the Cows'
    seven names are held and treasured.
 [0900904]Who hath beheld at birth the Primal Being, when She who hath
    no bone supports the bony?
   Where is the blood of earth, the life, the spirit? Who may ap-
    proach the man who knows, to ask it?
 [0900905]Let him who knoweth presently declare it, this lovely Bird's
    securely-founded station.
   Forth from his head the Cows draw milk, and wearing his ves-
    ture with their foot have drunk the water.
 [0900906]Unripe in mind, in spirit undiscerning, I ask of these the Gods'
    established places.
   High up above the yearling Calf the sages, to form a web, their
    own seven threads have woven.
 [0900907]Here, ignorant, I ask the wise who know it, as one who knows
    not, for the sake of knowledge,
   What is That One, who in the Unborn's image hath stablished
    and fixed firm this world's six regions.
 [0900908]The Mother gave the Sire his share of Order. With thought at
    first she wedded him in spirit.
   She, coyly loth, was filled with dew prolific. With adoration
    men approached to praise her.
 [0900909]Yoked was the Mother to the boon Cow's car-pole; in humid
    folds of cloud the infant rested.
   Then the Calf lowed and looked upon the Mother, the Cow
    who wears all shapes in three directions.
 [0900910]Bearing three mothers and three fathers, single he stood erect:
    they never made him weary. [p. a383]
   On yonder heaven's high ridge they speak together in speech
    not known to all, themselves all-knowing.
 [0900911]Upon the five-spoked wheel revolving ever, whereon all crea-
    tures rest and are dependent,
   The axle, heavy-laden, is not heated: the nave from ancient
    time remains unheated.
 [0900912]They call him in the farther half of heaven the Sire five-footed,
    of twelve forms, wealthy in watery store.
   These others, later still, say that he takes his stand upon a seven-
    wheeled car, six-spoked, whose sight is clear.
 [0900913]Formed with twelve spokes, too strong for age to weaken, this
    wheel of during Order rolls round heaven.
   Herein established, joined in pairs together, seven hundred sons
    and twenty stand, O Agni.
 [0900914]The wheel revolves, unwasting, with its felly: ten draw it, yoked
    to the far-stretching car-pole.
   Girt by the region moves the eye of Surya, on whom dependent
    rest all living creatures.
 [0900915]They told me these were males, though truly females. He who
    hath eyes sees this, the blind discerns not.
   The son who is a sage hath comprehended: who knows this
    rightly is his father's father.
 [0900916]Of the co-born they call the seventh single-born: the six twin,
    pairs are called the Rishis, sons of Gods.
   Their good gifts sought of men are ranged in order due, and,
    various, form by form, move for their guiding Lord.
 [0900917]Beneath the upper realm, above this lower, bearing her Calf at
    foot, the Cow hath risen.
   Whitherward, to what place hath she departed? Where doth she
    calve? Not in this herd of cattle.
 [0900918]Who, that the father of this Calf discerneth beneath the upper
    realm, above the lower,
   Showing himself a sage, may here declare him? Whence hath
    the godlike spirit had its rising?
 [0900919]Those that come hitherward they call departing, those that depart
    they call directed hither.
   Whatever ye have made, Indra and Soma! steeds draw, as' twere,
    yoked to the region's car-pole.
 [0900920]Two Birds with fair wings, knit with bonds of friendship, in the
    same sheltering tree have found a refuge, [p. a384]
   One of the twain eats the sweet Fig-tree's berry: the other, eat-
    ing not, regardeth only.
 [0900921]The tree whereon the fine Birds eat the sweetness, where they
    all rest and procreate their offspring
   Upon the top, they say the fruit is luscious: none gaineth it who
    knoweth not the Father.
 [0900922]Where the fine birds hymn ceaselessly their portion of life eter-
    nal, and the sacred synods.
   There is the Universe's Guard and Keeper who, wise hath
    entered into me the simple.

[p. a385]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. a386]

  

HYMN X

  

Continuation of Hymn 9

[0901001]How on the Gayatri the Gayatri was based; how from the
   Trishtup they fashioned the Trishtup forth:
   How on the Jagati was based the Jagati--they who know this
    have won themselves immortal life.
 [0901002]With Gayatri he measures out the praise-song, Saman with
    praise-song, triplet with the Trishtup, [p. a387]
   The triplet with the two or four-foot measure, and with the
    syllable they form seven metres.
 [0901003]With Jagati the flood in heaven he stablished, and saw the Sun
    in the Rathantara Saman.
   Gayatri hath, they say, three logs for burning: hence it excels
    in majesty and vigour.
 [0901004]I invocate this Milch-cow good at milking, so that the Milker,
    deft of hand, may milk her.
   May "Savitar give goodliest stimulation. The caldron is made
    hot: he will proclaim it.
 [0901005]She, Lady of all treasures, hath come hither, yearning in spirit
    for her calf, and lowing.
   May this Cow yield her milk for both the Asvins, and may she
    prosper to our high advantage.
 [0901006]The Cow hath lowed after her blinking youngling: she licks his
    forehead as she lows, to form it.
   His mouth she fondly calls to her warm udder, and suckles him
    with milk while gently lowing.
 [0901007]He also snorts, by whom encompassed round the Cow lows as
    she closely clings to him who sheds the rain.
   She with her shrilling cries hath humbled mortal men, and turn-
    ed to lightning, hath stripped off her covering robe.
 [0901008]That which hath breath and life and speed and motion lies
    firmly stablished in the midst of houses.
   The living moves by powers of the departed: the immortal is
    the brother of the mortal.
 [0901009]The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber, who
    runs his circling course with many round him.
   Behold the God's high wisdom in its greatness: he who died
    yesterday to-day is living.
 [0901010]He who hath made him doth not comprehend him: from him
    who saw him surely he is hidden.
   He, yet enveloped in his mother's bosom, source of much life,
    hath sunk into destruction.
 [0901011]I saw the Herdsman, him who never stumbles, approaching by
    his pathways and departing.
   He clothed with gathered and diffusive splendours, within the
    worlds continually travels.
 [0901012]Dyaus is our father, our begetter: kinship is here. This great
   Earth is our kin and mother. [p. a388]
   Between the wide-spread world-halves is the birth-place. The
   Father laid the Daughter's germ within it.
 [0901013]I bid thee tell me earth's extremest limit, about the Stallion's
    genial flow I ask thee;
   I ask about the universe's centre, and touching highest heaven
    where Speech abideth.
 [0901014]The earth's most distant limit is this altar: this Soma is the
   Stallion's genial humour;
   This sacrifice the universe's centre: this Brahman highest heaven
    where Speech abideth.
 [0901015]What thing I truly am I know not clearly: mysterious, fettered
    in my mind I wander.
   When the first-born of holy Law approached me, then of this
   Speech I first obtain a portion.
 [0901016]Back, forward goes he, grasped by power inherent, immortal
    born the brother of the mortal.
   Ceaseless they move in opposite directions: men mark the one
    and fail to mark the other.
 [0901017]Seven germs unripened yet are Heaven's prolific seed: their
    functions they maintain by Vishnu's ordinance.
   Endued with wisdom through intelligence and thought, present
    on every side they compass us about.
 [0901018]Upon what syllable of holy praise-hymn, as 'twere their highest
    heaven, the Gods repose them
   Who knows not this, what will he do with praise-hymn? But
    they who know it well sit here assembled.
 [0901019]They, ordering the verse's foot by measure, with the half-verse
    arranged each thing that moveth.
   Prayer was diffused in many forms three-footed thereby the
    world's four regions have their being
 [0901020]Fortunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture, and may we also
    be exceeding wealthy.
   Feed on the grass, O Cow, through all the seasons, and coming
    hitherward drink limpid water.
 [0901021]Forming the water-floods the Cow herself hath lowed, one-foot-
    ed or two-footed or four-footed, she,
   Who hath become eight-footed or acquired nine feet, the uni-
    verse's thousand-syllabled Pankti. From her descend in
    streams the seas of water. [p. a389]
 [0901022]Dark the descent: the birds are golden-coloured. Robed in the
    floods they fly aloft to heaven.
   Again from Order's seat have they descended, and inundated all
    the earth with fatness.
 [0901023]The footless Maid precedeth footed creatures. Who marketh,
   Mitra Varuna! this your doing?
   The Babe unborn supporteth this world's burthen, supporteth
   Right and watcheth Wrong and Falsehood.
 [0901024]Viraj is Speech, and Earth, and Air's mid-region. He is Praja-
    pati, and he is Mrityu.
   He is the Lord Imperial of the Sadhyas. He rules what is and
    what shall be hereafter. May he make me lord of what is and
    shall be.
 [0901025]1 saw from far away the smoke of fuel with spires that rose on
    high o'er that beneath it.
   The heroes cooked and dressed the spotted bullock. These were
    the customs in the days aforetime.
 [0901026]Three with long tresses show in ordered season. One of them
    sheareth when the year is ended.
   One with his powers the universe regardeth. Of one the sweep
    is seen, but not the figure.
 [0901027]Speech hath been measured out in four divisions: the Brahmans
    who have wisdom comprehend them.
   Three, kept in close concealment, cause no motion. Of Speech
    men speak the fourth division only.
 [0901028]They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni; and he is heavenly
    nobly-winged Garutman.
   That which is One bards call by many a title: they call It Agni,
   Yama, Matariswan.

[p. a390] [p. a391] [p. a392]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

BOOK X

  

HYMN I

  

A charm against witchcraft

[1000101]Afar let her depart: away we drive her whom, made with hands,
    all-beautiful,
   Skilled men prepare and fashion like a bride amid her nuptial
    train.
 [1000102]Complete, with head and nose and ears, all-beauteous, wrought
    with magic skill
   Afar let her depart: away we drive her.
 [1000103]Made by a Sidra or a Prince, by priests or women let her go.
   Back to her maker as her kin, like a dame banished by her lord.
 [1000104]I with this salutary herb have ruined all their magic arts,
   The spell which they have cast upon thy field, thy cattle, or thy
    men.
 [1000105]Ill fall on him who doeth ill, on him who curseth fall the
    curse!
   We drive her back that she may slay the man who wrought the
    witchery.
 [1000106]Against her comes the Angirasa, the Priest whose eye is over us.
   Turn back all witcheries and slay those practisers of magic arts.
 [1000107]Whoever said to thee, Go forth against the foeman up the
    stream,
   To him, O Kritya, go thou back. Pursue not us, the sinless
    ones.
 [1000108]He who composed thy limbs with thought as a deft joiner builds
    a car,
   Go to him: thither lies thy way. This man is all unknown to
    thee.
 [1000109]The cunning men, the sorcerers who fashioned thee and held thee
    fast,-- [p. 2]
   This cures and mars their witchery, this, repellent, drives it back
    the way it came. With this we make thee swim.
 [1000110]When we have found her ducked and drenched, a hapless cow
    whose calf hath died,
   Let all my woe depart and let abundant riches come to me.
 [1000111]If, as they gave thy parents aught, they named thee, or at sacri-
    fice,
   From all their purposed evil let these healing herbs deliver thee.
 [1000112]From mention of thy name, from sin against the Fathers or the
   Gods,
   These herbs of healing shall by prayer release thee, by power,
    by holy texts, the milk of .Rishis.
 [1000113]As the wind stirs the dust from earth and drives the rain cloud
    from the sky,
   So, chased and banished by the spell, all misery departs from
    me.
 [1000114]Go with a resonant cry, depart, like a she-ass whose cords are
    loosed.
   Go to thy makers: hence! away! Go driven by the potent
    spell.
 [1000115]This, Kritya, is thy path, we say, and guide thee. We drive thee
    back who hast been sent against us.
   Go by this pathway, breaking loose for onslaught even as a host
    complete with cars and horses.
 [1000116]No path leads hitherward for thee to travel. Turn thee from us:
    far off, thy light is yonder.
   Fly hence across the ninety floods, the rivers most hard to pass.
   Begone, and be not wounded.
 [1000117]As wind the trees, so smite and overthrow them: leave not cow,
    horse, or man of them surviving
   Return, O Kritya, unto those who made thee. Wake them from
    sleep to find that they are childless.
 [1000118]The charm or secret power which they have buried for thee in
    sacred grass, field, cemetery,
   Or spell in household fire which men more cunning have
    wrought against thee innocent and simple,--
 [1000119]That tool of hatred, understood, made ready, stealthy and buried
    deep, have we discovered, [p. 3]
   Let that go back to whence it came, turn thither like a horse
    and kill the children of the sorcerer.
 [1000120]Within our house are swords of goodly iron. Kritya, we know
    thy joints and all their places.
   Arise this instant and begone! What, stranger! art thou seek-
    ing here?
 [1000121]O Kritya, I will cut thy throat and hew thy feet off. Run, be-
    gone!
   Indra and Agni, Guardian Lords of living creatures, shield us
    well!
 [1000122]May Soma, gracious friend, imperial Sovran, and the world's
   Masters look on us with favour.
 [1000123]Bhava and Sarva cast the flash of lightning, the weapon of the
   Gods, against the sinner who made the evil thing, who deals
    in witchcraft!
 [1000124]If thou hast come two-footed or four-footed, made by the
    sorcerer, wrought in perfect beauty,
   Become eight-footed and go hence. Speed back again, thou evil
    one.
 [1000125]Anointed, balmed, and well adorned, bearing all trouble with
    thee, go.
   Even as a daughter knows her sire, so know thy marker, Kritya,
    thou.
 [1000126]Kritya, begone, stay not. Pursue as 'twere the wounded crea-
    ture's track.
   He is the chase, the hunter thou he may not slight or humble thee.
 [1000127]He waits, and aiming with his shaft smites him who first would
    shoot at him,
   And, when the foeman deals a blow before him, following strikes
    him down.
 [1000128]Hearken to this my word; then go thither away whence thou
    hast come; to him who made thee go thou back.
 [1000129]The slaughter of an innocent, O Kritya, is an awful deed. Slay
    not cow, horse, or man of ours.
   In whatsoever place thou art concealed we rouse thee up there-
    from: become thou lighter than a leaf.
 [1000130]If ye be girt about with clouds of darkness, bound as with a
    net.
   We rend and tear all witcheries hence and to their maker send
    them back. [p. 4]
 [1000131]The brood of wizard, sorcerer, the purposer of evil deed.
   Crush thou, O Kritya spare not, kill those practisers of magic
    arts.
 [1000132]As Surya frees himself from depth of darkness, and casts away
    the night and rays of morning,
   So I repel each baleful charm which an enchanter hath pre-
    pared;
   And, as an elephant shakes off the dust, I cast the plague aside.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

HYMN II

  

Purusha, Primeval Man or humanity personified

[1000201]Who framed the heels of Purusha? Who fashioned the flesh of
    him? Who formed and fixed his ankles?
   Who made the openings and well-moulded fingers? Who gave
    him foot-soles and a central station?
 [1000202]Whence did they make the ankles that are under, and the knee-
    bones of Purusha above them?
   What led them onward to the legs' construction? Who planned
    and formed the knees' articulations?
 [1000203]A fourfold frame is fixt with ends connected, and up above the
    knees a yielding belly.
   The hips and thighs, who was their generator, those props where-
    by the trunk grew firmly stablished?
 [1000204]Who and how many were those Gods who fastened the chest of
   Purusha and neck together?
   How many fixed his breasts? Who formed his elbows? How
    many joined together ribs and shoulders?
 [1000205]Who put together both his arms and said, Let him show manly
    strength?
   Who and what God was he who set the shoulderblades upon
    the trunk?
 [1000206]Who pierced the seven openings in the head? Who made these
    ears, these nostrils, eyes, and mouth,
   Through whose surpassing might in all directions bipeds and
    quadrupeds have power of motion?
 [1000207]He set within the jaws the tongue that reaches far, and thereon
    placed Speech the mighty Goddess.
   He wanders to and fro mid living creatures, robed in the waters.
   Who hath understood it?
 [1000208]Who was he, first, of all the Gods who fashioned his skull and
    brain and occiput and forehead,
   The pile that Purusha's two jaws supported? Who was that
   God who mounted up to heaven?
 [1000209]Whence bringeth mighty Purusha both pleasant and unpleasant
    things,
   Of varied sort, sleep, and alarm, fatigue, enjoyments and de-
    lights?
 [1000210]Whence is there found in Purusha want, evil, suffering, dis-
    tress? [p. 6]
   Whence come success, prosperity opulence, thought, and utte-
    rance?
 [1000211]Who stored in him floods turned in all directions, moving diverse
    and formed to flow in rivers,
   Hasty, red, copper-hued, and purple, running all ways in
   Purusha, upward and downward?
 [1000212]Who gave him visible form and shape? Who gave him magni-
    tude and name?
   Who gave him motion, consciousness? Who furnished Purusha
    with feet?
 [1000213]Who wove the vital air in him, who filled him with the down-
    ward breath?
   What God bestowed on Purusha the general pervading air?
 [1000214]What God, what only Deity placed sacrifice in Purusha?
   Who gave him truth and falsehood? Whence came Death and
    immortality?
 [1000215]Who wrapped a garment round him? Who arranged the life he
    hath to live?
   Who granted him the boon of speech? Who gave this fleetness
    to his feet?
 [1000216]Through whom did he spread waters out, through whom did he
    make Day to shine?
   Through whom did he enkindle Dawn and give the gift of even-
    tide?
 [1000217]Who set the seed in him and said, Still be the thread of life spun
    out?
   Who gave him intellect besides? Who gave him voice and
    gestic power?
 [1000218]Through whom did he bedeck the earth, through whom did he
    encompass heaven?
   Whose might made Purusha surpass the mountains and created
    things?
 [1000219]Through whom seeks he Parjanya out, and Soma of the piercing
    sight?
   Through whom belief and sacrifice? Through whom was spirit
    laid in him?
 [1000220]What leads him to the learned priest? What leads him to this
   Lord Supreme?
   How doth he gain this Agni? By whom hath he measured out
    the year? [p. 7]
 [1000221]He, Brahma gains the learned priest, he Brahma, gains this Lord
   Supreme.
   As Brahma, Man wins Agni here Brahma hath measured out the
    year.
 [1000222]Through whom doth he abide with Gods? Through whom with
    the Celestial Tribes?
   Why is this other called a star? Why is this called the Real
   Power?
 [1000223]Brahma inhabits with the Gods, Brahma among the Heavenly
   Tribes.
   Brahma this other star is called. Brahma is called the Real
   Power.
 [1000224]By whom was this our earth disposed? By whom was heaven
    placed over it?
   By whom was this expanse of air raised up on high and stre-
    tched across?
 [1000225]By Brahma was this earth disposed: Brahma is sky arranged
    above.
   Brahma is this expanse of air lifted on high and stretched
    across.
 [1000226]Together, with his needle hath Atharvan sewn his head and
    heart.
   And Pavamana hovered from his head on high above his brain.
 [1000227]That is indeed Atharvan's head, the well-closed casket of the
   Gods.
   Spirit and Food and Vital Air protect that head from injury.
 [1000228]Stationed on high, Purusha hath pervaded all regions spread
    aloft and stretched transversely.
   He who knows Brahma's cattle, yea, the fort whence Purusha is
    named,
 [1000229]Yea, knows that fort of Brahma girt about with immortality,
   Brahma and Brahmas have bestowed sight, progeny, and life on
    him.
 [1000230]Sight leaves him not, breath quits not him before life's natural
    decay,
   Who knows the fort of Brahma, yea, the fort whence Purusha
    is named.
 [1000231]The fort of Gods, impregnable, with circles eight and portals
    nine, [p. 8]
   Contains a golden treasure-chest, celestial, begirt with light.
 [1000232]Men deep in lore of Brahma know that Animated Being which
   Dwells in the golden treasure-chest that hath three spokes and
    three supports.
 [1000233]Brahma hath passed within the fort, the golden castle; ne'er
    subdued,
   Bright with excessive brilliancy, compassed with glory round
    about.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

HYMN III

  

Purusha, Primeval Man or humanity personified

[1000301]Here is my charm the Varana, slayer of rivals, strong in act.
   With this grasp thou thine enemies, crush those who fain would
    injure thee.
 [1000302]Break them in pieces; grasp them and destroy them. This Amu-
    let shall go before and lead thee.
   With Varana the Gods, from morn to morning, have warded off
    the Asuras' enchantment.
 [1000303]This charm, this Varana healeth all diseases, bright with a thou-
    sand eyes and golden glister.
   This charm shall conquer and cast down thy foemen. Be thou
    the first to slay the men who hate thee.
 [1000304]This will stay witchcraft wrought for thee, will guard thee from
    the fear of man:
   From all distress and misery this Varana will shield thee well.
 [1000305]Guard against ill of varied kind is Varana this heavenly Plant.
   The Gods have stayed and driven off Consumption which had
    seized this man.
 [1000306]If in thy sleep thou see an evil vision, oft as the beast repeats his
    loathed approaches,
   This Amulet, this Varana will guard thee from sneeze, and from
    the bird's ill-omened message.
 [1000307]From Mischief, from Malignity, from incantation, from alarm,
   From death, from stronger foeman's stroke the Varana will
    guard thee well.
 [1000308]Each sinful act that we have done,--my mother, father, and my
    friends,-- [p. 10]
   From all the guilt this heavenly Plant will be our guard and
    sure defence.
 [1000309]Affrighted by the Varana let my rivals near akin to me
   Pass to the region void of light: to deepest darkness let them
    go.
 [1000310]Safe are my cattle, safe am I, long-lived with all my men
    around.
   This Varana, mine Amulet, shall guard me well on every side.
 [1000311]This Varana is on my breast, the sovran, the celestial Plant.
   Let it afflict my foemen as Indra quelled fiends and Asuras.
 [1000312]Through hundred autumn seasons, long to live, I wear this
    Varana.
   May it bestow on me great strength, cattle, and royalty and
    power.
 [1000313]As with its might the wind breaks down the trees, the sovrans
    of the wood,
   So break and rend my rivals, born before me and born after.
   Let the Varana protect thee well.
 [1000314]As Agni and the wind devour the trees, the sovrans of the wood,
   Even so devour my rivals, born before me and born after. Let
    the Varana protect thee well.
 [1000315]As, shattered by the tempest, trees lie withering ruined on the
    ground.
   Thus over throw my rivals thou, so crush them down and ruin.
    them, those born before and after. Let this Varana protect
    thee well.
 [1000316]Cut them in pieces, Varana! before their destined term of life,
   Those who would hurt his cattle, those who fain would harm.
    the realm he rules.
 [1000317]As Surya shines with brightest sheen, as splendour hath been
    stored in him,
   So may the Charm, the Varana, give me prosperity and fame.
   With lustre let it sprinkle me, and balm me with magni-
    ficence.
 [1000318]As glory dwelleth in the Moon and in the Sun who vieweth
    men,
   So may the Charm, etc.
 [1000319]As glory dwelleth in the Earth, and in this Jatavedas here,
   So may the Charm etc. [p. 11]
 [1000320]As glory dwelleth in a maid, and in this well-constructed car,
   So may the Charm, etc.
 [1000321]As glory dwelleth in the draught of Soma and the honeyed.
    drink,
   So may the Charm, etc.
 [1000322]As glory dwells in sacrifice to Agni, and the hallowing word,
   So may the Charm, etc.
 [1000323]As glory is bestowed upon the patron and this sacrifice,
   So may the Charm, etc.
 [1000324]As glory dwelleth in the Lord of Life and in this God Supreme,.
   So may the Charm, etc.
 [1000325]As immortality and truth have been established in the Gods,
   So may the Charm, the Varana, give me prosperity and fame.
   With lustre let it sprinkle me, and balm me with magnificence.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

A charm to destroy venomous serpents

[1000402]The first of all is Indra's car, next is the chariot of the Gods
    the third is Varuna's alone.
   The last, the Serpents' chariot, struck the pillar and then sped
    away. [p. 12]
 [1000402]Their lustre is the Darbha-grass, its young shoots are their
    horse's tail: the reed's plume is their chariot seat.
 [1000403]Strike out, white courser! with thy foot, strike both with fore
    and hinder foot,
   Stay the dire poison of the Snakes, and make it weak as soaking
    wood.
   -4. Loud neighing he hath dived below, and rising up again replied,
   Stayed the dire poison of the Snakes, and made it weak as
    soaking wood.
 [1000405]Paidva kills Kasarnila, kills both the white Serpent and the
    black,
   Paidva hath struck and cleft in twain Ratharvi's and the Viper's
    head.
 [1000406]Go onward, horse of Pedu! go thou first: we follow after thee.
   Cast thou aside the Serpents from the pathway whereupon we
    tread.
 [1000407]Here was the horse of Pedu born: this is the way that takes him
    hence.
   These are the tracks the courser left, the mighty slayer of the
   Snakes.
 [1000408]Let him not close the opened mouth, nor open that which now
    is closed.
   Two snakes are in this field, and both, female and male, are
    powerless.
 [1000409]Powerless are the serpents here, those that are near and those
    afar.
   I kill the scorpion with a club, and with a staff the new-come
    snake.
 [1000410]This is the remedy against Aghasva and the adder, both:
   Indra and Paidva have subdued and tamed the vicious snake for
    me.
 [1000411]We fix our thoughts on Pedu's horse, strong, off-spring of a
    stedfast line.
   Behind our backs the vipers here crouch down and lie in wait
    for us.
 [1000412]Bereft of life and poison they lie slain by bolt-armed Indra's
    hand. Indra and we have slaughtered them.
 [1000400]13. Tiraschirajis have been slain, and vipers crushed and brayed to
    bits. [p. 13]
   Slay Darvi in the Darbha-grass, Karikrata, and White and
   Black.
 [1000414]The young maid of Kirata race, a little damsel, digs the drug,
   Digs it with shovels wrought of gold on the high ridges of the
    hills.
 [1000415]Hither the young uuconquered leech who slays the speckled
    snake hath come.
   He verily demolishes adder and scorpion; both of them.
 [1000416]Indra, Mitra and Varuna, and Vata and Parjanya both have
    given the serpent up to me.
 [1000417]Indra hath given him up to me, the female viper and the male,
   The adder, him with stripes athwart. Kasarnila, Dasonasi.
 [1000418]O Serpent, Indra hath destroyed the sire who first engendered
    thee:
   And when these snakes are pierced and bored what sap and
    vigour will be theirs?
 [1000419]Their heads have I seized firmly as a fisher grasps the spotted
    prey,
   Waded half through the stream and washed the poison of the
    serpents off.
 [1000420]Let the floods hurry on and bear the poison of all snakes afar.
   Tiraschirajis have been slain and vipers crushed and brayed to
    bits.
 [1000421]As from the salutary plants I deftly pick the fibres out, And
    guide them skilfully like mares, so let thy venom, Snake!
    depart,
 [1000422]All poison that the sun and fire, all that the earth and plants
    contain,
   Poison of most effectual power--let all thy venom pass away.
 [1000423]Serpents which fire or plants have generated, those which have
    sprung from waters or the lightning,
   Whose mighty broods are found in many places, these serpents
    we will reverently worship.
 [1000424]Thou art a maid called Taudi, or Ghritachi is thy name. Thy
    place;
   Is underneath my foot. I take the poison-killing remedy.
 [1000425]From every member drive away the venom, and avoid the heart.
   Then let the poison's burning heat pass downward and away-
    from thee. [p. 14]
 [1000426]The bane hath fled afar. It wept, and asked the poison how it
    fared.
 [1000427]Agni hath found the venom of the serpent, Soma drawn it out.
   Back to the biter hath returned the poison, and the snake hath
    died.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

  

A charm to overthrow a rival and gain strength, dignity, long life, children, and general prosperity

[1000501]Ye are the power of Indra, ye the force and strength of Indra,
    ye his hero might and manliness.
   I join you with the bonds of Prayer to the victorious enterprise.
 [1000506]For the victorious enterprise let all creation stand by me. For
    me ye, Waters, are prepared. [p. 15]
 [1000507]Ye are the share of Agni. Grant, O heavenly Waters unto us the
   Waters' brilliant energy.
   By statute of Prajapati I set you down for this our world.
 [1000515]Waters, your ceremonial share of Waters which the waters hold,
    which aids our sacrifice to Gods,
   This as a remnant here I leave. Do not thou wash it clean away.
   With this we let the man go by who hates us and whom we
    abhor.
   Him would I fain o'erthrow and slay with this our ceremonial
    act, with this our prayer, our thunder-bolt.
 [1000522]Whatever evil I have done within this last triennium,
   From all that woe and misery let the waters shield and guard
    me well.
 [1000523]Onward I urge your gathered floods: enter your own abiding-
    place,
   Uninjured and with all your strength. Let nothing bend or bow
    us down.
 [1000524]May the pure Waters cleanse us from defilement,
   Fair to behold remove our sin and trouble, and bear away ill-
    dream and all pollution.
 [1000525]Thou art the step of Vishnu, rival-slayer, sharpened by earth,
    aglow with fire of Agni,
   Earth have I ranged: from earth we bar him who hates us and
    whom we hate.
 [1000526]Ours is superior place and ours is conquest: may I in all fights
    tread down spite and malice.
   Let him not live, let vital breath desert him.
 [1000536]With this I here invest the power and splendour, the life of that
    man and his vital breathing, the son of such a sire and such a
    woman, here do I overthrow and cast him downward.
 [1000537]I follow Surya's course in heaven, the course that takes him to
    the South.
   May that bestow upon me wealth and glory of a Brahman's
    rank.
 [1000538]I turn me to the regions bright with splendour.
   May they bestow upon me wealth and glory of a Brahman's
    rank.
 [1000539]I turn me to the Rishis Seven. May they, etc.
 [1000540]I turn me unto Prayer. May that, etc.
 [1000541]I turn me unto Brahmans. May they etc. [p. 16]
 [1000542]We hunt that man, we beat him down and slay him with our
    murderous blows.
   We with the spell have hurried him to Parameshthin's opened
    jaws.
 [1000543]Let the shot missile catch him with Vaisvanara's two mighty
    fangs.
   This offering, and the mightiest Goddess, the Fuel, eat him up!
 [1000544]Thou art the bound of Varuna the King.
   Bind, such an one, the son of such a woman, in vital breath and
    in the food that feeds him.
 [1000545]All food of thine, O Lord of Life, that lies, upon the face of
    earth,
   Thereof bestow thou upon us. O Lord of Life, Prajapati!
 [1000546]Celestial Waters have I sought: with juice have I besprinkled
    them.
   With milk, O Agni, have I come; bestow upon me splendid
    strength.
 [1000547]Give me the boon of splendid strength; give, Agni! progeny
    and life.
   May the Gods know this prayer of mine, may Indra with the
   Rishis know.
 [1000548]What curse soever couples launch against us, whatever bitter
    speech the chatterers utter,
   With Manyu's arrow, offspring of the spirit, transfix thou to the
    heart the Yatudhanas,
 [1000549]Destroy the Yatudhanas with thy fervour, consume the demons
    with thy wrath, O Agni.
   Destroy the fool's gods with thy fiery splendour, destroy the
    blazing ones, the insatiable.
 [1000550]Well-skilled, against this man I hurl the Water's bolt with four
    spikes, to cleave his head asunder.
   May it destroy all members of his body. Let the whole host of
   Gods approve my purpose.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

HYMN VI

  

The glorification of an all-powerful amulet

[1000601]With power I cut away the head of my malignant rival, of mine
    evil-hearted enemy.
 [1000602]This Amulet of citron-wood shall make for me a trusty shield
   Filled with the mingled beverage, with sap and vigour hath it
    come.
 [1000603]What though the strong-armed carpenter have cleft thee with
    his hand and axe.
   Pure animating waters shall cleanse thee and make thee bright
    again.
 [1000604]This Amulet, decked with chain of gold, shall give faith,
    sacrifice, and might, and dwell as guest within our house.
 [1000605]To this we give apportioned food, clarified butter, wine, and
    meath.
   May it provide each boon for us as doth a father for his sons. [p. 18]
   Again, again, from morn to morn, having approached the
    deities.
 [1000606]The Charm Brihaspati hath bound, the fatness-dropping citron-
    wood, the potent Khadira for strength,
   This Agni hath put on: it yields clarified butter for this man.
   Again, again, from morn to morn. With this subdue thine
    enemies.
 [1000607]The Charm Brihaspati hath bound, the fatness-dropping citron-
    wood, the potent Khadira, for strength,
   This Charm hath Indra put on him for power and manly
    puissance.
   It yieldeth strength to strengthen him, again, again, from morn
    to morn, having approached the deities.
 [1000608]The Charin Brihaspati, etc.
   This Charm hath Soma put on him for might, for hearing, and
    for sight.
   This yields him energy indeed, again, again, etc.
 [1000609]The Charm Brihaspati, etc.
   This Surya put on him, with this conquered the regions of the
    sky.
   This yieldeth him ability, again, etc.
 [1000610]The Charm Brihaspati, etc.
   This Charm did Chandra wear, with this conquered the forts of
   Asuras, the golden forts of Danavas.
   This yields him glory and renown, again, etc.
 [1000611]The Amulet Brihaspati bound on the swiftly-moving Wind.
   This yieldeth him a vigorous steed, again, etc.
 [1000612]The Asvins with this Amulet protect this culture of our fields.
   This yields the two Physicians might, again, etc.
 [1000613]Savitar wore this Amulet: herewith he won this lucid heaven.
   This yields him glory and delight, again, etc.
 [1000614]Wearing this Charm the Waters flow eternally inviolate. This
    yieldeth them ambrosia, again etc.
 [1000615]King Varuna assumed and wore this salutary Amulet.
   This yieldeth him his truthfulness, again, etc.
 [1000616]Wearing this Amulet the Gods conquered in battle all the
    worlds.
   This yieldeth victory for them, again, etc.
 [1000617]The Amulet Brihaspati formed for the swiftly-moving Wind,
   This salutary Amulet the Deities assumed and wore. [p. 19]
   This yieldeth them the universe, again, again, from morn to
    morn. With this subdue thine enemies.
 [1000618]The seasons formed that Amulet, the Groups of Seasons fashion-
    ed it.
   The Year having constructed it preserveth everything that is.
 [1000619]The regions of the heaven, the points that lie between them
    fashioned it.
   Created by Prajapati, may the Charm cast my foemen down.
 [1000620]Atharvan made the Amulet, Atharvan's children fashioned it.
   With them the sage Angirases broke through the Dasyus'
    fortresses. With this subdue thine enemies.
 [1000621]Dhatar bound on this Amulet: he ranged and ordered all that
    is. With this do thou subdue thy foes.
 [1000622]The Amulet Brihaspati formed for the Gods, that slew the
    fiends.
   That Amulet here hath come to me combined with sap and
    energy.
 [1000623]The Amulet, etc.
   That Amulet here hath come to me, hath come with cows, and
    goats, and sheep, hath come with food and progeny.
 [1000624]The Amulet, etc.
   That Amulet here hath come to me with store of barley and of
    rice, with greatness and prosperity.
 [1000625]The Amulet, etc.
   That Amulet here hath come to me with streams of butter and
    of mead, with sweet delicious beverage.
 [1000626]The Amulet, etc.
   That Amulet here hath come to me with power and abundant
    strength, hath come with glory and with wealth.
 [1000627]The Amulet, etc..
   That Amulet here hath come to me with splendour and a blaze
    of light, with honour and illustrious fame.
 [1000628]The Amulet Brihaspati made for the Gods, that slew the fiends,
   That Amulet here hath come to me combined with all
    prosperities.
 [1000629]That Amulet may the Deities bestow on me to win success,
   The conquering, strength-increasing Charm, the damager of
    enemies.
 [1000630]I bind on me my happy fate with holy prayer and energy.
   Foeless destroyer of the foe, it hath subdued mine enemies. [p. 20]
 [1000631]May this Chaim, offspring of the Gods, make me superior to my
    foe.
   So may this charm whose milk expressed these three worlds
    longingly await,
   Be fastened on me here, that it may crown me with surpassing
    power.
 [1000632]The Charm to which men, Fathers, Gods look ever for their
    maintenance,
   May this be fastened on me here, to crown me with surpassing
    power
 [1000633]As, when the plough hath tilled the soil, the seed springs up in.
    fertile land,
   Let cattle, progeny, and food of every kind spring up with me.
 [1000634]Charm, forwarder of sacrifice, who hast a hundred priestly fees.
   Speed to preeminence him to whom I have attached thy happy
    fate.
 [1000635]Love thou, O Agni, pleased with burnt oblations, this sacred
    fuel that is ranged in order.
   In him may we find grace and loving-kindness, happiness,
    progeny, and sight and cattle, in Jatavedas kindled with
    devotion.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

  

Skambha, the Pillar or Fulcrum of all existence

[1000701]Which of his members is the seat of Fervour: Which is the base
    of Ceremonial Order? [p. 21]
   Where in him standeth Faith? Where Holy Duty? Where, in
    what part of him is truth implanted?
 [1000702]Out of which member glows the light of Agni? Form which
    proceeds the breath of Matarisvan?
   From which doth Chandra measure out his journey, travelling
    over Skambha's mighty body?
 [1000703]Which of his members is the earth's upholder? Which gives the
    middle air a base to rest on?
   Where, in which member is the sky established? Where hath
    the space above the sky its dwelling?
 [1000704]Whitherward yearning blazeth Agni upward? Whitherward
    yearning bloweth Matarisvan?
   Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha to whom with long-
    ing go the turning pathways?
 [1000705]Whitheward go the half-months, and, accordant with the full
    year, the months in their procession?
   Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha to whom go seasons
    and the groups of seasons?
 [1000706]Whitherward yearning speed the two young Damsels, accordant,
   Day and Night, of different colour?
   Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha to whom the Waters
    take their way with longing?
 [1000707]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha,
   On whom Prajapati set up and firmly stablished all the worlds?
 [1000708]That universe which Prajapati created, wearing all forms,, the
    highest, midmost, lowest,
   How far did Skambha penetrate within it? What portion did
    he leave unpenetrated?
 [1000709]How far within the past hath Skambha entered? How much of
    him hath reached into the future?
   That one part which he set in thousand places,--how far did
   Skambha penetrate within it?
 [1000710]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha in whom men
    recognize the Waters, Brahma,
   In whom they know the worlds and their enclosures, in whom
    are non-existence and existence?
 [1000711]Declare that. Skambha, who is he of many,
   In whom, exerting every power, Fervour maintains her loftiest
    vow; [p. 22]
   In whom are comprehended Law, Waters, Devotion and Belief
 [1000712]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha
   On whom as their foundation earth and firmament and sky are
    set;
   In whom as their appointed place rest Fire and Moon and Sun
    and Wind?
 [1000713]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha
   He in whose body are contained all three-and-thirty Deities?
 [1000714]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha.
   In whom the Sages earliest born, the Richas, Saman, Yajus,
   Earth, and the one highest Sage abide?
 [1000715]Who out of many, tell me, is the Skambha.
   Who comprehendeth, for mankind, both immortality and death,
   He who containeth for mankind the gathered waters as his
    veins?
 [1000716]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha,
   He whose chief arteries stand there, the sky's four regions, he irk
    whom Sacrifice putteth forth its might?
 [1000717]They who in Purusha understand Brahma know Him who is.
   Supreme.
   He who knows Him who is Supreme, and he who knows the
   Lord of Life,
   These know the loftiest Power Divine, and thence know Skam-
    bha thoroughly.
 [1000718]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha
   Of whom Vaisvanara became the head, the Angirases his eye,
    and Yatus his corporeal parts?
 [1000719]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha
   Whose mouth they say is Holy Lore, his tongue the Honey-
    sweetened Whip, his udder is Viraj, they say?
 [1000720]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha
   From whom they hewed the lichas off, from whom they
    chipped the Yajus, he
   Whose hairs are Sama-verses and his mouth the Atharvangi-
    rases?
 [1000721]Men count as 'twere a thing supreme nonentity's conspicuous
    branch;
   And lower man who serve thy branch regard it as an entity.
 [1000722]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha [p. 23]
   In whom Adityas dwell, in whom Rudras and Vasus are
    contained,
   In whom the future and the past and all the worlds are firmly
    set;
 [1000723]Whose secret treasure evermore the three-and thirty Gods
    protect?
   Who knoweth now the treasure which, O Deities ye watch and
    guard?
 [1000724]Where the Gods, versed in Sacred Lore, worship the loftiest
   Power Divine
   The priest who knows them face to face may be a sage who
    knows the truth.
 [1000725]Great, verily, are those Gods who sprang from non-existence
    into life.
   Further, men say that that one part of Skambha is nonentity.
 [1000726]Where Skambha generating gave the Ancient World its shape
    and form,
   They recognized that single part of Skambha as the Ancient
   World,
 [1000727]The three-and-thirty Gods within his body were disposed as
    limbs:
   Some, deeply versed in Holy Lore, some know those three-and-
    thirty Gods.
 [1000728]Men know Hiranyagarbha as supreme and inexpressible:
   In the beginning, in the midst of the world, Skambha poured
    that gold.
 [1000729]On Skambha Fervour rests, the worlds and Holy Law repose on
    him.
   Skambha, I clearly know that all of thee on Indra is imposed.
 [1000730]On Indra Fervour rests, on him the worlds and Holy Law
    recline.
   Indra, I clearly know that all of thee on Skambha findeth rest.
 [1000731]Ere sun and dawn man calls and calls one Deity by the other's
    name.
   When the Unborn first sprang into existence he reached that
    independent sovran lordship; than which aught higher never
    hath arisen.
 [1000732]Be reverence paid to him, that highest Brahma, whose base is
   Earth, his belly Air, who made the sky to be his head. [p. 24]
 [1000733]Homage to highest Brahma, him whose eye is Surya and the
   Moon who groweth young and new again, him who made
   Agni for his mouth.
 [1000734]Homage to highest Brahma, him whose two life-breathings were
    the Wind,
   The Angirases his sight: who made the regions be his means of
    sense.
 [1000735]Skambha set fast these two, the earth and heaven, Skambha
    maintained the ample air between them.
   Skambha established the six spacious regions: this whole world
   Skambha entered and pervaded.
 [1000736]Homage to highest Brahma, him who, sprung from Fervour and
    from toil,
   Filled all the worlds completely, who made Soma for himself
    alone.
 [1000737]Why doth the Wind move ceaselessly? Why doth the spirit take
    no rest?
   Why do the Waters, seeking truth, never at any time repose?
 [1000738]Absorbed in Fervour, is the mighty Being, in the world's centre,
    on the waters' surface.
   To him the Deities, one and all betake them. So stand the tree-
    trunk with the branches round it.
 [1000739]Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha.
   To whom the Deities with hands, with feet, and voice, and ear,
    and eye.
   Present unmeasured tribute in the measured hall of sacrifice?
 [1000740]Darkness is chased away from him: he is exempt from all dist-
    ress.
   In him are all the lights, the three abiding in Prajapati.
 [1000741]He verily who knows the Reed of Gold that stands amid the
    flood, is the mysterious Lord of Life.
 [1000742]Singly the two young Maids of different colours approach the
    six-pegged warp in turns and weave it.
   The one draws out the threads, the other lays them: they break
    them not, they reach no end of labour.
 [1000743]Of these two, dancing round as 'twere, I cannot distinguish
    whether ranks before the other.
   A Male in weaves this web, a Male divides it: a Male hath
    stretched it to the cope of heaven [p. 25]
 [1000744]These pegs have buttressed up the sky. The Samans have turned
    them into shuttles for the weaving.

[p. 26]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

HYMN VIII

  

Speculations on the Supreme Being and Cosmogonical and theological subjects

[1000801]Worship to loftiest Brahma, Lord of what hath been and what
    shall be,
   To him who rules the universe, and heavenly light is all his own!
 [1000802]Upheld by Skambha's power these two, the heaven and the earth,
    stand fast.
   Skambha is all this world of life, whatever breathes or shuts an.
    eye.
 [1000803]Three generations have gone by and vanished and others near
    have entered into sunlight.
   There stood on high he who metes out the region into green,
    plants hath passed the Golden-coloured.
 [1000804]One is the wheel, the tires are twelve in number, the naves are
    three What man hath understood it?
   Three hundred spokes have thereupon been hammered, and sixty
    pins set firmly in their places. [p. 28]
 [1000805]Discern thou this, O Savitar. Six are the twins, one singly born.
   They claim relationship in that among them which is born alone.
 [1000806]Though manifest, it lies concealed in the vast place they call the
    old:
   Therein is firmly stationed all the moving, breathing universe.
 [1000807]Up, eastward downward in the west, 'it rolleth, with countless
    elements, one-wheeled, single-fellied.
   With half it hath begotten all creation. Where hath the other half
    become unnoticed?
 [1000813]In front of these the five-horsed car moves onward: side-horses,
    harnessed with the others draw it.
   No one hath seen its hither course untravelled; the height sees
    it more near, the depth more distant.
 [1000809]The bowl with mouth inclined and bottom upward holds stored
    within it every form of glory.
   Thereon together sit the Seven Rishis who have become this
    mighty One's protectors
 [1000810]The Verse employed at opening and conclusion, the Verse
    employed in each and every portion;
   That by which sacrifice proceedeth onward. I ask thee which is
    that of all the Verses.
 [1000811]That which hath power of motion, that which flies, or stands,
    which breathes or breathes not, which, existing, shuts the eye
   Wearing all forms that entity upholds the earth, and in its close
    consistence still is only one.
 [1000812]The infinite to every side extended, the finite and the infinite
    around us,
   These twain Heaven's Lord divides as he advances, knowing the
    past hereof and all the future
 [1000813]Within the womb Prajapati is moving: he, though unseen, is
    born in sundry places.
   He with one half engendered all creation. What sign is there to
    tell us of the other?
 [1000814]All men behold him with the eye, but with the mind they know
    not him.
   Holding aloft the water as a water-bearer in her jar.
 [1000815]With the full vase he dwells afar, is left far off what time it fails,
   A mighty Being in creation's centre: to him the rulers of the
    realms bring tribute. [p. 29]
 [1000816]That, whence the Sun arises, that whither he goes to take his
    rest,
   That verily I hold supreme: naught in the world surpasses it.
 [1000817]Those who in recent times, midmost, or ancient, on all sides.
    greet the sage who knows the Veda,
   One and all, verily discuss Aditya, the second Agni, and the
    threefold Hansa.
 [1000818]This gold-hued Haiisa's wings, flying to heaven, spread o'er a
    thousand days' continued journey.
   Supporting all the Gods upon his bosom, he goes his way behol-
    ding every creature.
 [1000819]By truth he blazes up aloft by Brahma, he looks down below:
   He breathes obliquely with his breath, he on whom what is.
    highest rests.
 [1000820]The sage who knows the kindling-sticks whence by attrition
    wealth is drawn,
   Will comprehend what is most high, will know the mighty
   Brahmana.
 [1000821]Footless at first was he produced, footless he brought celestial
    light.
   Four-footed grown, and meet for use, he seized each thing
    enjoyable.
 [1000822]Useful will he become, and then will he consume great store of
    food
   The man who humbly worshippeth the eternal and victorious
   God.
 [1000823]Him too they call eternal; he may become new again to-day.
   Day and Night reproduce themselves, each from the form the
    other wears.
 [1000824]A hundred, thousand, myriad, yea a hundred million stores of
    wealth that passes count are laid in him.
   This wealth they kill as he looks on, and now this God shines
    bright therefrom.
 [1000825]One is yet finer than a hair, one is not even visible. And hence
    the Deity who grasps with firmer hold is dear to me.
 [1000826]This fair one is untouched by age, immortal in a mortal's house.
   He for whom she was made lies low, and he who formed her
    hath grown old.
 [1000827]Thou art a woman, and a man; thou art a damsel and a boy. [p. 30]
   Grown old thou totterest with a staff, new-born thou lookest
    every way.
 [1000828]Either the sire or son of these, the eldest or the youngest child.
   As sole God dwelling in the mind, first born, he still is in the
    womb.
 [1000829]Forth from the full he lifts the full, the full he sprinkles with
    the full.
   Now also may we know the source from which the stream is
    sprinkled round.
 [1000830]Brought forth in olden time, the everlasting, high over all that
    is was she, the Ancient.
   The mighty Goddess of the Morn, refulgent with one eye, looketh
    round with one that winketh,
 [1000831]Known by the name of Guardian Grace the Deity sits girt by
   Right.
   The trees have taken from her hue, green-garlanded, their robe
    of green.
 [1000832]When he is near she leaves him not, she sees him not though he
    is near.
   Behold the wisdom of the God; he hath not died, he grows not
    old.
 [1000833]Voices that never were before emitted speak as fitteth them.
   Whither they go and speak, they say there is the mighty Brah-
    mana.
 [1000834]I ask thee where the waters' flower by wondrous magic art was
    placed,
   Thereon the Gods and men are set as spokes are fastened in the
    nave.
 [1000835]Who gave command unto the wind that blowet!
   Who ranged the five united heavenly regions?
   Who were the Gods who cared not for oblations!
   Which of them brought the sacrificial waters?
 [1000836]One God inhabiteth the earth we live on; another hath encom-
    passed air's mid-region.
   One, the Supporter, takes the heaven and bears it: some keep-
    ing watch guard all the quarters safely.
 [1000837]The man who knows the drawn-out string on which these crea-
    tures all are strung,
   The man who knows the thread's thread, he may know the
    mighty Brahmana. [p. 31]
 [1000838]I know the drawn-out string, the thread whereon these creatures
    all are strung.
   I know the thread's thread also, thus I know the mighty Brah-
    ma na.
 [1000839]When Agni passed between the earth and heaven devouring with
    his flame the all-consumer,
   Where dwelt afar the spouses of one husband, where at that
    moment, where was Matarisvan?
   -40. Into the floods had Matarisvan entered, the deities had past in-
    to the waters.
   There stood the mighty measurer of the region: into the ver-
    dant plants went Pavamana.
 [1000841]Over the Gayatri, above the immortal world he strode away.
   Those who by Song discovered Song--where did the Unborn see
    that thing?
 [1000842]Luller to rest, and gatherer-up of treasures, Savitar like a God
    whose laws are constant, hath stood like Indra in the war for
    riches.
 [1000843]Men versed in sacred knowledge know that living Being that
    abides.
   In the nine-portalled Lotus Flower, enclosed with triple bands
    and bonds.
 [1000844]Desireless, firm, immortal, self-existent, contented with the es-
    sence, lacking nothing,
   Free from the fear of Death is he who knoweth that Soul cou-
    rageous, youthful, undecaying.

[p. 32]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

HYMN IX

  

The Sataudana or Hundredfold Oblation

[1000901]Binding the mouths of those who threaten mischief, against my
    rivals cast this bolt of thunder,
   Indra first gave the Hundredfold Oblation, welfare of him who
    worships, foe-destroying.
 [1000902]Thy skin shall be the Altar; let thine hair become the Sacred
   Grass.
   This cord hath held thee firmly: let this pressing-stone dance
    round on thee:
 [1000903]The holy water be thy hair: let thy tongue make thee clean, O
   Cow.
   Go, Hundredfold Oblation, made bright and adorable, to hea-
    ven. [p. 34]
 [1000904]He who prepares the Hundredfold Oblation gains each wish
    thereby:
   For all his ministering priests, contented, move as fitteth them.
 [1000905]He rises up to heaven, ascends to younder third celestial
    height.
   Whoever gives the Hundredfold Oblation with the central
    cake.
 [1000906]That man completely wins those worlds, both of the heavens
    and of the earth,
   Whoever pays the Hundredfold. Oblation with its golden light.
 [1000907]Thine Immolators, Goddess! and the men who dress thee for
    the feast, all these will guard thee, Hundredfold Oblation!
   Have no fear of them.
 [1000908]The Vasus from the South will be thy guards, the Maruts from
    the North,
   Adityas from the West; o'ertake and pass the Agnishtoma,
    thou!
 [1000909]The Gods, the Fathers, mortal men, Gandharvas, and Apsara-
    ses,
   All these will be the guards: o'ertake and pass the Atiratra,
    thou!
 [1000910]The man who pays the Hundredfold Oblation winneth all the
    worlds,
   Air, heaven, and earth, Adityas, and Maruts, and regions of the
    sky.
 [1000911]Sprinkling down fatness, to the Gods will the beneficent God-
    dess go.
   Harm not thy dresser, Cow! To heaven, O Hundredfold Obla-
    tion, speed!
 [1000912]From all the Gods enthroned in heaven, in air, from those who
    dwell on earth,
   Draw forth for evermore a stream of milk, of butter, and of
    mead.
 [1000913]Let thy head, let thy mouth, let both thine ears, and those two
    jaws of thine.
   Pour for the giver mingled curd, and flowing butter, milk, and
    mead.
 [1000914]Let both thy lips, thy nostrils, both thy horns, and these two
    eyes of thine. [p. 35]
   Pour for the given, etc.
 [1000915]Let heart and pericardium, let thy lungs with all the bronchial
    tubes, etc.
 [1000916]Let liver, and let kidneys, let thine entrails, and the parts within,
    etc.
 [1000917]Let rectum and omentum, let thy belly's hollows, and thy skin,
    etc.
 [1000918]Let all thy marrow, every bone, let all thy flesh, and all thy
    blood, etc.
 [1000919]Let both thy shoulders and thy hump, thy forelegs, and their
    lower parts, etc.
 [1000920]Let neck and nape and shoulder-joints, thy ribs and inter-costal
    parts, etc.
 [1000921]So let thy thighs and thy knee-bones, thy hinder quarters, and
    thy hips, etc.
 [1000922]So let thy tail and all the hairs thereof, thine udder, and thy
    teats, etc.
 [1000923]Let all thy legs, the refuse of thy feet, thy heelropes, and thy
    hooves.
   Pour for the giver mingled curd, and flowing butter milk, and
    mead.
 [1000924]Let all thy skin, Sataudana! let every hair thou hast, O Cow,
   Pour for the giver mingled curd, and flowing butter, milk, and
    mead.
 [1000925]Sprinkled with molten butter, let the two meal-cakes be sport
    for thee.
   Make them thy wings, O Goddess, and bear him who dresses
    thee to heaven.
 [1000926]Each grain of rice in mortar or on pestle, all on the skin or in
    the winnowing-basket,
   Whatever purifying Matarisvan, the Wind, hath sifted, let the
   Hotar Agni make of it an acceptable oblation.
 [1000927]In the priest's hands I lay, in separate order, the sweet celestial
   Waters, dropping fatness.
   As here I sprinkle them may all my wishes be granted unto me
    in perfect fulness. May we have ample wealth in our posses-
    sion.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

HYMN X

  

A glorification of the sacred Cow as representing the radiant heavens

[1001001]Worship to thee springing to life, and worship unto thee when
    born!
   Worship, O Cow, to thy tail-hair, and to thy hooves, and to thy
    form!
 [1001002]The man who knows the Seven Floods, who knows the seven
    distances,
   Who knows the head of sacrifice, he may receive the holy Cow.
 [1001003]I know the Seven Water-floods, I know the seven distances,
   I know the head of sacrifice, and Soma shining bright in her.
 [1001004]Hitherward we invite with prayer the Cow who pours a thou-
    sand streams,
   By whom the heaven, by whom the earth, by whom these waters
    are preserved.
 [1001005]Upon her back there are a hundred keepers, a hundred metal
    bowls, a hundred milkers.
   The Deities who breathe in her all separately know the Cow. [p. 37]
 [1001006]Her foot is sacrifice, her milk libation, Svadha her breath, Mahi-
    luka the mighty:
   To the God goes with prayer the Cow who hath Parjanya for
    her lord.
 [1001007]Agni hath entered into thee; Soma, O Cow, hath entered thee.
   Thine udder is Parjanya, O blest Cow; the lightnings are thy
    teats.
 [1001008]Thou pourest out the Waters first, and corn-lands afterward,
   O Cow.
   Thirdly thou pourest princely sway. O Cow, thou pourest food
    and milk.
 [1001009]When, Holy One, thou camest nigh invited by the Adityas' call,
   Indra gave thee to drink, O cow, a thousand bowls of Soma
    juice.
 [1001010]The Bull, what time thou followedst the way of Indra, summon-
    ed thee:
   Thence the Fiend-slayer, angered, took thy water and thy milk
    away.
 [1001011]O Cow, the milk which in his wrath the Lord of Riches took
    from thee,
   That same the vault of heaven now preserveth in three reser-
    voirs.
 [1001012]The Cow Celestial received that Soma in three vessels, where.
   Atharvan, consecrated, sate upon the Sacred Grass of gold.
 [1001013]Come hither with the Soma, come with every footed thing; the
   Cow
   With Kalis and Gandharvas by her side hath stepped upon the
    sea.
 [1001014]Come hither with the Wind, yea, come with every creature borne
    on wings.
   Laden with holy verse and song the Cow hath leapt into the
    sea.
 [1001015]Come with the Sun, come hitherward with every creature that
    hath eyes,
   Bearing auspicious lights with her the Cow hath looked across
    the sea.
 [1001016]When, covered round about with gold, thou stoodest there, O
   Holy One,
   The ocean turned into a horse and mounted on thy back, O
   Cow, [p. 38]
 [1001017]Then came and met the Blessed Ones, Deshtri, the Cow, and
   Svadha, where
   Atharvan, consecrated. sate upon the Sacred Grass of gold.
 [1001018]The Kshatriya's mother is the Cow, thy mother, Svadha! is the
   Cow.
   Sacrifice is the weapon of the Cow: the thought arose from,
    her.
 [1001019]From Brahma's summit there went forth a drop that mounted
    up on high:
   From that wast thou produced, O Cow, from that the Hotar
    sprang to life.
 [1001020]Forth from thy mouth the Gathas came, from thy neck's nape
    sprang strength, O Cow.
   Sacrifice from thy flanks was born, and rays of sunlight from.
    thy teats,
 [1001021]From thy fore-quarters and thy thighs motion was generated,
   Cow!
   Food from thine entrails was produced, and from thy belly came
    the plants.
 [1001022]When into Varuna's belly thou hadst found a passage for thy-
    self,
   The Brahman called thee thence, for he knew how to guide and
    lead thee forth.
 [1001023]All trembled at the babe that came from him who brings not to
    the birth.
   He hath produced her--thus they cried--He is a cow, and formed
    by spells, he hath become skin to her.
 [1001024]He only joineth battle, yea, he who alone controlleth her.
   Now sacrifices have become victories, and the Cow their eye.
 [1001025]The Cow hath welcomed sacrifice: the Cow hath held the Sun
    in place.
   Together with the prayer the mess of rice hath passed into the
   Cow.
 [1001026]They call the Cow immortal life, pay homage to the Cow as
   Death.
   She hath become this universe, Fathers, and Rishis, hath become
    the Gods, and men, and Asuras.
 [1001027]The man who hath this knowledge may receive the Cow with.
    welcoming. [p. 39]
   So for the giver willingly doth perfect sacrifice pour milk.
 [1001028]Within the mouth of Varuna three tongues are glittering with
    light.
   That which shines midmost of them is this Cow most difficult to
    hold.
 [1001029]Four-parted was the Cow's prolific humour.
   One-fourth is Water, one-fourth life eternal, one-fourth is sacri-
    fice, one-fourth are cattle.
 [1001030]The Cow is Heaven, the Cow is Earth, the Cow is Vishnu, Lord
    of Life.
    e The Sadhyas and the Vasus have drunk the out-pourings of the
   Cow.
 [1001031]When these, Sadhyas and Vasus, have drunk the out-pourings of
    the Cow,
   They in the Bright One's dwelling-place pay adoration to her
    milk.
 [1001032]For Soma some have milked her: some worship the fatness she
    hath poured.
   They who have given a cow to him who hath this knowledge
    have gone up to the third region of the sky.
 [1001033]He who hath given a Cow unto the Brahmans winneth all the
    worlds.
   For Right is firmly set in her devotion, and religious zeal.
 [1001034]Both Gods and mortal men depend for life and being on the
   Cow.
   She hath become this universe: all that the Sun surveys is she.

[p. 40]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

BOOK XI

  

HYMN I

  

An accompaniment to the preparation and presentation of a Brahmaudana

[1100101]Agni, spring forth! Here Aditi, afflicted, cooks a Brahmaudana,
    yearning for children.
   Let the Seven Rishis, World-creators, rub thee into existence
    here with gift of offspring.
 [1100102]Raise, as I bid, the smoke, my strong companions, lovers of free-
    dom from deceit and malice!
   Victor in fight heroic, here is Agni by whom the Gods subdued
    the hostile demons.
 [1100103]Thou, Agni, wart produced for mighty valour, to cook Brahmau-
    dana, O Jatavedas.
   Seven Rishis, makers of the world, begat thee, Grant to this
    woman wealth with store of heroes.
 [1100104]Burn up, O Agni, kindled with the fuel. Knowing the Gods who
    merit worship, bring them.
   Cooking, for these, oblation, Jatavedas! lift up this man to
    heaven's most lofty summit.
 [1100105]Your portion from of old is triply parted, portion of Gods, of
   Fathers, and of mortals.
   Know, all, your shares. I deal them out among you. The portion
    of the Gods shall save this woman.
 [1100106]Strong art thou, Agni, conquering, all-surpassing. Crush down
    our foemen, ruin those who hate us.
   So let this measure, measured, being measured, make all our kin
    thy tributary vassals.
 [1100107]Increase with kinsmen and with all abundance: to mighty strength
    and power lift up this woman.
   Erect, rise upward to the sky's high station, rise to the lofty
    world which men call Svarga.
 [1100108]May this great Earth receive the skin, this Goddess Prithivi,
    showing us her love and favour. Then may we go unto the
    world of virtue. [p. 42]
 [1100109]Fix on the skin these two joined press-stones, duly rending the
    fibres for the sacrificer.
   Strike down and slay those who assail this woman, and elevating
    raise on high her offspring.
 [1100110]Grasp with thy hand, O man, the well-formed press-stones: the
    holy Gods have come unto thy worship.
   Three wishes of thy heart which thou electest, these happy gains
    for thee I here make ready.
 [1100111]Here thy devotion is, here is thy birthplace. Aditi, Mother of
    brave sons, accept thee!
   Wipe away those who fight against this woman with wealth and
    store of goodly sons endow her.
 [1100112]Rest in the roaring frame of wood: be parted from husk and
    chaff, ye Sacrificial Fibres.
   May we surpass in glory all our rivals. I cast beneath my feet
    the men who hate us.
 [1100113]Go, Dame, and quickly come again: the waters, enclosed, have
    mounted thee that thou mayst bear them.
   Take thou of these such as are fit for service: skilfully separating.
    leave the others.
 [1100114]Hither these Dames have come in radiant beauty. Arise and seize=
    upon thy strength, O woman.
   To thee hath sacrifice come: take the pitcher, blest with a good
    lord, children, children's children.
 [1100115]Instructed by the Rishis, bring those waters, the share of strength
    which was of old assigned you.
   Let this effectual sacrifice afford you protection, fortune, off-
    spring, men, and cattle.
 [1100116]Agni, on thee the sacrificial caldron hath mounted: shining,.
    fiercely flaming, heat it.
   May hottest flames, divine, sprung from the Rishis, gathering,
    with the Seasons, heat this portion.
 [1100117]Purified, bright, and holy, let these Women, these lucid waters
    glide into the caldron.
   Cattle and many children may they give us. May he who cooks.
    the Odana go to heaven.
 [1100118]Ye, Sacrificial Rice and Soma Fibres, cleansed and made pure by
    prayer and molten butter. [p. 43]
   Enter the water: let the caldron take you. May he who dresses
    this ascend to heaven.
 [1100119]Expand thyself abroad in all thy greatness, with thousand Prish-
    thas, in the world of virtue.
   Grandfathers, fathers, children, and descendants, fifteenth am I
    to thee when I have dressed it.
 [1100120]With thousand streams and Prishthas, undecaying, Brahmaudana
    is celestial, God-reaching.
   Those I give up to thee with all their children. Force them to
    tribute, but to me be gracious.
 [1100121]Rise to the altar: bless this dame with offspring. Promote this
    woman; drive away the demons.
   May we surpass in glory all our rivals. I cast beneath my feet the
    men who hate us.
 [1100122]Approach this woman here with store of cattle: together with
    the deities come to meet her.
   Let not a curse or imprecation reach thee: in thine own seat
    shine forth exempt from sickness.
 [1100123]Fashioned at first by Right, set by the spirit, this altar of Brahmau-
    dana was appointed.
   Place the pure boiler on it, woman! set thou therein the rice
    mess of Celestial Beings.
 [1100124]This second hand of Aditi, this ladle which the Seven Rishis,
    world-creators, fashioned.
   May this scoop deftly pile upon the altar, therein, the members
    of the rice-oblation.
 [1100125]Let the dressed offering and divine Ones serve thee: creep from.
    the fire again, own these as masters.
   Made pure with Soma rest within the Brahmans: let not thine
    eaters, Rishis' sons, be injured.
 [1100126]Give understanding unto these, King Soma! all the good Brah
    mans who attend and serve thee.
   Oft, in Brahmaudana, and well I call on: Rishis, their sons, and
    those who sprang from Fervour.
 [1100127]Here I set singly in the hands of Brahmans these cleansed and.
    purifie d and holy Women,
   May Indra, Marut girt, grant me the blessing which as I sprinkle
    you, my heart desireth.
 [1100128]Here is my gold, a light immortal: ripened grain from the field
    this Cow of Plenty give me! [p. 44]
   This wealth I place among the Brahmans, making a path that
    leads to heaven among the Fathers.
 [1100129]Lay thou the chaff in Agni Jatavedas: remove the husks and
    drive them to a distance.
   That, we have heard, that is the House-Lord's portion: we know
    the share allotted to Destruction.
 [1100130]Mark him who toils and cooks and pours oblation: make this
    man climb the path that leads to heaven,
   That he may mount and reach life that is highest, ascending to
    the loftiest vault above us.
 [1100131]Adhvaryu, cleanse that face of the Supporter. Make room, well
    knowing, for the molten butter.
   Purify duly all the limbs with fatness. I make a path to heaven
    amid the Fathers.
 [1100132]Supporter, send to those men fiends and battle, to all non-Brah-
    mans who attend and serve thee.
   Famous and foremost, with their great possessions, let not these
    here, the Rishis sons, be injured.
 [1100133]I set thee, Odana, with Rishis' children: naught here belongs to
    men not sprung from Rishis.
   Let Agni my protector, all the Maruts, the Visve Devas guard
    the cooked oblation.
 [1100134]May we adore thee, Sacrifice that yieldeth an everlasting son,
    cow, home of treasures,
   Together with increasing store of riches, long life and immor-
    tality of children.
 [1100135]Thou art a Bull that mounts to heaven: to Rishis and their off-
    spring go.
   Rest in the world of pious men: there is the place prepared for
    us.
 [1100136]Level the ways: go thitherward, O Agni. Make ready thou the
   Godward-leading pathways.
   By these our pious actions may we follow sacrifice dwelling in
    the seven-rayed heaven.
 [1100137]May we invested with that light go upward, ascending to the
    sky's most lofty summit.
   Wherewith the Gods, what time they had made ready
   Brahmaudana, mounted to the world of virtue.

[p. 45]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

HYMN II

  

Prayer and praise to Bhava, Sarva and Rudra

[1100201]Bhava and Sarva, spare us, be not hostile. Homage to you, twin
   Lords of beasts and spirits!
   Shoot not the arrow aimed and drawn against us: forbear to
    harm our quadrupeds and bipeds.
 [1100202]Cast not our bodies to the dog or jackal, nor, Lord of Beasts!
    to carrion-kites or vultures.
   Let not thy black voracious flies attack them; let not thy birds
    obtain them for their banquet.
 [1100203]We offer homage to thy shout, Bhava! thy breath, thy racking
    pains:
   Homage, Immortal One! to thee, to Rudra of the thousand
    eyes.
 [1100204]We offer reverence to thee from eastward, and from north and
    south,
   From all the compass of the sky, to thee and to the firmament.
 [1100205]Homage, O Bhava, Lord of Beasts, unto thy face and all thine
    eyes,
   To skin, and hue, and aspect, and to thee when looked at from
    behind!
 [1100206]We offer homage to thy limbs, thy belly, and thy tongue, and
    mouth we offer homage to thy smell.
 [1100207]Never may we contend with him, the mighty archer, thousand-
    eyed. [p. 47]
   Rudra who wears black tufts of hair, the slaughterer of
   Ardhaka.
 [1100208]May he, may Bhava from all sides avoid us, avoid us even as
    fire avoids the waters. Let him not threaten us. To him be
    homage!
 [1100209]Four times, eight times be homage paid to Bhava, yea, Lord of
   Beasts, ten times be reverence paid thee!
   Thine are these animals, five several classes, oxen, and goats and
    sheep, and men, and horses
 [1100210]Thine the four regions, thine are earth and heaven, thine,
   Mighty One, this firmament between them;
   Thine everything with soul and breath here on the surface of the
    land.
 [1100211]Thine is this ample wealth-containing storehouse that holds with-
    in it all these living creatures.
   Favour us, Lord of Beasts, to thee be homage! Far from us go
    ill-omens, dogs, and jackals, and wild-haired women with
    their horrid shrieking!
 [1100212]A yellow bow of gold thou wieldest, slaying its hundred, tufted
   God! smiting its thousand.
   Weapon of Gods, far flies the shaft of Rudra: wherever it may
    be, we pay it homage.
 [1100213]Thou, Rudra, followest close the foe who lies in wait to conquer
    thee.
   Even as a hunter who pursues the footsteps of the wounded
    game.
 [1100214]Accordant and allies, Bhava and Rudra, with mighty strength ye
    go to deeds of valour. Wherever they may be, we pay them
    homage.
 [1100215]Be homage, Rudra, unto thee approaching and departing hence!
   Homage to thee when standing still, to thee when seated and at
    rest!
 [1100216]Homage at evening and at morn, homage at night, homage by
    day .
   To Bhava and to Sarva, both, have I paid lowly reverence,
 [1100217]Let us not outrage with our tongue far-seeing Rudra, thousand-
    eyed,
   Inspired with varied lore, who shoots his arrows forward, far
    away. [p. 48]
 [1100218]Foremost we go to meet his car, the chariot of the long-haired
   God,
   Drawn by brown horses, dusky, black, o'erthrowing, slaying,
    terrible. Let reverence be paid to him.
 [1100219]Cast not thy club at us, thy heavenly weapon. Lord of Beasts,
    be not wroth with us. Let reverence be paid to thee.
   Shake thy celestial branch above some others elsewhere, not o'er
    us.
 [1100220]Do us no harm, but comfort us: avoid thou us, and be not
    wroth. Never let us contend with thee.
 [1100221]Covet not thou our kine or men, covet not thou our goats or
    sheep.
   Elsewhither, strong One! turn thine aim: destroy the mockers'
    family.
 [1100222]Homage to him whose weapon, Cough or Fever, assails one like
    the neighing of a stallion; to him who draws one forth and
    then another!
 [1100223]Homage be paid him with ten Sakvari verses who stands
    established in the air's mid-region, slaying non-sacrificing
   God-despisers!
 [1100224]For thee were forest beasts and sylvan creatures placed in the
    wood, and small birds, swans, and eagles.
   Floods, Lord of Beasts! contain thy living beings: to swell thy
    strength flow the celestial Waters.
 [1100225]Porpoises, serpents, strange aquatic monsters, fishes, and things
    unclean at which thou shootest.
   Nothing is far for thee, naught checks thee, Bhava! The whole
    earth in a moment thou surveyest. From the east sea thou
    smitest in the northern.
 [1100226]O'erwhelm us not with Fever or with poison, nor, Rudra! with
    the fire that comes from heaven. Elsewhere, and not on us,
    cast down this lightning.
 [1100227]Ruler of heaven and Lord of earth is Bhava: Bhava hath filled
    the spacious air's mid-region. Where'er he be, to him be paid
    our homage!
 [1100228]King Bhava, favour him who offers worship, for thou art
   Pasupati, Lord of victims.
   Be gracious to the quadruped and biped of the believer in the
   Gods' existence. [p. 49]
 [1100229]Harm thou among us neither great nor little, not one who bears
    us, not our future bearers.
   Injure no sire among us, harm no mother. Forbear to injure our
    own bodies, Rudra.
 [1100230]This lowly reverence have I paid to Rudra's dogs with mighty
    mouths,
   Hounds terrible with bark and howl, who gorge unmasticated
    food.
 [1100231]Homage to thy loud-shouting hosts and thy long-haired
    followers!
   Homage to hosts that are adored, homage to armies that enjoy
   Homage to all thy troops, O God. Security and bliss be ours!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN III

  

A glorification of the Odana or oblation of boiled rice

   [1100301]1. Of that Odana Brihaspati is the head, Brahma the mouth.
    [1100302]2. Heaven and Earth are the ears, the Sun and Moon are the
    eyes, the seven Rishis are the vital airs inhaled and exhaled. [p. 50]
    3. Vision is the pestle, Desire the mortar. 4. Diti is the
    winnowing basket, Aditi is she who holds it, Vata is the sifter.
    5. Horses are the grains, oxen the winnowed ricegrains, gnats
    the husks. 6. Kabru is the husked grain, the rain cloud is the
    reed. 7. Grey iron is its flesh, copper its blood. 8. Tin is its
    ashes, gold its colour, the blue lotus flower its scent. 9. The
    threshing-floor is its dish, the wooden swords its shoulders,
    the car-shafts its backbones. 10. Collar-bones are its entrails,
    straps its intestines. 11. This earth, verily becomes the jar,
    and heaven the cover of the Odana as it is cooking.
    12. Furrows are its ribs, sandy soils the undigested contents
    of its stomach. 13. Law is its water for the hands and family
    custom its aspersion. 14. The jar covered with the Rich has
    been solemnly directed by the priestly office. 15. Received by
    the Brahman, it has been carried round. 16. The Brihat is,
    the stirring-spoon, the Rathantara the ladle. 17. The Seasons
    are the dressers, the Groups of Seasons kindle the fire.
    18. The caldron flames round the oblation (charu) whose
    mouth consists of five openings.
    [1100319]19. The sacrificial word, all worlds are to be won with Odana.
    [1100320]20. Whereon in order rest the three, the ocean, and the heaven, and
    earth.
    [1100321]21. Within the residue whereof the Gods arranged six eightieth
    parts--
    [1100322]22. I ask thee, of this Odana what is the mighty magnitude.
    [1100323]23. He who may know the magnitude of the Odana. 24. Would say,
   Not small, nor devoid of moistening sauce; not this, nor any-
    thing whatever. 25. He would not declare it to be greater than
    the giver imagines it to be. 26. The theologians say, Thou
    hast eaten the averted Odana and the Odana turned hither-
    ward. 27. Thou hast eaten the Odana and the Odana will eat
    thee. 28. Thou hast eaten this averted; thy inward breath will
    leave thee; so he said to this one. 29. Thou hast eaten this
    turned hitherward; thy downward breath will leave thee; so
    he said to this one. 30. I indeed have not eaten the Odana,
    nor has the Odana eaten me. 31. The Odana has just eaten
    the Odana.

  

2

   [1100332]32. And thence he said to this one, Thou hast eaten this with a[p. 51]
    different head from that with which the ancient Rishis ate:
    thy offspring, reckoning from the eldest, will die. I have eaten
    it neither turned downward, nor turned away, nor turned
    hitherward. With Brihaspati as head: with him I have eaten,
    with him have I come to it. Now this Odana is complete with
    all members, joints, and body. Complete, verily, with all his
    members, joints, and body is he who possess this knowledge.
    33. And thence he said to him, Thou hast eaten this with
    other ears than those with which the ancient Rishis ate it.
    Thou wilt be deaf. I have eaten it neither, etc. (as in verse 32).
    With Heaven and Earth as ears, with these I have eaten it,
    with these I have come to it. Now this Odana, etc. (as in 32).
    34. And thence he said to him. Thou hast eaten this with
    other eyes . . . thou wilt be blind. With Sun and Moon, etc.
    35. And thence, etc. . . with other month. Thy offspring will
    die, reckoning from the head . . . With Brahma as mouth.
    36. And thence, etc. . . . with other tongue . . . Thy tongue
    will die . . . With the tongue of Agni. 37. And thence, etc. . .
    With other teeth . . . Thy teeth will fall out . . . With the
    Seasons as teeth. 38. And thence, etc. . . . with other vital
    airs. . . . Thy vital airs will leave thee . . . With the Seven
    Rishis as the vital airs. 39. And thence, etc. . . . with other
    expanse . . . Consumption will destroy thee . . . With the
    firmament as expanse. 40 And thence, etc. . . . with other
    back. . . . Lightning will slay thee. . . With the heaven as
    back. 41. And thence, etc. . . . with other breast . . . Thou
    wilt fail in agriculture. . . . With the earth as breast. 42. And
    thence, etc. . . . with other belly . . . colic will destroy thee . . .
    With truth as belly. 43. And thence, etc. . . . with other
    abdomen . . . Thou wilt die in the water . . . With the sea as
    abdomen. 44. And thence, etc. . . . with other thighs . . .
    Thy thigh will perish . . . With Mitra-Varuna as thighs.
    45. And thence, etc. . . . with other knees . . . Thou wilt
    become a sick man . . . With the knees of Tvashtar. 46. And
    thence, etc. . . . with other feet . . . Thou wilt become a
    wanderer . . . With the feet of the Asvins. 47. And thence,
    etc. . . with other fore-parts of the feet . . . A serpent will
    kill thee . . . With the fore-parts of Savitar's feet. 48. And
    thence, etc. . . . with other hands . . . The Brahmana (divine
    power) will kill thee . . . With the hands of Right. 49. And [p. 52]
    thence, etc. . . . with other basis . . . Without standing-ground
    and resting-place thou wilt die . . . Having taken my stand on
    truth. With this I ate it, with this I came to it. Now this
    Odana is complete with all members, joints, and body.
    Complete, verily, with all his members, joints, and body is he
    who possesses this knowledge.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

A glorification of Prana, Breath or Vital Spirit

[1100401]Homage to Prana, him who hath dominion o'er the universe,
   Who hath become the Sovran Lord of all, on whom the whole
    depends!
 [1100402]Homage, O Prana, to thy roar, to thunder-peal and lightning
    flash!
   Homage, O Prana, unto thee what time thou sendest down thy
    rain!
 [1100403]When Prana with a thunderous voice shouts his loud message
    to the plants,
   They straightway are impregnate, they conceive, and bear
    abundantly. [p. 53]
 [1100404]When the due season hath arrived and Prana shouteth to herbs,
   Then all is joyful, yea, each thing upon the surface of the earth.
 [1100405]When Prana hath poured down his flood of rain upon the
    mighty land.
   Cattle and beasts rejoice thereat: Now great will he our
    strength, they cry.
 [1100406]Watered by Prana's rain the plants have raised their voices in
    accord:
   Thou hast prolonged our life, they say, and given fragrance to us
    all.
 [1100407]Homage to thee when coming nigh, homage to thee departing
    hence!
   Homage, O Prana, be to thee when standing and when sitting
    still.
 [1100408]Homage to thee at every breath thou drawest in and sendest
    forth!
   Homage to thee when turned away, homage to thee seen face to
    face! This reverence be to all of thee!
 [1100409]Prana, communicate to us thy dear, thy very dearest form.
   Whatever healing balm thou hast, give us thereof that we may
    live.
 [1100410]Prana robes living creatures as a father his beloved son. Prana
    is sovran Lord of all, of all that breathes not, all that
    breathes
 [1100411]Prana is Fever, he is Death. Prana is worshipped by the Gods.
   Prana sets in the loftiest sphere the man who speaks the words
    of truth.
 [1100412]Prana is Deshtri, and Viraj Prana is reverenced by all. He is the
   Sun, he is the Moon. Prana is called Prajapati.
 [1100413]Both breaths are rice and barley, and Prana is called the toiling
    ox:
   In barley is the inbreath laid, and rice is named the outward
    breath.
 [1100414]The human infant in the womb draws vital breath and sends it
   Lout:
   When thou, O Prana, quickenest the babe it springs anew to
    life.
 [1100415]The name of Prana is bestowed on Matarisvan and on Wind.
   On Prana, past and future, yea, on Prana everything depends. [p. 54]
 [1100416]All herbs and plants spring forth and grow when thou, O Prana
    quickenest,
   Plants of Atharvan, Angiras, plants of the deities and men.
 [1100417]When Prana hath poured down his flood of rain upon the
    mighty earth,
   The plants are wakened into life, and every herd that grows on
    ground.
 [1100418]The man who knows this truth of thee, O Prana, and what bears
    thee up
   To him will all present their gift of tribute in that loftiest will
    all present their gift of tribute in that loftiest world.
 [1100419]As all these living creatures are thy tributaries, Prana, so
   Shall they bring tribute unto him who hears thee with attentive
    ears.
 [1100420]Filled with a babe, mid deities he wanders: grown; near at hand,
    he springs again to being.
   That Father, grown the present and the future, hath past into
    the son with mighty powers.
 [1100421]Hansa, what time he rises up, leaves in the flood one foot un-
    moved.
   If he withdrew it there would be no more tomorrow or to-day,
   Never would there be night, no more would daylight shine or
    morning flush.
 [1100422]It rolleth on, eight-wheeled and single-fellied, and with a thousand
    eyes, forward and backward.
   With one half it engendered all creation. What sign is there to
    tell us of the other?
 [1100423]Homage, O Prana unto thee armed with swift bow among the
    rest,
   In whose dominion is this All of varied sort that stirs and
    works!
 [1100424]May he who rules this Universe of varied sort, that stirs and
    works,
   Prana, alert and resolute, assist me through the prayer I pray.
 [1100425]Erect among the sleepers he wakes, and is never laid at length,
   No one hath ever heard that he hath been asleep while others
    slept.
 [1100426]Thou, Prana, never shalt be hid, never shalt be estranged from
    me.
   I bind thee on myself for life, O Prana, like the Waters' germ.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

HYMN V

  

A glorification of the Brahmachgri or religious student

[1100501]Stirring both worlds the Brahmachari moveth: in him the
    deities are all one-minded.
   He hath established firmly earth and heaven: he satisfies his
   Master with his Fervour.
 [1100502]After the Brahmachari go the Fathers, the heavenly hosts, all
   Gods in separate order.
   After him too have the Gandharvas followed, thirty and three,
    three hundred, and six thousand. He satisfies all Gods with
    his devotion.
 [1100503]The Master, welcoming his new disciple, into his bowels takes
    the Brahmachari.
   Three nights he holds and bears him in this belly. When he is
    born, the Gods convene to see him.
 [1100504]This log is earth, the second log is heaven: he fills the air's mid
    region with the fuel.
   With fuel, with his zone the Brahmachari contents the worlds,
    with labour and with Fervour.
 [1100505]The Brahmachari, earlier born than Brahma, sprang up through
   Fervour, robed in hot libation.
   From him sprang heavenly lore, the highest Brahma, and all the
   Gods, with life that lasts for ever. [p. 56]
 [1100506]Lighted by fuel goes the Brahmachari, clad in black-buck skin,
    consecrate, long-bearded.
   Swiftly he goes from east to northern ocean, grasping the worlds,
    oft bringing them anear him.
 [1100507]The Brahmachari, fathering Prayer, world, Waters, Viraj, Praja-
    pati, and Parameshthin,
   Lay as a germ within the Immortal's bosom, then became Indra
    and destroyed the demons.
 [1100508]The Master fashioned both these cloudy regions, profound and
    spacious pair, the earth and heaven.
   The Brahmachari guards them with his Fervour. In him the
    deities are all one-minded.
 [1100509]The Brahmachari first of all brought hither this ample earth as
    alms, and heaven above it.
   He makes these twain two fuel-logs, and worships, On these sup-
    ported rest all living creatures.
 [1100510]Both treasuries of sacred lore lie hidden, one hitherward, beyond
    heaven's ridge the other.
   The Brahmachari with his Fervour guards them. He makes this
    all his own as knowing Brahma.
 [1100511]Hitherward one, hence from the earth the other, two Agnis meet
    between these cloudy regions.
   Close to these two firm rays of light are clinging. The Brahma-
    chari enters them through Fervour.
 [1100512]Thundering, shouting, ruddy-hued, and pallid, he bears along the
    earth great manly vigour.
   Down on the ridge of earth the Brahmachari pours seed, and
    this gives life to heaven's four regions.
 [1100513]The Brahmachari stores with fuel Waters, and Fire, and Sun, and
   Moon, and Matarisvan.
   The Water's lights move separate in the rain-cloud, Man, rain,
    and water are their molten butter.
 [1100514]The Master is Death, Varuna, Soma, the plants of earth, and
    milk.
   The thunder-clouds were men of war. By these this heavenly
    light was brought.
 [1100515]Varuna, made a Master, takes at home the butter to himself.
   Whatever with Prajapati he sought, the Brahmachari gave like
   Mitra from his loftiest soul. [p. 57]
 [1100516]The pupil is the Master, yea, the pupil is Prajapati.
   Prajapati shines bright; the bright Viraj grew potent Indra's self.
 [1100517]By Fervour and by self-restraint the King protects the realm he
    rules.
   By self-restraint the Master seeks a Brahmachari to instruct.
 [1100518]By self-restraint a maiden finds a youth to be her wedded lord.
   By self-restraint the ox and horse seek to win fodder for them-
    selves.
 [1100519]By Fervour and by self-restraint the Gods draye Death away
    from them,
   And Indra brought by self-restraint heaven's lustre to the deities.
 [1100520]The plants, what is and what shall be, day, night, the tall tree of
    the wood,
   The year with seasons of the year, all from the Brahmachari
    sprang.
 [1100521]All creatures of the earth and heaven, tame animals and sylvan
    beasts,
   Winged and wingless creatures, from the Brahmachari sprang
    to life,
 [1100522]All children of Prajapati have breath distinctly in themselves.
   The Brahma that is stored within the Brahmachari guards them
    all.
 [1100523]Piled up on high, but never yet ascended, that power of deities
    is brightly shining.
   From that sprang heavenly lore, the loftiest Brahma, and all the
   Gods with, life that lasts for ever.
 [1100524]The Brahmachari wields the radiant Brahma wherein all Gods
    are woven close together;
   Creating breath, inhaling and exhaling, voice, mind, and heart,
   Brahma and holy wisdom.
 [1100525]Bestow on us the power of sight and hearing, glory and food and
    seed and blood and belly.
 [1100526]These, standing on the flood, the Brahmachari formed practising
    in sea his hot devotion.
   When he hath bathed, brown, yellow-hued, he shines exceedingly
    on earth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

  

HYMN VI

  

A prayer to all Divinities and Sanctities for deliverance from distress

[1100601]We call on Agni, on the trees lords of the forest, herbs and.
    plants,
   Indra, Surya, Brihaspati: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100602]We call on Vishnu, Bhaga, on Mitra and Varuna the King,
   Ansa Vivasvan we address: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100603]We call on Savitar the God, on Pushan the establisher, [p. 59]
   Tvashtar the foremost we address: may they deliver us from
    woe.
 [1100604]Gandharvas and Apsarases; the Asvins, Brahmanaspati,
   Aryaman, God, by name we call: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100605]This word of ours to Day and Night, and to the Sun and Moon
    we speak,
   All the Adityas we address: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100606]Vata, Parjanya we address, the Quarters, and the Firmament,
   And all the Regions of the sky: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100607]From all that brings a curse may Day and Night and Dawn
    deliver me,
   May Soma free me, God to whom they give the name of Chan-
    dramas.
 [1100608]All creatures both of heaven and earth, wild beasts and sylvan
    animals,
   And winged birds of air we call: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100609]Bhava and Sarva we address, and Rudra who is Lord of Beasts,
   Their arrows which we feel and know: may they be ever kind to
    us.
 [1100610]We speak to Constellations, Heaven, to Earth, to Genii, and to
   Hills,
   To Seas, to Rivers, and to Lakes: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100611]Or the Seven Rishis we address, Waters divine, Prajapati,
   Fathers with Yama at their head: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100612]Gods whose abode is in the heaven and those who dwell in
    middle air,
   And Mighty ones who rest on earth: may they deliver us from.
    woe.
 [1100613]Adityas, Rudra, Vasus, Gods aloft in heaven, Atharvan's sons,
   The sages, sons of Angiras: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100614]To sacrifice, to worshipper, hymns, songs, and healing charms,
    we speak,
   To priestly acts and Yajus texts: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100615]To the five kingdoms of the plants which Soma rules as Lord we
    speak.
   Darbha, hemp, barley, mighty power: may these deliver us from
    woe,
 [1100616]To demons and fierce fiends we speak, to Holy Genii, Fathers,.
   Snakes, [p. 60]
   And to the hundred deaths and one: may these deliver us from
    woe.
 [1100617]We speak to Seasons, Season-Lords, to years and sections of the
    year,
   To Months, half-months, and years complete: may they deliver
    us from woe.
 [1100618]Come hither from the south, ye Gods, rise and come forward
    from the west.
   Gathered together, all ye Gods, ye mighty Ones, from east and
    and north: may they deliver us from woe.
 [1100619]This we address to all the Gods, faithful, maintainers of the
   Right,
   With all their Consorts by their side: may they deliver us from
    woe.
 [1100620]We speak to the collected Gods, faithful, maintainers of the
   Right.
   Present with their collective Dames: may these deliver us from
    woe.
 [1100621]The spirit, yea, the spirits' Lord, ruler of spirits, we address.
   Together let all spirits meet: may these deliver us from woe.
 [1100622]The five Sky regions, Goddesses, and the twelve Seasons which
    are Gods.
   The teeth of the completed year, may these deliver us from woe.
 [1100623]The deathless balm that Matali knows, purchased at a chariot's
    price,
   Indra effused into the floods. Waters, give us that healing
    balm!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

  

HYMN VII

  

A glorification of the Uchchhishta or Residue of Sacrifice

[1100701]The Residue of Sacrifice containeth name, and from, and world:
   Indra and Agni and the whole universe are comprised therein.
 [1100702]The Residue of Sacrifice holdeth Earth, Heaven, and all that is:
   The Residue of Sacrifice holdeth sea, waters, Moon, and Wind.
 [1100703]Real, non-real, both are there, Prajapati, and Death, and
    strength:
   Thereon depend the worldly ones: in me are glory Dra and Vra.
 [1100704]The firm, the fast, the strong, the hard, Brahma, the All-creating
    Ten.
   Gods, as a wheel about the nave, are fixed all round the
    Residue.
 [1100705]Verse, Song, and Sacrificial Text, chanting, the prelude, and the
    laud,
   The hum is in the Residue, the tone, the murmur of the psalm.
 [1100706]Within the Residue, like babes unborn, the parts of sacrifice,
   Aindragne Pavamana lie. Mahanamni, Mahavrata.
 [1100707]The Vajapeya, Royal Rite, the Agnishoma and its forms,
   Hymns, joyfullest with living grass the Asvamedha, are therein,
 [1100708]Diksha and Agnyadheya rite that sates the wish, with magic-
    hymn,
   Suspended rites, long sessions, are contained within the Residue.
 [1100709]Faith fire-oblation, fervent zeal, service, and sacrificial cry,
   Guerdon, good works and their reward, are stored within the
   Residue.
 [1100710]Sacrifice of one night, or two, Sadya1 kri, Ukthya, and Prakri,
   Call, deep-toned summons are therein, fine parts, through lore,
    of sacrifice,
 [1100711]Sacrifice of four nights, of five, of six nights, day and night
    conjoined,
   Shodai, seven-night sacrifice, all these sprang from the Residue,
    these which the Immortal One contains. [p. 62]
 [1100712]Pratihara and Nidhanam, the Visvajit, the Abhijit,
   The two Sahnatiratras and Twelve-day rite are stored therein.
 [1100713]Pleasantness, reverence, peace, and power, strength, vigour,
    immortality
   All forward wishes are with love satisfied in the Residue.
 [1100714]Nine several oceans, earths, and skies are set within, the Residue,
   Bright shines the Sun therein, in me, the Residue, are Day and
   Night.
 [1100715]The Residue the Father's sire, who bears this universe, supports
   Vishuvan, Upahavya, and all worship offered secretly.
 [1100716]The Father's sire, the Residue, grandson of Spirit, primal Sire,
   Lord of the universe, the Bull, dwells on the earth victorious.
 [1100717]Right, truth, dominion, fervent zeal, toil, duty, action, future,
    past,
   Valour; prosperity, and strength dwell in the Residue in
    strength.
 [1100718]Welfare, resolve and energy, the six expanses, kingship, sway,
   Prayer, and direction, and the year, oblation, planets, are there-
    in;
 [1100719]And the four Hotars, Apri hymns, the Nivids, and Four-
    monthly rites,
   Oblations, sacrifices, and animal offerings, and their forms.
 [1100720]Months, half-months, sections of the year, seasons are in the
   Residue,
   The waters resonant afar, the thunder, and the mighty noise.
 [1100721]Pebbles, sand, stones, and herbs, and plants, and grass are in
    the Residue,
   Closely embraced and laid therein are lightnings and the clouds
    and rain.
 [1100722]Gain, acquisition, and success, fulness, complete prosperity.
   Great gain and wealth, are laid, concealed and treasured, in the
   Residue.
 [1100723]All things that breathe the breath of life, all creatures that have
    eyes to see,
   All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang from the
   Residue.
 [1100724]Verses, and Songs, and magic hymns, Purana, sacrificial text.
   All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang from the
   Residue. [p. 63]
 [1100725]Inbreath and outbreath, eye and ear, decay and freedom from
    decay,
   All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang from the
    Residue.
 [1100726]All pleasures and enjoyments, all delights and rapturous ecsta-
    sies,
   All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang from the
    Residue.
 [1100727]The Deities, the Fathers, men, Gandharvas, and Apsarases.
   6 All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang from the
   Residue.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

HYMN VIII

  

On the origin of some Gods and the creation of man

[1100801]When Manyu brought his consort home forth from Sankalpa's
    dwelling-place,
   Who were the wooers of the bride, who was the chief who
    courted her?
 [1100802]Fervour and Action were the two, in depths of the great billowy
    sea?
   These were the wooers of the bride; Brahma the chief who
    courted her.
 [1100803]Ten Gods before the Gods were born together in the ancient
    time.
   Whoso may know them face to face may now pronounce the
    mighty word.
 [1100804]Inbreath and outbreath, eye and ear, decay and freedom from.
    decay, [p. 65]
   Spiration upward and diffused, voice, mind have brought us
    wish and plan.
 [1100805]As yet the Seasons were unborn, and Dilator and Prajapati,
   Both Asvins, Indra, Agni. Whom then did they worship as
    supreme?
 [1100806]Fervour and Action were the two, in depths of the great billowy
    sea;
   Fervour sprang up from Action: this they served and worship-
    ped as supreme.
 [1100807]He may account himself well versed in ancient time who knows
    by name.
   The earth that was before this earth, which only wisest Sages
    know.
 [1100808]From whom did Indra spring? from whom sprang Soma?
    whence was Agni born?
   From whom did Tvashtar spring to life? and whence is Dilator's
    origin?
 [1100809]Indra from Indra, Soma from Soma, Agni from Agni sprang
   Tvashtar from Tvashtar was produced, Dilator was Dhatar's
    origin.
 [1100810]Those Gods who were of old, the Ten begotten earlier than the
   Gods,
   What world do they inhabit since they gave the world unto
    their sons?
 [1100811]When he had brought together hair, sinew and bone, marrow
    and flesh.
   And to the body added feet, then to what world did he depart?
 [1100812]Whence, from what region did he bring the hair, the sinews, and
    the bones,
   Marrow and limbs, and joints, and flesh? Who was the bringer,
    and from whence?
 [1100813]Casters, those Gods were called who brought together all the
    elements:
   When they had fused the mortal man complete, they entered
    into him.
 [1100814]The thighs, the knee-bones, and the feet, the head, the face,
   Land both the hands,
   The ribs, the nipples, and the sides--what I ishi hath constructed
    that? [p. 66]
 [1100815]Head, both the hands, and face, and tongue, and neck, and inter-
    coastal parts,
   All this, investing it with skins, Mahi conjoined with bond and
    tie.
 [1100816]What time the might body lay firmly compact with tie and bond,
   Who gave its colour to the form, the hue wherewith it shines
    to-day?
 [1100817]All Deities had lent their aid: of this a noble Dame took note,
   Tsa, the Consort of Command. She gave its colour to the form.
 [1100818]When Tvashtar, Tvashtar's loftier Sire, had bored it out and
    hollowed it.
   Gods made the mortal their abode, and entered and possessed
    the man.
 [1100819]Sleep, specially, Sloth, Nirriti, and deities whose name is Sin,
   Baldness, old age, and hoary hairs within the body found their
    way.
 [1100820]Theft, evil-doing, and deceit, truth, sacrifice, exalted fame,
   Strength, princely power, and energy entered the body as a
    home.
 [1100821]Prosperity and poverty, kindnesses and malignities,
   Hunger and thirst of every kind entered the body as a home.
 [1100822]Reproaches, freedom from reproach, all blamable, all blameless
    deeds,
   Bounty, belief, and unbelief entered the body as a home.
 [1100823]All knowledge and all ignorance, each other thing that one may
    learn,
   Entered the body, prayer, and hymns, and songs, and sacrificial
    texts.
 [1100824]Enjoyments, pleasures, and delights, gladness, and rapturous
    ecstasies.
   Laughter and merriment and dance entered the body as a home.
 [1100825]Discourse and conversation, and the shrill-resounding cries of
    woe,
   All entered in, the motives and the purposes combined there-
    with.
 [1100826]Inbreath and outbreath, ear and eye, decay and freedom from
    decay.
   Breath upward and diffused, voice, mind, these quickly with the
    body move, [p. 67]
 [1100827]All earnest wishes, all commands, directions, and admonish-
    ments.
   Reflections, all deliberate plans entered the body as a home.
 [1100828]They laid in the abhorrent frame those waters hidden, bright,
    and thick,
   Which in the bowels spring from blood, from mourning or from
    hasty toil.
 [1100829]Fuel they turned to bone, and then they set light waters in the
    frame.
   The molten butter they made seed: then the Gods entered into
    man.
 [1100830]All Waters, all the Deities. Viraj with Brahma at her side:
   Brahma into the body passed: Prajapati is Lord thereof.
 [1100831]The Sun and Wind formed, separate, the eye and vital breath of
    man.
   His other person have the Gods bestowed on Agni as a gift.
 [1100832]Therefore whoever knoweth man regardeth him as Brahman's
    self:
   For all the Deities abide in him as cattle in their pen.
 [1100833]At his first death he goeth hence, asunder, in three separate
    parts.
   He goeth yonder with one part, with one he goeth yonder:
    here he sinketh downward with a third.
 [1100834]In the primeval waters cold the body is deposited.
   In this there is the power of growth: from this is power of
    growth declared.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68]

  

HYMN IX

  

An incantation for the destruction of a hostile army

[1100901]All arms and every arrow, all the power and might that bows
    possess,
   The warlike weapon, axes, swords, the plan and purpose in the
    heart,
   All this, O Arbudi, make thou visible to our enemies, and let
    them look on mist and fog.
 [1100902]Arise ye and prepare yourselves: ye, the celestial hosts, are
    friends.
   Let your mysterious natures be seen by our friends O Arbudi.
 [1100903]Rise both of you: begin your work with fettering and binding.
    fast,
   Assail, both of you, Arbudi, the armies of our enemies.
 [1100904]The God whose name is Arbudi, and Nyarbudi the Mighty
   One,
   The two by whom the air and this great earth are compassed
    and possessed,
   With these two friends of Indra I go forth to conquer with the
    host.
 [1100905]Rise with our army stand thou up. O Godlike Being, Arbudi.
   Breaking the hosts of enemies, surround them with thy winding
    coils.
 [1100906]Exhibiting, O Arbudi, seven children of the mist and fog,
   When butter hath been offered, rise with all of these and with
    the host.
 [1100907]Beating her breast, with tearful face, let the short-earned, the
    wild-haired hag. [p. 69]
   Shriek loudly when a man is slain, pierced through by thee, O
   Arbudi;
 [1100908]Snatching away the vertebra, while with her thought she seeks
    her son,
   Her husband, brother, kin, when one, Arbudi! hath been pierc-
    ed by thee.
 [1100909]Let vultures, ravens, kites, and crows, and every carrion-eating
    bird.
   Feast on our foes, and show where one, Arbudi! hath been
    pierced by thee.
 [1100910]Then let each greedy beast of prey, and fly and worm regale
    itself
   Upon the human corpse where one, Arbudi, hath been pierced
    by thee.
 [1100911]Attack them, both of you; bear off their vital breath O Nyar-
    budi.
   Let mingled shouts and echoing cries of woe amid our foemen
    show where thou, O Arbudi, hast pierced
 [1100912]Shake them, and let them sink with fear: e'erwhelm our enemies
    with dread.
   With widely-grasping bends of arm, O Arbudi, crush down our
    foes.
 [1100913]Let those mens' arms grow faint and weak, dull be the purpose
    of their heart;
   And let not aught of them be left when thou, O Arbudi, hast
    pierced.
 [1100914]Self-smiting, beating breast and thigh, careless of unguent, with
    their hair dishevelled, weeping,
   hags shall run together, when a man is slain, when thou, O
   Arbudi, hast pierced.
 [1100915]Apsarases with dog-like mates, and Rupakas, O Arbudi,
   And her who licks the cup inside, and seeks to wound in ill-
    kept place,
   All these, O Arbudi, do thou make visible to our enemies and
    let them look on mists and fog.
 [1100916]The fiend who creeps upon the sword, maimed, dwelling where
   Lthe wounded lie,
   The misty shapes that lurk concealed, Gandharvas and Apsara-
    ses, demons, and snakes and Other Folk; [p. 70]
 [1100917]Armed with four fangs and yellow teeth, deformed, with faces
    smeared with blood, the terrible and fearless ones,
 [1100918]Make thou, O Arbudi, those wings of hostile armies quake with
    dread.
   Let Conqueror and Victor, friends of Indra, overcome our foes.
 [1100919]Stifled and crushed, O Nyarbudi, low let the smitten foeman lie.
   With tongue of fire and crest of smoke go conquering maidens
    with our host!
 [1100920]May Indra, Lord of Might, strike down each bravest warrior of
    the foes,
   Whom this our band hath put to flight: let not one man of
    those escape.
 [1100921]Let their hearts burst asunder, let their breath fly up and pass
    away.
   Let dryness of the mouth o'ertake our foemen, not the friendly
    ones.
 [1100922]The clever and the foolish ones, those who are twisted round,
    the deaf,
   The dusky-hued, the hornless goats and those whose voice is like
    the buck's,
   All these, O Arbudi, do thou make visible to our enemies:
    cause them to look on mists and fog.
 [1100923]Arbudi and Trishandhi fall upon our foes and scatter them,
   So that, O Indra, Lord of Might, Slayer of Vritra, we may kill
    thousands of these our enemies!
 [1100924]Tall trees, and those who live in woods, the herbs and creeping
    plants of Earth,
   Gandharvas, and Apsarases, Snakes, [       ] Beings, Fathers,
   Gods,
   All these do thou, O Arbudi, make visible to our enemies:
    cause them to look on mists and fog.
 [1100925]High sway have Maruts, and the God Aditya, Brahmanaspati,
   High sway have Indra, Agni, and Dilator, Mitra, Prajapati,
   High sway have Rishis given to you, showing upon our enemies
    where thou, O Arbudi, hast pierced.
 [1100926]With full dominion over these, rise, stand ye up, prepare your-
    selves,
   Ye are our friends, celestial hosts. When ye have won this
    battle, go, each to his several sphere, apart.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

HYMN X

[1101001]Rise up, with all your banners rise; prepare your strength, ye
    vapoury Forms!
   Serpents and fiends and Other Folk, charge and pursue our
    enemies!
 [1101002]Let those who bear an evil name, in air, in heaven on earth, and
    men,
   After Trishandhi's will, revere your power, the sway that Know-
    ledge gives, together with your ruddy flags.
 [1101003]Let those with iron faces, with faces like needles or like combs,
   Flesh-eaters, rapid as the wind, cling closely to our foemen with
   Trishandhi for their thunderbolt.
 [1101004]Omniscient Aditya, make full many a corpse to disappear.
   Let this devoted army of Trishandhi be in my control.
 [1101005]Rise up, O Godlike Being, rise, Arbudi, with thine army: this,
   Tribute is sacrificed to thee, Trishandhi's welcome offering
 [1101006]May this four-footed White-foot, may this arrow brace and bind
    thee fast:
   Together with Trishandhi's host, be thou, O Witchcraft, meant
    for foes.
 [1101007]Down let the dim-eyed demon fly, and let her shorteared sister
    shriek:
   Red be the banners when the host of Arbudi hath won the day.
 [1101008]Let all the birds that move on wings come downward, all fowls
    that roam the heavens and air's midregion. [p. 72]
   Let beasts of prey and flies attacks, and vultures that eat raw
    flesh mangle and gnaw the carcase.
 [1101009]By that same binding treaty which thou madest, Brihaspati!
    with Indra! and with Brahma,
   By Indra's pledge I bid the Gods come hither. Conquer on this
    side, not on their side yonder.
 [1101010]Brihaspati Angirasa, Rishis made strong and keen by prayer,
   Have set Trishandhi in the heaven, dire weapon that destroys
    the fiends.
 [1101011]The Gods enjoyed Trishandhi for the sake of energy and power,
   Him under whose protection, both, Indra and yon Aditya stand.
 [1101012]The Gods, victorious, won themselves all worlds by this oblation,
    which
   Brihaspati Angirasa effused, a very thunderbolt, a weapon to
    destory the friends.
 [1101013]That fiend-destroying weapon which Brihaspati Angirasa poured
    out and made a thunderbolt.
   Even therewith, Brihaspati, I brush that hostile armament, and
    strike the foemen down with might.
 [1101014]Over to us come all the Gods who eat the hallowed sacrifice
   With this oblation be ye pleased: conquer on this side, not on
    that.
 [1101015]Over,to us let all Gods come: dear is Trishandhi's offering.
   Keen the great pledge through which, of old, the Asuras were
    overthrown.
 [1101016]Let Vayu bend the arrow-points of those who are our enemies.
   Let Indra break their arms away: no power to lay the shaft be
    theirs!
   Aditya utterly destroy their missile! Chandramas bar the path
    of him who lingers!
 [1101017]If they have issued forth strongholds of Gods, and made their
    shields of prayer,
   Gaining protection for their lives, protection round about, make
    all their instigation powerless
 [1101018]With the Flesh-eater and with Death, following the Purohita,
   On! forward with Trishandhi's host! conquering enemies
    advance!
 [1101019]Do thou, Trishandhi, with the gloom of darkness compass round
    our foes; [p. 73]
   Let none escape of them expelled with speckled butter mixt with
    curds.
 [1101020]Let White-foot fall upon those wings of our opponents' arma-
    ment;
   Mazed and bewildered be those hands of foes this day, O Nyar-
    budi.
 [1101021]Mazed are the foemen, Nyarbudi! Slay thou each bravest man
    of them: with this our army slaughter them.
 [1101022]Low lie the warrior, mailed, unmailed, each foeman in the rush
    of war.
   Down-smitten with the strings of bows, the fastenings of mail,
    the charge!
 [1101023]The armour-clad, the armourless, enemies clothed with coats of
    mail,
   All these struck down, O Arbudi, let dogs devour upon the
    earth.
 [1101024]Car-borne and carless fighting men, riders and those who go
    on foot,
   All these, struck down, let vultures, kites, and all, the birds of
    air devour.
 [1101025]Low let the hostile army lie, thousands of corpses, on the
    ground,
   Pierced through and rent to pieces where the deadly weapons
    clash in fight.
 [1101026]With eagles let them eat the evil-hearted, pierced in the vitals,
    lying crushed and howling.
   The foe whoe'er will fight against this our protecting sacrifice.
 [1101027]With this which Gods attend, with this which never fails to gain
    its end,
   Let Indra, Vritra-slayer, smite, and with Trishandhi as a bolt.

[p. 74]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

  

BOOK XII

  

HYMN I

  

A hymn of prayer and praise to Prithivi or deified Earth

[1200101]Truth, high and potent Law, the Consecrating Rite, Fervour,
   Brahma, and Sacrifice uphold the Earth.
   May she, the Queen of all that is and is to be, may Prithivi
    make ample space and room for us.
 [1200102]Not over awded by the crowd of Manu's sons, she who hath
    many heights and floods and level plains;
   She who bears plants endowed with many varied powers, may
   Prithivi for us spread wide and favour us.
 [1200103]In whom the sea, and Sindhu, and the waters, in whom our food
    and corn-lands had their being,
   In whom this all that breathes and moves is active, this Earth.
    assign us foremost rank and station!
 [1200104]She who is Lady of the earth's four regions, in whom our food
    and corn-lands had their being,
   Nurse in each place of breathing, moving creatures, this Earth.
    vouchsafe us kine with milk that fails not!
 [1200105]On whom the men of old before us battled, on whom the Gods
    attacked the hostile demons,
   The varied home of bird, and kine and horses, this Prithivi
    vouchsafe us luck and splendour!
 [1200106]Firm standing-place, all-bearing, store of treasures, gold-breasted,
    harbourer of all that moveth.
   May Earth who bears Agni Vaisvanara, Consort of mighty
    Indra, give us great possessions
 [1200107]May Earth, may Prithivi, always protected with ceaseless care by
    Gods who never slumber,
   May she pour out for us delicious nectar, may she bedew us
    with a flood of splendour.
 [1200108]She who at first was water in the ocean, whom with their wond-
    rous powers the sages followed,
   May she whose heart is in the highest heaven, compassed about
    wit h truth, and everlasting, [p. 76]
   May she, this Earth, bestow upon us lustre, and grant us power
    in loftiest dominion.
 [1200109]On whom the running universal waters flow day and night with
    never-ceasing motion,
   May she with many streams pour milk to feed us, may she
    bedew us with a flood of splendour.
 [1200110]She whom the Asvins measured out, o'er whom the foot of
   Vishnu strode,
   Whom Indra, Lord of Power and Might, freed from all foemen
    for himself,
   May Earth pour out her milk for us, a mother unto me her son.
 [1200111]O Prithivi, auspicious be thy woodlands, auspicious be thy hills
    and snow-clad mountains.
   Unslain, unwounded, unsubdued, I have set foot upon the
   Earth,
   On earth brown, black, ruddy and every-coloured, on the firm
    earth that Indra guards from danger.
 [1200112]O Prithivi, thy centre and thy navel, all forces that have issued
    from thy body
   Set us amid those forces; breathe upon us. I am the son of
   Earth, Earth is my Mother. Parjanya is my Sire; may he
    promote me.
 [1200143]Earth on whose surface they enclose the altar, and all-performers
    spin the thread of worship;
   In whom the stakes of sacrifice, resplendent, are fixed and raised
    on high before the oblation, may she, this Earth, prospering,
    make us prosper.
 [1200114]The man who hates us, Earth! who fights against us, who
    threaten us with thought or deadly weapon, make him our
    thrall as thou hast done aforetime.
 [1200115]Produced from thee, on thee move mortal creatures: thou
    bearest them, both quadruped and biped.
   Thine, Prithivi, are these Five human Races, for whom, though
    mortal, Surya as he rises spreads with his rays the light that is
    immortal.
 [1200116]In concert may these creatures yield us blessings. With honey of
    discourse, O Earth, endow me.
 [1200117]Kind, ever gracious be the Earth we tread on, the firm Earth,
   Prithivi, borne up by Order, mother of plants and herbs, the
    all-producer. [p. 77]
 [1200118]A vast abode hast thou become, the Mighty. Great stress is on
    thee, press and agitation, but with unceasing care great Indra
    guards thee.
   So make us shine, O Earth, us with the splendour of gold. Let
    no man look on us with hatred.
 [1200119]Agni is in the earth, in plants; the waters hold Agni in them,
    in the stones is Agni.
   Agni abideth deep in men: Agnis abide in cows and steeds.
 [1200120]Agni gives shine and heat in heaven: the spacious air is his, the
   God's
   Lover of fatness, bearer of oblation, men enkindle him.
 [1200121]Dark-kneed, invested with a fiery mantle, Prithivi sharpen me
    and give me splendour!
 [1200122]On earth they offer sacrifice and dressed oblation to the Gods.
   Men, mortals, live upon the earth by food in their accustomed
    way.
   May that Earth grant us breath and vital power. Prithivi give
    me life of long duration!
 [1200123]Scent that hath risen from thee, O Earth, the fragrance which.
    growing herbs and plants and waters carry,
   Shared by Apsarases, shared by Gandharvas therewith make
    thou me sweet: let no man hate me.
 [1200124]Thy scent which entered and possessed the lotus, the scent
    which they prepared at Surya's bridal,
   Scent which Immortals Earth! of old collected, therewith make
    thou me sweet: let no man hate me.
 [1200125]Thy scent in women and in men, the luck and light that is in.
    males,
   That is in heroes and in steeds in sylvan beasts and elephants,
   The splendid energy of maids, therewith do thou unite us,.
   Earth! Let no man look on us with hate.
 [1200126]Rock earth, and stone, and dust, this Earth is held together,.
    firmly bound.
   To this gold-breasted Prithivi mine adoration have I paid.
 [1200127]Hither we call the firmly held, the all-supporting Prithivi,
   On whom the trees, lords of the wood, stand evermore immov-
    able.
 [1200128]Sitting at ease or rising up, standing or going on our way.
   With our right foot and with our left we will not reel upon the
    earth. [p. 78]
 [1200129]I speak to Prithivi the purifier, to patient Earth who groweth
    strong through Brahma.
   O Earth, may we recline on thee who bearest strength, increase,
    portioned share of food, and fatness.
 [1200130]Purified for our bodies flow the waters: we bring distress on
    him who would attack us.
   I cleanse myself, O Earth, with that which cleanseth.
 [1200131]Earth, be thine eastern and thy northern regions, those lying
    southward and those lying westward.
   Propitious unto me in all my movements. Long as I tread the
    ground let me not stumble.
 [1200132]Drive us not from the west or east, drive us not from the north
    or south,
   Be gracious unto us, O Earth: let not the robbers find us; keep
    the deadly weapon far away.
 [1200133]Long as, on thee, I look around, possessing Surya as a friend,
   So long, through each succeeding year, let not my power of
    vision fail.
 [1200134]When, as I lie, O Earth, I turn upon my right side and my left,
   When stretched at all our length we lay our ribs on thee who
    meetest us.
   Do us no injury there, O Earth who furnishest a bed for all.
 [1200135]Let what I dig from thee, O Earth, rapidly spring and grow
    again.
   O Purifier, let me not pierce through thy vitals or thy heart.
 [1200136]Earth, may thy summer, and thy rains, and autumn, thy winter,
    and thy dewy frosts, and spring-time.
   May thy years, Prithivi! and ordered seasons, and day and
    night pour out for us abundance.
 [1200137]The purifier, shrinking from the Serpent, she who held fires that
    lie within the waters,
   Who gives as prey the God-blaspheming Dasyus, Earth choosing
   Indra for her Lord, not Vritra, hath clung to Sakra, to the
   Strong and Mighty.
 [1200138]Base of the seat and sheds, on whom the sacrificial stake is
    reared,
   On whom the Yajus-knowing priests recite their hymns and
    chant their psalms,
   And ministers are busied that Indra may drink the Soma juice; [p. 79]
 [1200139]On whom the ancient Rishis, they who made the world, sang
    forth the cows,
   Seven worshippers, by session, with their fervent zeal and
    sacrifice;
 [1200140]May she, the Earth, assign to us the opulence for which we
    yearn,
   May Bhaga share and aid the task and Indra come to lead the
    way.
 [1200141]May she, the Earth, whereon men sing and dance with varied
    shout and noise,
   Whereon men meet in battle, and the war-cry and the drum
    resound,
   May she drive off our foemen, may Prithivi rid me of my foes.
 [1200142]On whom is food, barley and rice, to whom these Races Five
    belong,
   Homage to her, P arjanya's wife, to her whose marrow is the
    rain!
 [1200143]Whose castles are the work of Gods, and men wage war upon
    her plain
   The Lord of Life make Prithivi, who beareth all things in her
    womb, pleasant to us on every side!
 [1200144]May Earth the Goddess, she who bears her treasure stored up
    in many a place, gold, gems, and riches,
   Giver of opulence, grant great possessions to us bestowing them
    with love and favour.
 [1200145]Earth, bearing folk of many a varied language with divers rites
    as suits their dwelling-places,
   Pour, like a constant cow that never faileth, a thousand streams
    of treasure to enrich me!
 [1200146]Thy snake, thy sharply stinging scorpion, lying concealed, be-
    wildered, chilled with cold of winter,
   The worm, O Prithivi, each thing that in the Rains revives and
    stirs,
   Creeping, forbear to creep on us! With all things gracious bless
    thou us.
 [1200147]Thy many ways on which the people travel, the road for car and
    wain to journey over,
   Thereon meet both the good and bad, that pathway may we
    attain without a foe or robber. With all things gracious bless
    thou us. [p. 80]
 [1200148]Supporting both the foolish and the weighty she bears the death
    both of the good and evil.
   In friendly concord with the boar, Earth opens herself for the
    wild swine that roams the forest.
 [1200149]All sylvan beasts of thine that love the woodlands, man-eaters,.
    forest-haunting, lions, tigers,
   Hyena, wolf, Misfortune, evil spirit, drive from us, chase the
    demons to a distance.
 [1200150]Gandharvas and Apsarases, Kimidins, and malignant sprites,
   Pisachas all, and Rakshasas, these keep thou, Earth! afar from
    us.
 [1200151]To whom the winged bipeds fly together, birds of each various
    kind, the swans, the eagles;
   On whom the Wind comes rushing, Matarisvan, rousing the
    dust and causing trees to tremble, and flame pursues the blast.
    hither and thither;
 [1200152]Earth, upon whom are settled, joined together, the night and
    day, the dusky and the ruddy, Prithivi compassed by the rain
    about her,
   Happily may she stablish us in each delightful dwelling place.
 [1200153]Heaven, Earth, the realm of Middle Air have granted me this
    ample room,
   Agni, Sun, Waters, all the Gods have joined to give me mental
    power.
 [1200154]I am victorious, I am called the lord superior on earth,
   Triumphant, all-o'erpowering the conqueror on every side
 [1200155]There, when the Gods, O Goddess, named thee, spreading thy
    wide expanse as thou wast broadening eastward,
   Then into thee passed many a charm and glory: thou madest
    for thyself the world's four regions.
 [1200156]In hamlets and in woodland, and in all assemblages on earth,
   In gatherings, meeting of the folk, we will speak glorious things
    of thee.
 [1200157]As the horse scattereth the dust, the people who dwelt upon
    the land, at birth, she scattered,
   Leader and head of all the world, delightful, the trees' protectress
    and the plants' upholder.
 [1200158]Whate'er I say I speak with honey-sweetness, whatever I behold
    for that they love me.
   Dazzling, impetuous am I: others who fiercely stir I slay. [p. 81]
 [1200159]Mild, gracious, sweetly odorous, milky, with nectar in her breast,
   May Earth, may Prithivi bestow her benison, with milk, on me.
 [1200160]Whom Visvakarman with oblation followed, when she was set
    in mid-air's billowy ocean
   A useful vessel, hid, when, for enjoyment, she was made mani-
    fest to those with mothers.
 [1200161]Thou art the vessel that containeth people, Aditi, granter of the
    wish, far-spreading.
   Prajapati, the first-born Son of Order, supplieth thee with what-
    soe'er thou lackest.
 [1200162]Let thy breasts, frec from sickness and Consumption, be.
   Prithivi, produced for our advantage.
   Through long-extended life wakeful and watching still may we
    be thy tributary servants.
 [1200163]O Earth, my Mother, set thou me happily in a place secure.
   Of one accord with Heaven, O Sage, set me in glory and in
    wealth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

HYMN II

  

A funeral hymn, and deprecation of Agni the Consumer of corpses

[1200201]This is no place to hold thee; mount the Nada: this lead is
    thine appointed share. Come hither.
   Together with Consumption in the cattle, Consumption in our
    men, go henee, go southward.
 [1200202]With this we chase and banish all consumptive malady and
   Death,
   With sinner andamalicious man, with helper and with minister,
 [1200203]Death and Misfortune we expel, Malignity we drive away.
   O Agni, thou who eatest not the corpse, eat him who hateth us:
    him whom we hate we send to thee. [p. 83]
 [1200204]If the corpse-eating Agni, or a tiger leaving his lair, hath entered
    this our homestead,
   With beans prepared in butter I expel him: far let him go to
    fires that lie in waters.
 [1200205]When, angered that a man hath died, we in our wrath have
    banished thee,
   That deed is easily set right through thee: we kindle thee again.
 [1200206]Again have the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, the Brahman, bringer
    of good things, O Agni,
   Again hath Brahmanaspati disposed thee for long life lasting
    through a hundred autumns.
 [1200207]I sweep afar, for sacrifice to Fathers, corpse-eating Agni who
    hath come among us,
   Although he saw this other, Jatavedas: in loftiest space let him
    inflame the caldron.
 [1200208]I drive corpse-eating Agni to a distance: sin-laden let him go to
   Yamas vassals.
   Here let this other, Jatavedas, carry oblation to the Deities, fore-
    knowing.
 [1200209]I quickly sweep away corpse-eating Agni, Death, with his bolt
    potdepriving men of motion.
   From household fire, well-knowing, I divide him: so in the
    world of Fathers be his portion.
 [1200210]Corpse-eating Agni, toil-worn, meet for praises, I send away
    bypaths used by the Fathers.
   Stay there; keep watch among the Fathers: come not again to
    us by ways whereon Gods travel.
 [1200211]They being cleansed and bright, the purifiers, kindle Sankasuka
    for our well-being.
   Impurity leaveth us and sin departeth: lighted by the good
    cleanser Agni cleanseth.
 [1200212]Agni the God, the Breaker-up, hath mounted to the heights of
    heaven.
   Released from all transgression, he hath from the curse delivered
    us.
 [1200213]On Agni here, the Breaker-up, we wipe impurities away.
   Cleansed, fit for sacrifice have we become: may he prolong our
    lives.
 [1200214]The Breaker-up, the Burster, the Destroyer, and the Silent One, [p. 84]
   These have expelled Consumption far, far off from thee and all
    thou hast,
 [1200215]Corpse-eating Agni we expel, the Agni who bewilders men,
   Him who is in our horses, in our heroes, cows, and goats, and
    sheep:
 [1200216]We drive thee forth to other folk, to alien cattle, alien steeds,
   Thee the corpse-eating Agni, thee the Agni who bewilders men,
 [1200217]Whereon the Deities, whereon men too have purified themselves,
   Exalting fatness, cleanse thyself, Agni, therein and mount to
    heaven.
 [1200218]O Agni, kindled and adored, turn not away to visit us.
   Shine brightly even there in heaven, so that we long may see the
   Sun.
 [1200219]Wipe all away on lead and reed, on Agni, him who breaketh up,
   Then on a black-hued sheep, and on a cushion pain that racks.
    the head,
 [1200220]Wipe off pollution, lay it in the lead and in the black-hued
    sheep,
   And headache in the cushion; then be cleansed and fit to sacri-
    fice.
 [1200221]Go onward, Death, pursue thy special pathway apart from that
    which Gods are wont to travel.
   To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest: great grow the
    number of these men around us!
 [1200222]Divided from the dead are these, the living: now is our calling
    on the Gods successful.
   We have gone forth for dancing and for laughter: may we with
    brave sons speak to the assembly.
 [1200223]Here I erect this rampart for the living: let none of these, none
    other, reach this limit.
   May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may they
    bury Death beneath this mountain.
 [1200224]Live your full lives and find age delightful, all of you striving,
    one behind the other.
   May Tvashtar, maker of fair things, be gracious, and lead your
    whole lives on to full existence.
 [1200225]As the days follow days in close succession, as with the seasons
    duly come the seasons.
   As each successor fails not his foregoer, so constitute the lives of
    these, Ordainer! [p. 85]
 [1200226]Gather your strength, my friends; the stream flows stony:
    acquit yourselves as men, and cross the river.
   Abandon here the powers that were malignant, and let us cross
    to powers exempt from sickness.
 [1200227]Rise up erect, cross over, my companions: the stream is stony
    that flows here before us.
   Abandon here the powers that were ungracious, and let us cross
    to powers benign and friendly.
 [1200228]Becoming pure and bright and purifying begin the Vaisvadevi
    strain for splendour..
   May we rejoice, o'erpassing troublous places, with all our heroes
    through a hundred winters.
 [1200229]On pathways swept by wind, directed upward, passing beyond
    the lower, on the higher,
   Thrice seven times have the Rishis, the Departed, forced Mrityu
    backward with the fastened fetter.
 [1200230]Effecting Mrityu's footstep ye came hither, to further times pro-
    longing your existence,
   Seated, drive Mrityu to his proper dwelling: then may we,
    living, speak to the assembly.
 [1200231]Let these unwidowed dames with goodly husbands adorn them-
    selves with fragrant balm and unguent,
   Decked with fair jewels, tearless, sound and healthy, first let the
    dames go up to where he lieth.
 [1200232]I with oblation separate both classes, and with my prayer dis-
    part their several portions.
   I offer food that wastes not to the Fathers, a nd to these men
    give life of long duration.
 [1200233]That Agni, Fathers! who, himself immortal, hath entered and
    possessed our mortal bosoms,
   Even him I grasp and hold the God with me, Let him not hate
    us, may we never hate him.
 [1200234]When ye have left the household fire, with the Corpse-eater
    southward go.
   Do that which is delightful to the Fathers, Brahmans, and your-
    selves.
 [1200235]Agni, the banqueter on flesh, not banished, for the eldest son
   Taketh a double share of wealth and spoileth it with poverty.
 [1200236]What man acquires by plough, by war, all that he wins by toil
    of hand, [p. 86]
   He loses all if Agni the Carnivorous be not set aside,
 [1200237]Unholy, splendour-reft is he, his sacrifice unfit to eat. Krayad
    deprives of tilth of cow, of riches him whom he pursues,
 [1200238]Oft as a greedy beggar speaks the mortal who has brought
    distress,
   Those whom Carnivorous Agni close at hand runs after and
    detects.
 [1200239]When a dame's husband dies the house is tangled  in
   Grahi's net.
   A learned Brahman must be sought to drive Carnivorous Agni,
    forth.
 [1200240]From any evil we have done, act of impurity or sin,
   Let waters purge me and from all that comes from Agni
   Breaker-up.
 [1200241]By pathways travelled by the Gods these waters, well-knowing,
    from below have mounted upward.
   High on the summit of the raining mountain the ancient rivers
    fresh and new are flowing.
 [1200242]Drive off Carnivorous Agni, thou Agni who eatest not the flesh;.
    carry oblation paid to Gods.
 [1200243]The Flesh-eater hath entered him: he hath pursued the Flesh-
    eater.
   Making two tigers different-wise, I bear away the ungracious
    one.
 [1200244]He who holds Gods within himself, the rampart and defence of
    men,
   Agni, the sacred household fire, hath come and stands between
    them both.
 [1200245]Prolong the lives of those who live, O Agni, Let the dead go
    unto world of Fathers.
   As goodly household fire burn up Arati; give this man dawn
    brighter than all the mornings.
 [1200246]Subduing all our adversaries, Agni, give us their food, their
    strength and their possessions.
 [1200247]Grasp ye this Indra, furtherer, satisfier: he will release you
    from disgrace and trouble.
   With him drive back the shaft that flies against you, with him.
    ward off the missile shot by Rudra.
 [1200248]Seize with firm hold the Ox who boundeth forward: he will
    uplift you from disgrace and trouble. [p. 87]
   Enter this ship of Savitar; let us flee from poverty over all the
    six expenses.
 [1200249]Thou followest the day and night, supporting, standing, at
    peace, promoting, rich in heroes.
   Long bearing undiseased and happy sleepers, be ours, O Bed,
    with smell of man about thee,
 [1200250]They sever from the Gods, they live in sin and misery evermore,
   Those whom from very near at hand Carnivorous Agni casteth
    down as a horse tramples down the reeds.
 [1200251]The faithless, who from lust of wealth abide with him who feeds
    on flesh,
   For ever set upon the fire an alien caldron, not their own.
 [1200252]Forward in spirit would he fly, and often turns he back again,
   Whomso Carnivorous Agni from anear discovers and torments.
 [1200253]Among tame beasts the black ewe is thy portion, and the bright
    lead is thine, they say, Flesh-eater!
   Mashed beans have been assigned thee for oblation go seek the
    dark wood and the wildernesses.
 [1200254]I sought the rustling sugar-cane, white Seasamum, and cane and
    reed.
   I made this Indra's fuel, and the Fire of Yama I removed.
 [1200255]Against the sinking western Sun I set them; each sundered path,
    knowing my way, I entered.
   I have warned off the ghosts of the Departed: to these I give
    the boon of long existence.

[p. 88]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

HYMN III

  

An accompaniment to the preparation and presentation of sacrificial offerings by a householder and his wife, with prayer for prosperity and happiness on earth and in heaven

[1200301]Mount, male from male, the skin. Go thither: summon those
    whom thou lovest, one and all, to meet thee,
   Strong as ye were when first ye met each other, still be your
    strength the same in Yama's kingdom.
 [1200302]So strong your sight, so many be your powers, so great your
    force, your energies so many,
   When fire attends the body as its fuel, then may, ye gain full
    chargers, O ye couple.
 [1200303]Together in this world, in God-ward pathway, together be ye in
    the realms of Yama.
   Invite, made pure with means of purifying, whatever seed of
    yours hath been developed.
 [1200304]Do ye, O sons, unite you with the waters, meeting this living
    man, ye life-sustainers,
   Allot to them the Odana your mother is making ready, which
    they call immortal.
 [1200305]That which your mother and your sire, to banish sin and un-
    cleanness from their lips, are cooking.
   That Odana with hundred streams, sky-reaching, hath in its
    might prevaded earth and heaven.
 [1200306]Live with your sons, when life on earth is ended, live in the
    sphere most rich in light and sweetness.
   In skies that have been won by sacrificers make both the worlds,
    earth, heaven, your habitation.
 [1200307]Approach the eastern, yea: the eastern region, this is the
    sphere to which the faithful turn them,
   Your cooked oblation that in fire was offered, together, wife and
    husband, meet to guard it. [p. 90]
 [1200308]Now, as your steps approach the southern quarter, move in.
    your circling course about this vessel.
   Herein, accordant with the Fathers, Yama shall mightily protect
    your cooked oblation.
 [1200309]Best of the regions is indeed this western wherein the King and
    gracious Lord is Soma.
   Thither resort for rest, follow the pious. Then gain the laden
    chargers, O ye couple.
 [1200310]Ever victorious is the northern region: may the east quarter set
    us first and foremost.
   The Man became the five-divisioned metre. May we abide wit .
    all our members perfect.
 [1200311]This stedfast realm is Queen. To her be homage! To me and
    to my sons may she be gracious.
   Guard thou, O Goddess Aditi, all-bounteous, our cooked oblation
    as an active warder.
 [1200312]Embrace us as a father clasps his children. Here on the Earth
    let kindly breezes fan us.
   Let the rice-mess these two cook here, O Goddess, know this
    our truthfulness and zealous fervour.
 [1200313]If the dark bird hath come to us and, stealing the hanging. .
    morsel, settled in his dwelling,
   Or if the slave-girl hath, wet-handed, smearing the pestle and
    the mortar, cleansed the waters,
 [1200314]This pressing-stone, broad-based and strength-bestowing, made
    pure by cleansing means, shall chase the demon.
   Mount on the skin: afford us great protection, Let not the sons'
    sin fall on wife and husband.
 [1200315]Together with the Gods, banning Pis5chas and demons, hath
   Vanaspati come hither.
   He shall rise up and send his voice out loudly. May we win all
    the worlds with him to help us.
 [1200316]Seven victims held the sacrificial essence, the bright one and the
    one that hath grown feeble.
   The three-and-thirty Deities attend them. As such, conduct us
    io the world of Svarga.
 [1200317]Unto the world of Svarga shalt thou lead us: there may we dwell
    beside our wife and children.
   I take thy hand Let not Destruction, let not Malignity come
    hither and subdue us. [p. 91]
 [1200318]We have subdued that sinful-hearted Grahi. Thou shalt speak
    sweetly having chased the darkness.
   Let not the wooden gear made ready fail us, nor harm the grain
    of rice that pays due worship.
 [1200319]Soon to be, decked with butter, all-embracing, come to this
    world wherewith birth unites thee.
   Seize thou the winnowing-fan which rains have nourished, and
    let this separate the chaff and refuse.
 [1200320]Three worlds hath Power Divine marked out and measured,
   Fheaven yonder, and the earth, and airs mid-region.
   Grasp ye the stalks and in your hands retain them: let them be
    watered and again be winnowed.
 [1200321]Manifold, various are the shapes of victims. Thou growest uni-
    form by great abundance.
   Push thou away this skin of ruddy colour: the stone will cleanse
    as one who cleanses raiment.
 [1200322]Earth upon earth l set thee. This thy body is con-substantial,.
    but in form it differs.
   Whate'er hath been worn off or scratched in fixing, leak not
    thereat: I spread a charm to mend it.
 [1200323]Thou for thy son shalt yearn as yearns a mother. I lay thee
    down and with the earth unite thee.
   Conjoined with sacrificial gear and butter may pot and jar stand
    firmly on the altar.
 [1200324]Eastward may Agni as he cooks preserve thee. Southward may
   Indra, grit by Maruts, guard thee,
   Varuna strengthen and support thee westward, and Soma on
    the north hold thee together.
 [1200325]Drops flow, made pure by filters, from the rain-cloud: to heaven
    and earth and to the worlds they travel,
   May Indra light them up, poured in the vessel, lively and sted-
    fast, quickening living creatures.
 [1200326]From heaven they come, they visit earth, and rising from earth
    unite themselves with air's mid-region,
   Purified, excellent, they with shine in beauty. Thus may they lead us
    to the world of Svarga.
 [1200327]Yea, and supreme, alike in conformation, and brilliant and
    refulgent and immortal,
   As such, enjoined, well-guarding, water-givers, dress ye the
   Odana for wife and husband. [p. 92]
 [1200328]Numbered, they visit earth, these drops of moisture, commensu-
    rate with plants and vital breathings,
   Unnumbered, scattered, beautiful in colour, the bright, ones
    have pervaded all refulgence.
 [1200329]Heated, they rage and boil in agitation, they cast about their
    foam and countless bubbles
   Like a fond woman when she sees her husband--what time ye
    waters and these rice-grains mingle,
 [1200330]Take up these rice-grains lying at the bottom: led them be blent
    and mingled with the waters.
   This water I have measured in the vessel, if as mid-points the
    rice-grains have been meted.
 [1200331]Present the sickle: quickly bring it hither. Let them out plants
    and joints with hands that harm not.
   So may the plants be free from wrath against us, they o'er
    whose realm Soma hath won dominion.
 [1200332]Strew ye fresh grass for the boiled rice to rest on: fair let it be,
    sweet to the eye and spirit.
   Hither come Goddesses with Gods, and sitting here taste in
    proper season this oblation.
 [1200333]On the strewn grass. Vanaspati, be seated; commensurate with
   Gods and Agnishtomas.
   Let thy fair form, wrought as by Tvashtar's hatchet, mark these
    that yearn for thee within the vessel.
 [1200334]In sixty autumns may the Treasure-Guardian seek to gain
    heavenly light by cooked oblation.
   On this may sons and fathers live dependent. Send thou this
    mess to Fire that leads to heaven.
 [1200335]On the earth's breast stand firmly as supporter: may Deities
    stir thee who ne'er hast shaken.
   So living man and wife with living children remove thee from
    the hearth of circling Agni.
 [1200336]All wishes that have blessed those with fulfilment, having won
    all the worlds have met together.
   Let them plunge in both stirring-spoon and ladle: raise this and
    set it in a single vessel.
 [1200337]Pour out the covering butter, spread it eastward: sprinkle this
    vessel over with the fatness.
   Greet this, ye Deities, with gentle murmur, as lowing cows wel-
    come their tender suckling. [p. 93]
 [1200338]Thou hast poured oil and made the worlds: let heaven, unequal-
    led, be spread out in wide extension.
   Herein be cooked the buffalo, strong-pinioned: the Gods shall
    give the Deities this oblation.
 [1200339]Whate'er thy wife, away from thee, makes ready, or what, O
    wife, apart from thee, thy husband,
   Combine it all: let it be yours in common while ye produce one
    world with joint endeavour.
 [1200340]All these now dwelling on the earth, mine offspring, these whom,
    this woman here, my wife, hath borne me,
   Invite them all unto the vessel: knowing their kinship have the
    children met together.
 [1200341]Swollen with savoury meath, the stream of treasures, sources of
    immortality blent with fatness
   Soma retains all these; in sixty autumns the Guardian Lord of
   Treasures may desire them.
 [1200342]The Lord of Treasures may desire this treasure: lordless on.
    every side be all the others.
   Our mess, presented seeking heaven, hath mounted in three
    divisions all three realms of Svarga.
 [1200343]May Agni burn the God-denying demon: let no carnivorous.
   Pis icha drink here.
   We drive him off, we keep him at a distance. Adityas and
   Angirases pursue him!
 [1200344]This meath do I announce, mingled with butter, to the Angi-
    rases and the Adityas.
   With pure hands ne'er laid roughly on a Brahman go, pious.
    couple, to the world of Svarga.
 [1200345]Of this have I obtained the noblest portion from that same
    world whence Parmeshthin gained it.
   Pour forth, besprinkle butter rich in fatness: the share of
   Angiras is here before us.
 [1200346]To Deities, to Truth, to holy Fervour this treasure we consign,.
    this rich deposit,
   At play, in meeting led it not desert us, never give out to anyone
    besides me.
 [1200347]I cook the offering, I present oblation: only my wife attends
    the holy service.
   A youthful world, a son hath been begotten. Begin a life that
    brings success and triumph. [p. 94]
 [1200348]There is no fault in this, no reservation, none when it goes with
    friends in close alliance.
   We have laid down this vessel in perfection: the cooked mess
    shall re-enter him who cooked it.
 [1200349]To those we love may we do acts that please them. Away to
    darkness go all those who hate us!
   Cow, ox, and strength of every kind approach us! Thus let
    them banish death of human beings.
 [1200350]Perfectly do the Agnis know each other, one visitor of plants
    and one of rivers,
   And all the Gods who shine and glow in heaven. Gold is the
    light of him who cooks oblation.
 [1200351]Man hath received this skin of his from nature: of other
    animals not one is naked.
   Ye make him clothe himself with might for raiment. Odana's
    mouth is a home-woven vesture.
 [1200352]Whatever thou may say at dice, in meeting, whatever falsehood
    through desire of riches,
   Ye two, about one common warp uniting, deposit all impurity
    within it.
 [1200353]Win thou the rain: approach the Gods. Around thee thou from
    the skin shalt make the smoke rise upward.
   Soon to be, decked with butter, all-embracing, come to this
    world wherewith one birth unites thee.
 [1200354]In many a shape hath heaven transformed its body, as in itself
    is known, of varied eolour.
   Cleansing the bright, the dark form hath it banished: the red
    form in the fire to thee I offer.
 [1200355]To the eastern region, to Agni the Regent, to Asita the Protector,
   Aditya the Archer, we present thee, this offering of ours. Do
    ye preserve it from aggression
   To full old age may Destiny conduct us; may full old age deliver
    us to Mrityu. Then may we be with our prepared oblation.
 [1200356]To the southern region, to Indra the Regent, to Tiraschiraji the
   Protector, to Yama the Archer, we present, etc. (as in stanza
    55)
 [1200357]To the western region, to Varuna the Regent, to Pridaku the
   Protector, to Food the Archer, we present, etc.
 [1200358]To the northern region, to Soma the Regent, to Svaja the Protec-
    tor, to Thunderbolt the Archer, we present, etc. [p. 95]
 [1200359]To the stedfast region, to Vishnu the Regent, to Kalmashagriva
    the Protector, to Plants the Archers, we present, etc.
 [1200360]To the upper region, to Brihaspati the Regent, to Svitra the
   Protector, to Rain the Archer, we present thee, this offering
    of ours. Do ye preserve it from aggression.
   To full old age may Destiny conduct us, may full old age deliver
    us to Mrityu. Then may we be with our prepared oblation.

[p. 96]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

  

HYMN IV

  

On the duty of giving cows to Brahmans, and the sin and danger of withholding the gift

[1200401]Give the gift, shall be his word: and straightway they have bound
    the Cow
   For Brahman priests who beg the boon. That bringeth sons and
    progeny.
 [1200402]He trades and traffics with his sons, and in his cattle suffers loss.
   Who will not give the Cow of Gods to Rishis children when
    they beg.
 [1200403]They perish through a hornless cow, a lame cow sinks them in a
    pit.
   Through a maimed cow his house is burnt: a one-eyed cow
    destroys his wealth.
 [1200404]Fierce fever where her droppings fall attacks the master of the
    kine.
   So have they named her Vasa, for thou art called uncontrollable.
 [1200405]The malady Viklindu springs on him from ground whereon she
    stands,
   And suddenly, from fell disease, perish the men on whom she
    sniffs.
 [1200406]Whoever twitches up her ears is separated from the Gods.
   He deems he makes a mark, but he diminishes his wealth
    thereby.
 [1200407]If to his own advantage one applies the long hair of her tail, [p. 98]
   His colts, in consequence thereof. die, and the wolf destroys his
    calves.
 [1200408]If, while her master owneth her, a carrion crow hath harmed her
    hair,
   His young boys die thereof, Decline o'ertakes them after fell
    disease.
 [1200409]What time the Dasi woman throws lye on the droppings of the
   Cow,
   Misshapen birth arises thence, inseparable from that sin.
 [1200410]For Gods and Brahmans is the Cow produced when first she
    springs to life,
   Hence to the priests must she be given: this they call guarding
    private wealth.
 [1200411]The God-created Cow belongs to those who come to ask for
    her.
   They call it outrage on the priests when one retains her as his
    own.
 [1200412]He who withholds the Cow of Gods from Rishis' sons who ask
    the gift
   Is made an alien to the Gods, and subject to the Brahmans'
    wrath:
 [1200413]Then let him seek another Cow, whate'er his profit be in this.
   The Cow, not given, harms a man when he denies her at their
    prayer.
 [1200414]Like a rich treasure stored away in safety is the Brahmans' Cow.
   Therefore men come to visit her, with whomsoever she is born.
 [1200415]So when the Brahmans come unto the Cow they come unto their
    own.
   For this is her withholding, to oppress these in another life.
 [1200416]Thus after three years may she go, speaking what is not under-
    stood.
   He, Narads! would know the Cow, then Brahmans must be
    sought unto.
 [1200417]Whoso calls her a worthless Cow, the stored-up treasure of the
   Gods,
   Bhava and Sarva, both of them, move round and shoot a shaft
    at him.
 [1200418]The man who hath no knowledge of her udder and the teats
    thereof, [p. 99]
   She yields him milk with these, if he hath purposed to bestow
    the Cow.
 [1200419]If he withholds the Cow they beg, she lies rebellious in his stall.
   Vain are the wishes and the hopes which he, withholding her,
    would gain.
 [1200420]The Deities have begged the Cow, using the Brahman as their
    mouth:
   The man who gives her not incurs the enmity of all the Gods.
 [1200421]Withholding her from Brahmans, he incurs the anger of the
    beasts,
   When mortal man appropriates the destined portion of the
   Gods.
 [1200422]If hundred other Brahmans beg the Cow of him who owneth
    her,
   The Gods have said, She, verily, belongs to him who knows the
    truth.
 [1200423]Whoso to others, not to him who hath this knowledge, gives the
   Cow,
   Earth, with the Deities, is hard for him to win and rest upon.
 [1200424]The Deities begged the Cow from him with whom at first she
    was produced:
   Her, this one, Narada would know: with Deities he drove her
    forth.
 [1200425]The Cow deprives of progeny and makes him poor in cattle who
   Retains in his possession her whom Brahmans have solicited.
 [1200426]For Agni and for Soma, for Kama, Mitra and Varuna,
   For these the Brahmans ask: from these is he who giveth not
    estranged.
 [1200427]Long as her owner hath not heard, himself, the verses, let her
    move
   Among his kine: when he hath heard, let her not make her
    home with him;
 [1200428]He who hath heard her verses and still makes her roam among
    his kine.
   The Gods in anger rend away his life and his prosperity
 [1200429]Roaming in many a place the Cow is the stored treasure of the
   Gods,
   Make manifest thy shape and form when she would seek her
    dwelling-place. [p. 100]
 [1200430]Her shape and form she manifests when she would seek her
    dwelling-place;
   Then verily the Cow attends to Brahman priests and their
    request.
 [1200431]This thought he settles in his mind. This safely goeth to the
   Gods.
   Then verily the Brahman priests approach that they may beg the
   Cow
 [1200432]By Svadha to the Fathers, by sacrifice to the Deities,
   By giving them the Cow, the Prince doth not incur the mother's.
    wrath.
 [1200433]The Prince's mother is the Cow: so was it ordered from of old.
   She, when bestowed upon the priests, cannot be given back, they
    say.
 [1200434]As molten butter, held at length, drops down to Agni from the
    scoop,
   So falls away from Agni he who gives no Cow to Brahman
    priests.
 [1200435]Good milker, with rice-cake as calf, she in the world comes
    nigh to him,
   To him who gave her as a gift the Cow grants every hope and.
    wish.
 [1200436]In Yama's realm the Cow fulfils each wish for him who gave her
    up;
   But hell, they say, is for the man who, when they beg, bestow
    her not.
 [1200437]Enraged against her owner roams the Cow when she hath been
    impregned.
   He deemed me fruitless is her thought; let him be bound in,
    snares of Death!
 [1200438]Whoever looking on the Cow as fruitless, cooks her flesh at
    home,
   Brihaspati compels his sons and children of his sons to beg.
 [1200439]Downward she sends a mighty heat, though amid kine a Cow
    she roams.
   Poison she yields for him who owns and hath not given her away.
 [1200440]The animal is happy when it is bestowed upon the priests:
   But happy is the Cow when she is made a sacrifice to Gods.
 [1200441]Narada chose the terrible Vilipti out of all the cows Which the [p. 101]
   Gods formed and framed when they had risen up from sacri-
    fice
 [1200442]The Gods considered her in doubt whether she were a Cow or
    not.
   Mirada spake of her and said, The veriest Cow of cows is she.
 [1200443]How many cows, O Narada, knowest thou, born among man-
    kind
   I ask thee who dost know, of which must none who is no
   Brahman eat?
 [1200444]Vilipti, cow, and she who drops no second calf, Brihaspati!
   Of these none not a Brahmana should eat if he hope for emi-
    nence.
 [1200445]Homage, O Narada, to thee who hast quick knowledge of the
    cows.
   Which of these is the direst, whose withholding bringeth death
    to man?
 [1200446]Vilipti, O Brihaspati, cow, mother of no second calf--Of these
    none not a Brahman should eat if he hope for eminence.
 [1200447]Threefold are kine, Vilipti, cow, the mother of no seeond calf:
   These one should give to priests, and he will not offend Praja-
    pati.
 [1200448]This Brahmans! is your sacrifice: thus should one think when he
    is asked,
   What time they beg from him the Cow fearful in the with-
    holder's house.
 [1200449]He gave her not to us, so spake the Gods, in anger, of the Cow.
   With these same verses they addressed Bheda: this brought
    him to his death.
 [1200450]Solicited by Indra, still Bheda refused to give this Cow.
   In strife for victory the Gods destroyed him for that sin of his.
 [1200451]The men of evil counsel who advise refusal of the Cow,
   Miscreants, through their foolishness, are subjected to Indra's
    wrath.
 [1200452]They who seduce the owner of the Cow and say, Bestow her
    not.
   Encounter through their want of sense the missile shot by
   Rudra's hand.
 [1200453]If in his home one cooks the Cow, sacrificed or not sacrificed.
   Wronger of Gods and Brahmans' he departs, dishonest, from
    the world.

[p. 102]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 103]

  

HYMN V

  

On the duty of giving cows to Brahmans, and the sin and danger of withholding the gift

[1200501]Created by toil and holy fervour, found by devotion, resting in
    right;
 [1200502]Invested with truth, surrounded with honour, compassed about
    with glory;
 [1200503]Girt round with inherent power, fortified with faith, protected,
    by consecration, installed at sacrifice, the world her resting-
    place;
 [1200504]Brahma her guide, the Brahman her lord and ruler;
 [1200505]Of the Kshatriya who taketh to himself this Brahman's cow and
    oppresseth the Brahman.
 [1200506]The glory, the heroism, and the favouring fortune depart.
 [1200507]The energy and vigour, the power and might the speech and
    mental strength, the glory and duty;
 [1200508]Devotion and princely sway, kingship and people, brilliance and
    honour, and splendour and wealth;
 [1200509]Long life and goodly form, and name and fame, inbreathing and
    expiration, and sight, and hearing;
 [1200510]Milk and flavour, and food and nourishment, and right and
    truth, and action and fulfilment, and children and cattle;
 [1200511]All these blessings of a Kshatriya depart from him when he
    oppresseth the Brahman and taketh to himself the hhman's
    cow.
 [1200512]Terrible is she this Brahman's cow, and fearfully venomous,
    visibly witchcraft.
 [1200513]In her are all horrors and all death.
 [1200514]In her are all dreadful, deeds, all slaughters of mankind.
 [1200515]This, the Brahman's cow, being appropriated, holdeth bound in
    the fetter of Death the oppressor of the Brahman, the blas-
    phemer of the Gods.
 [1200516]A hundred-killing bolt is she: she slays the Brahman's injurer.
 [1200517]Therefore the Brahmans' cow is held inviolable by the wise.
 [1200518]Running she is a thunderbolt, when driven away she is Vaisva-
    nara;
 [1200519]An arrow when she draweth up her hooves, and Mahadeva when
    she looketh around;
 [1200520]Sharp as a razor when she beholdeth, she thundereth when she
    belloweth. [p. 104]
 [1200521]Death is she when she loweth, and a fierce God when she whis-
    keth her tail;
 [1200522]Utter destruction when she moveth her ears this way and that,
   Consumption when she droppeth water;
 [1200523]A missile when milking, pain in the head when milked;
 [1200524]The taking away of strength when she approacheth, a hand-to-
    hand fighter when roughly touched;
 [1200525]Wounding like an arrow when she is fastened by her mouth,
    contention when she is beaten;
 [1200526]Fearfully venomous when falling, darkness when she hath fallen
    down.
 [1200527]Following him, the Brahman's cow extinguisheth the vital breath
    of the injurer of the Brahman.
 [1200528]Hostility when being cut to pieces, woe to children when the
    portions are distributed,
 [1200529]A destructive missile of Gods when she is being seized,
    misfortune when carried away;
 [1200530]Misery while being additionally acquired, contumely and abuse
    while being put in the stall;
 [1200531]Poison when in agitation, fever when seasoned with condi-
    ments;
 [1200532]Sin while she is cooking, evil dream when she is cooked;
 [1200533]Uprooting when she is being turned round, destruction when she
    hath been turned round;
 [1200534]Discord by her smell, grief when she is being eviscerated: ser-
    pent with poison in its fang when drawn;
 [1200535]Loss of power while sacrificially presented, humiliation when she
    hath been offered;
 [1200536]Wrathful Sarva while being carved. Simida when cut up:
 [1200537]Poverty while she is being eaten. Destruction when eaten.
 [1200538]The Brahman's cow when eaten cuts off the injurer of Brahmans
    both from this world and from the world yonder.
 [1200539]Her slaughter is the sin of witchcraft, her cutting-up is a thunder-
    bolt, her undigested grass is a secret spell.
 [1200540]Homelessness is she when denied her rights.
 [1200541]Having become Flesh-eating Agni the Brahman's cow entereth
    into and devoureth the oppressor of Brahmans.
 [1200542]She sunders all his members, joints, and roots.
 [1200543]She cuts off relationship on the father's side and destroys mater-
    nal kinship. [p. 105]
 [1200544]The Brahman's cow, not restored by a Kshatriya, ruins the
    marriages and all the kinsmen of the Brahman's oppressor.
 [1200545]She makes him houseless, homeless, childless: he is extinguished
    without posterity to succeed him.
 [1200500]46. So shall it be with the Kshatriya who takes to himself the cow
    of the Braman who hath this knowledge.
 [1200547]Quickly, when he is smitten down by death, the clamorous vul-
    tures cry:
 [1200548]Quickly around his funeral fire dance women with dishevelled
    locks,
   Striking the hand upon the breast and uttering their evil shriek.
 [1200549]Quickly the wolves are howling in the habitation where he
    lived:
 [1200550]Quickly they ask about him, What is this? What thing hath
    happened here?
 [1200551]Rend, rend to pieces, rend away, destroy, destroy him utterly.
 [1200552]Destroy Angirasi! the wretch who robs and wrongs the Brah-
    mans, born.
 [1200553]Of evil womb, thou witchcraft hid, for Vaisvadevi is thy name,
 [1200554]Consuming, burning all things up, the thunderbolt of spell and
    charm.
 [1200555]Go thou, becoming Mrityu sharp as razor's edge pursue thy
    course:
 [1200556]Thou bearest off the tyrants' strength, their store of merit, and
    their prayers.
 [1200557]Bearing off wrong, thou givest in that world to him who hath
    been wronged.
 [1200558]O Cow, become a tracker through the curse the Brahman hath
    pronounced,
 [1200559]Become a bolt, an arrow through his sin, be terribly venomous.
 [1200560]O Cow, break thou the head of him who wrongs the Brahmans,
    criminal, niggard, blasphemer of the Gods.
 [1200561]Let Agni burn the spiteful wretch when crushed to death and
    slain by thee.
 [1200562]Rend, rend to bits, rend through and through, scorch and con-
    sume and burn to dust,
 [1200563]Consume thou, even from the root, the Brahmans' tyrant, god-
    like Cow!
 [1200564]That he may go from Yama's home afar into the worlds of sin.
    its [p. 106]
 [1200565]So, Goddess Cow, do thou from him, the Brahmans' tyrant,
    criminal, niggard, blasphemer of the Gods,
 [1200566]With hundred-knotted thunderbolt, sharpened and edged with
    razor-blades,
 [1200567]Strike off the shoulders and the head.
 [1200568]Snatch thou the hair from off his head, and from his body strip
    the skin:
 [1200569]Tear out his sinews, cause his flesh to fall in pieces from his
    frame.
 [1200570]Crush thou his bones together, strike and beat the marrow out
    of him.
 [1200571]Dislocate all his limbs and joints.
 [1200572]From earth let the Carnivorous Agni drive him, let Vayu burn.
    him from mid-air's broad region.
 [1200573]From heaven let Surya drive him and consume him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

BOOK XIII

  

HYMN I

  

The glorification of Rohita, a form of Fire and of the Sun

[1300101]Rise, Mighty One, who liest in the waters, and enter this thy
    fair and glorious kingdom.
   Let Rohita who made this All uphold thee carefully nurtured
    for supreme dominion.
 [1300102]The strength that was in waters hath ascended. Mount o'er the
    tribes which thou hast generated.
   Creating Soma, waters, plants and cattle, bring hitherward both
    quadrupeds and bipeds.
 [1300103]Ye Maruts, strong and mighty, sons of Prisni, with Indra for
    ally crush down our foemen.
   Let Rohita, ye bounteous givers, hear you, thrice-seven Maruts
    who delight in sweetness!
 [1300104]Up to the lap of births, to lofty places, hath Rohita, the germ
    of Dames, ascended.
   Conjoined with these he found the six realms: seeing his way
    in front here he received the kingship.
 [1300105]For thee hath Rohita obtained dominion, scattered thine ene-
    mies, become thy safeguard.
   So by the potent Sakvaris let Heaven and Earth be milked to-
     yield thee all thy wishes.
 [1300106]Rohita gave the Earth and Heavens their being. There Para-
    meshthin held the cord extended.
   Thereon reposeth Aja Ekapada. He with his might hath stab-
    lished Earth and Heaven.
 [1300107]Rohita firmly stablished Earth and Heaven: by him was ether
    fixt by him the welkin.
   He measured out mid air and all the regions: by him the Gods
    found life that lasts for ever.
 [1300108]Arranging shoots, springs, Rohita considered this Universe in
    all its forms and phases.
   May he, gone up to heaven with mighty glory, anoint thy sov-
    ranty with milk and fatness. [p. 108]
 [1300109]Thy risings up, thy mountings and ascensions wherewith thou
    fillest heaven and air's mid-region--
   By prayer for these, by milk of these, increasing, in Rohita's
    kingdom watch, among his people.
 [1300110]The tribes thy heat produced have followed hither the Calf and
   Gayatri, the strain that lauds him.
   With friendly heart let them approach to serve thee, and the
   Calf Rohita come with his mother.
 [1300111]Erected, Rohita hath reached the welkin, wise, young, creating
    every form and figure.
   Agni, refulgent with his heightened lustre, in the third realm
    hath brought us joy and gladness.
 [1300112]Thousand-horned Bull, may Jatavedas, worshipped with butter,
    balmed with Soma, rich in heroes,
   Besought, ne'er quit me; may I ne'er forsake thee. Give me
    abundant men and herds of cattle.
 [1300113]Rohita is the sire and mouth of worship: to him with voice, ear,
    heart I pay oblation.
   To Rohita come Gods with joyful spirit. May he by risings raise
    me till I join him.
 [1300114]Rohita ordered sacrifice for Visvakarman: thence have I obta-
    ined this strength and energy.
   May I proclaim thee as my kin over the greatness of the world.
 [1300115]On thee have mounted Brihati and Pankti. and Kakup with great
    splendour, Jatavedas!
   The cry of Vashat with the voice uplifted and Rohita with seed
    on thee have mounted.
 [1300116]He goes into the womb of earth, he robes himself in heaven and
    air.
   He on the Bright One's station hath reached heavenly light and
    all the worlds.
 [1300117]To us, Vachaspati, may Earth be pleasant, pleasant our dwelling,
    pleasant be our couches.
   Even here may Prana be our friend: may Agni, O Parameshthin
    give thee life and splendour.
 [1300118]And those, Vachaspati, our own five seasons, sacred to Visva-
    karman their creator.
   Even here our friend be Prana: Parameshthin, may Rohita
    vouchsafe the life and splendour. [p. 109]
 [1300119]Breed, O Vachaspati, joy and understanding, kine i n our stall
    and children in our consorts.
   Even here may Prana be our friend: may Agni, O Parameshthin,
    give thee life and splendour.
 [1300120]With splendour let God Savitar, and Agni, with splendour
   Mitra, Varuna invest thee.
   Treading down all Malignities, come hither. Pleasant and'
    glorious hast thou made this kingdom.
 [1300121]Rohita, car-borne by a speckled leader, thou, pouring water,.
    goest on in triumph.
 [1300122]Golden, refulgent, lofty is the Lady, Rohini, Rohita's devoted
   Consort.
   Through her may we win various spoil and booty, through her
    be conquerors in every battle.
 [1300123]Rohita's seat is Rohini before us: that is the path the speckled
   Mare pursueth.
   Kasyapas and Gandharvas lead her upward, and heavenly sages
    ever watch and guard her,
 [1300124]Surya's bay steeds refulgent and immortal draw the light-rolling.
    chariot on for ever.
   Drinker of fatness, Rohita, resplendent, hath entered into
    various-coloured heaven,
 [1300125]Rohita, Bull whose horns are sharply pointed, superior of Agni
    and of Surya,
   He who supports the sundered earth and heaven,--from him the
   Gods effect their own creations.
 [1300126]Rohita rose to heaven from mighty ocean, Rohita rose and
    clomb all steeps and rises.
 [1300127]Prepare the Milky One who teems with fatness: she is the Gods'
    never-reluctant milch-cow.
   Indra drink Soma: ours be peace and safety. Let Agni lead the
    laud, and chase our foemen.
 [1300128]Both kindling and inflamed, adored with butter and enhanced
    thereby.
   May conquering Agni, conqueror of all, destroy mine enemies.
 [1300129]Let him smite down in death and burn the foeman who
    attacketh me.
   Our adversaries we consume through Agni the Carnivorous.
 [1300130]Beat them down, Indra, with thy bolt, beat them down, mighty
    with thine arm. [p. 110]
   I through the energy and force of Agni have secured my foes.
 [1300131]Cast down our foes beneath our feet, O Agni. Brihaspati,
    oppress our rebel kinsman.
   Low let them fall, O Indra-Agni. Mitra-Varuna, powerless to
    show their anger.
 [1300132]Ascending up on high, O God. O Surya, drive my foes away.
   Yea, beat them backward with the stone: to deepest darkness
    let them go.
 [1300133]Calf of Viraj, the Bull of prayers and worship, whitebacked, he
    hath gone up to air's mid-region.
   Singing, they hymn the Calf, with gifts of butter: him who is
   Brahma they exalt with Brahma.
 [1300134]Rise up to earth, rise up to heaven above it; rise up to opulence,
    rise up to kingship.
   Rise up to offspring, rise to life immortal; rise, and with Rohita
    unite thy body.
 [1300135]With all the Gods who circle round the Sun, upholding royal
    sway,
   With all of these may Rohita accordant, give sovranty to thee
    with friendly spirit.
 [1300136]Cleansed by prayer, sacrifices bear thee upward: bay coursers,
    ever travelling, convey thee. Thy light shines over sea and
    billowy ocean.
 [1300137]Rohita, conqueror of cows and riches and gathered spoil, is
    heaven's and earth's upholder.
   Over earth's greatness would I tell my kinship with thee who
    hast a thousand births and seven.
 [1300138]A glorious sight to beasts and men, thou goest glorious to the
    regions and mid-regions.
   On earth's, on Aditi's bosom, bright with glory. Fain would I
    equal Savitar in beauty.
 [1300139]Thou, yonder, knowest all things here, when here thou knowest
    what is there.
   From here men see the sphere of light, Surya profoundly wise in
    heaven.
 [1300140]A God, thou injurest the Gods: thou movest in the ocean's
    depth.
   Men kindle common Agni: him only the higher sages know.
 [1300141]Beneath the upper realm, above this lower, bearing her Calf at
    foot, the Cow hath risen [p. 111]
   Whitherward, to what place hath she departed? Where doth she
    calve? Not in this herd of cattle.
 [1300142]She hath become one-footed or two-footed, four-footed, or
    eight-footed or nine-footed,
   This universe's thousand-syllabled Pankti Oceans flow forth
    from her in all directions.
 [1300143]Rising to heaven, immortal, hear my calling. Cleansed by
    prayer, sacrifices bear thee upward. Bay coursers, ever on the
    road, convey thee.
 [1300144]This, O Immortal One, I know of thee, thy progress to the sky
    thy dwelling-place in loftiest heaven.
 [1300145]Beyond the sky, beyond the Earth looks Surya, and beyond the
    floods.
   The single eye of all that is; to mighty heaven hath he arisen.
 [1300146]The earth was made his altar, and the wide expanses were the
    fence.
   There Rohita established both these Agnis, fervent heat and
    cold.
 [1300147]He stablished heat and cold, he made the mountains sacrificial
    posts.
   Then both the Agnis, Rohita's who found celestial light, with
    rain for molten butter, sacrificed.
 [1300148]Rohita's Agni-his who found heaven's light-is kindled with the
    prayer.
   From him the heat, from him the cold, from him the sacrifice
    was born.
 [1300149]Both Agins-Rohita's who found the light of heaven--made
    strong by prayer,
   Waxing by prayer, adored with prayer, by prayer enkindled,
    sacrificed.
 [1300150]One is deposited in Truth, one kindled in the waters: both
   Agnis of Rohita who found the light are set aflame with prayer.
 [1300151]That decked by Wind, and that prepared by Indra Brahman-
    aspati,
   Agnis of Rohita who found light, prayer-enkindled, sacrificed.
 [1300152]Rohita made the earth to be his altar, heaven his Dakshina.
   Then heat he took for Agni, and with rain for molten butter he
    created every living thing.
 [1300153]The earth became an altar, heat was Agni, and the butter rain. [p. 112]
   There Agni made, by song and hymn, these mountains rise and
    stand erect.
 [1300154]Then, having made the hills stand up, Rohita spake to Earth,
    and said:
   In thee let every thing be born, what is and what is yet to be.
 [1300155]This sacrifice, the first of all, the past, the present, had its birth.
   From that arose this universe, yea, all this world of brightness,
    brought by Rohita the heavenly Sage.
 [1300156]If thou should kick a cow, or by indecent act offend the Sun,
   Thy root I sever; nevermore mayst thou cast shadow on the
    ground.
 [1300157]Thou who, between the fire and me, passest across the line of
    shade.
   Thy root I sever: nevermore mayst thou cast shadow on the
    ground.
 [1300158]Whoe'er he be who, Surya, God! comes between thee and me
    to-day,
   On him we wipe away ill-dream, and troubles, and impurity.
 [1300159]Let us not, Indra, leave the path, the Soma-presser's sacrifice.
   Let not malignities dwell with us.
 [1300160]May we obtain, completely wrought, the thread spun out tc
    reach the Gods,
   That perfecteth our sacrifice.

[p. 113] [p. 114]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115]

  

HYMN II

  

The glorification of the Sun as Aditya, Surya and Rohita

[1300201]Radiant, refulgent in the sky are reared the banners of his light,
   Aditya's, who beholdeth man, mighty in act and bountiful.
 [1300202]Let us laud him, the whole world's Herdsman, Surya, who with
    his rays illumines all the regions,
   Mark of the quarters, brightening them with lustre, swift,
    mighty-pinioned, flying in the ocean.
 [1300203]From west to east thou speedest freely, making by magic day
    and night of diverse colours.
   This is Aditya, thy transcendent glory, that thou alone art born
    through all creation.
 [1300204]Victorious, inspired, and brightly shining, whom seven strong
    tawny-coloured coursers carry,
   Whom Atri lifted from the flood to heaven, thus men behold
    thee as thy course thou runnest.
 [1300205]Let them not snare thee speeding on thy journey: pass safely,
    swiftly places hard to traverse,
   While measuring out the day and night thou movest--O Surya,
    even Heaven and Earth the Goddess.
 [1300206]Hail to thy rapid car whereon, O Surya, thou circlest in a
    moment both the limits,
   Whirled by thy bay steeds, best of all at drawing, thy hundred
    horses or seven goodly coursers!
 [1300207]Mount thy strong car, O Surya, lightly rolling, drawn by good
    steeds, propitious, brightly gleaming,
   Whirled by thy bays, most excellent at drawing, thy hundred
    horses or seven goodly coursers.
 [1300208]Surya hath harnessed to his car to draw him seven stately bay
    steeds gay with wolden housings.
   The Bright One started from the distant region: dispelling
    gloom the God hath climbed the heavens.
 [1300209]With lofty banner hath the God gone upward, and introduced
    the light, expelling darkness.
   He hath looked round on all the worlds, the Hero, the son of
   Aditi, Celestial Eagle. [p. 116]
 [1300210]Rising, thou spreadest out thy rays, thou nourishest all shapes
    and forms.
   Thou with thy power illumest both the oceans, encompassing
    all spheres with thy refulgence.
 [1300211]Moving by magic power to east and westward, these two young
    creatures, sporting, circle ocean.
   One of the pair beholds all living creatures: with wheels of gold
    the bay steeds bear the other.
 [1300212]Atri established thee in heaven. O Surya, to create the month.
   So on thou goest, firmly held, heating, beholding all that is.
 [1300213]As the Calf both his parents so thou joinest both the distant
    bounds,
   Surely the Gods up yonder knew this sacred mystery long ago.
 [1300214]Surya is eager to obtain all wealth that lies along the sea,
   Great is the course spread out for him, his eastward and his
    westward path.
 [1300215]He finishes his race with speed and never turns his thought
    aside,
   Thereby he keeps not from the Gods enjoyment of the Drink of
    Life.
 [1300216]His heralds bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all that
    live,
   Surya, that all may look on him.
 [1300217]The Constellations pass away, like thieves, departing in the
    night.
   Before the all-beholding Sun.
 [1300218]His herald rays are seen afar refulgent o'er the world of men,
   Like flames of fire that burn and blaze.
 [1300219]Swift and all-beautiful art thou, O Surya, maker of the light,
   Illuming all the radiant realm.
 [1300220]Thou goest to the hosts of Gods, thou comest hither to mankind,
   Hither, all light to behold.
 [1300221]With that same eye of thine wherewith thou seest, brilliant
   Varuna.
   The active one among mankind,
 [1300222]Traversing sky and wide mid-air, thou metest with thy beams
    our days,
   Sun, seeing all things that have life.
 [1300223]Seven bay steeds harnessed to thy car bear thee, O thou far-
    seeing One, [p. 117]
   God, Surya, with the radiant hair.
 [1300224]Surya, hath yoked the pure bright seven, the daughters of the
    car, with these,
   His own dear team, he travelleth.
 [1300225]Devout, aflame with fervent heat, Rohita hath gone up to
    heaven.
   He is re-born, returning to his birthplace, and hath become the
   Gods' imperial ruler.
 [1300226]Dear unto all men, facing all directions, with hands and palms
    on every side extended,
   He, the sole God, engendering earth and heaven, beareth them
    with his wings and arms together.
 [1300227]The single-footed hath outstepped the biped, the biped overtakes
    the triple-footed.
   The biped hath outstridden the six-footed: these sit around the
    single-footed's body.
 [1300228]When he, unwearied, fain to go, hath mounted his bays, he
    makes two colours, brightly shining.
   Rising with banners, conquering the regions, thou sendest light
    through all the floods, Aditya.
 [1300229]Verily, Surya, thou art great: truly, Aditya, thou art great.
   Great is thy grandeur, Mighty One: thou, O Aditya, thou art
    great.
 [1300230]In heaven, O Bird, and in mid-air thou shinest: thou shinest on
    the earth and in the waters.
   Thou hast pervaded both the seas with splendour: a God art
    thou, O God, light-winner, mighty.
 [1300231]Soaring in mid-course hither from the distance, fleet and ins-
    pired, the Bird that flies above us,
   With might advancing Vishnu manifested, he conquers all that
    moves with radiant banner:
 [1300232]Brilliant, observant, mighty Lord, an Eagle illuming both the
    spheres and air between them.
   Day and the Night, clad in the robes of Surya, spread forth more
    widely all his hero powers.
 [1300233]Flaming and radiant, strengthening his body, bestowing floods
    that promptly come to meet us,
   He, luminous, winged, mighty, strength-bestower, hath mounted
    all the regions as he forms them. [p. 118]
 [1300234]Bright presence of the Gods, the luminous herald Surya hath
    mounted the celestial regions.
   Day's maker, he hath shone away the darkness, and radiant,
    passed o'er places hard to traverse.
 [1300235]He hath gone up on high, the Gods' bright presence, the eye of
   Mitra, Varuna and Agni.
   The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, Surya hath filled the
    earth and air and heaven,
 [1300236]High in the midst of heaven may we behold thee whom men call
   Savitar, the bright red Eagle,
   Soaring and speeding on thy way, refulgent, unwasting light
    which Atri erst discovered.
 [1300237]Him, Son of Aditi, an Eagle hasting along heaven's height, I
    supplicate in terror,
   As such prolong our lengthened life, O Surya: may we, unha-
    rmed, enjoy thy gracious favour.
 [1300238]This gold-hued Hansa's wings, soaring to heaven, spread o'er a
    thousand days' continued journey
   Supporting all the Gods upon his bosom, he goes his way behold-
    ing every creature.
 [1300239]Rohita, in primeval days Prajapati, was, after, Time, Mouth of
    all sacrifices, he, Rohita, brought celestial light.
 [1300240]He, Rohita, became the world: Rohita gave the heaven its heat.
   Rohita with his beams of light travelled along the earth and sea.
 [1300241]To all the regions Rohita came, the imperial Lord of heaven.
   He watches over ocean, heaven, and earth and all existing things.
 [1300242]Mounting the lofty ones, he, bright, unwearied, splendidly
    shining, makes two separate colours,
   While through all worlds that are he sends his lustre, radiant,
    observant, mighty, wind-approacher.
 [1300243]One form comes on, the other is reverted: to day and night the
   Strong One shapes and fits him.
   With humble prayer for aid we call on Surya, who knows the
    way, whose home is in the region.
 [1300244]The suppliant's way, filling the earth, the Mighty circleth the
    world with eye that none deceiveth.
   May he, all-seeing, well-disposed and holy, give ear and listen to
    the word I utter.
 [1300245]Blazing with light his majesty hath compassed ocean and earth
    and heaven and air's mid-region. [p. 119]
   May he, all-seeing, well-disposed and holy, give ear and listen to
    the word I utter.
 [1300246]Agni is weakened by the people's fuel to meet the Dawn who
    cometh like a milch-cow,
   Like young trees shooting up on high their branches, his flames
    are mounting to the vault of heaven.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

  

HYMN III

  

A glorification of Rohita. with a malediction on the man who wrongs a Brahman

[1300301]He who engendered these, the earth and heaven, who made the
    worlds the mantle that he weareth,
   In whom abide the six wide-spreading regions through which the
   Bird's keen vision penetrateth,
   This God is wroth offended by the sinner who wrongs the
   Brahman who hath gained this knowledge
   Agitate him, O Rohita; destroy him: entangle in thy snares the
   Braman's tyrant.
 [1300302]He from whom winds blow pure in ordered season, from whom
    the seas flow forth in all directions, [p. 121]
   This God, etc.
 [1300303]He who takes life away, he who bestows it; from whom comes
    breath to every living creature,
   This God, etc.
 [1300304]Who with the breath he draws sates earth and heaven, with
    expiration fills the ocean's belly,
   This God, etc.
 [1300305]In whom Viraj, Prajapati, Parameshthin, Agni Vaisvanara abide
    with Pankti,
   He who hath taken to himself the breathing of the Supreme, the
    vigour of the Highest,
   This God, etc.
 [1300306]On whom rest six expenses and five regions, four waters, and
    three syllables of worship,
   He who hath looked between both spheres in anger,
   This God, etc.
 [1300307]He who, consuming food, became its master, the Lord of Prayer,
    the Regent of Devotion,
   The world's Lord, present and to be hereafter,
   This God, etc.
 [1300308]He who metes out the thirteenth month, constructed with days
    and nights, containing thirty members,
   This God, etc.
 [1300309]Dark the descent; the strong-winged birds are golden: they fly
    aloft to heaven, enrobed in waters.
   They have come hither from the seat of Order,
   This God, etc.
 [1300310]What silver. Kasyapa, thou hast refulgent, what brightly-shining
    lotus-flower collected,
   Wherein are gathered seven Suns together,
   This God, etc.
 [1300311]In front the Brihat-Saman is his mantle, and from behind
   Rathantara enfolds him,
   Ever with care robing themselves in splendour.
   This God, etc.
 [1300312]One of his wings was Brihat, and the other Rathantarr., vigorous
    with one same purpose,
   What time the Gods gave Rohita his being.
   This God, etc. [p. 122]
 [1300313]At evening he is Varuna and Agni, ascending in the morning he
    is Mitra.
   As Savitar, he moves through air's mid region, as Indra warms-
    the heavens from the centre.
   This God, etc.
 [1300314]This gold-hued Harisa's wings, soaring to heaven spread o'er a
    thousand days' continued journey.
   Supporting all the Gods upon his bosom, he goes his way behol-
    ding every creature.
   This God, etc.
 [1300315]This is the God who dwells-within the waters, the thousand-
    rooted, many-powered Atri,
   He who brought all this world into existence.
   This God; etc.
 [1300316]With flying feet his tawny coursers carry the bright God through,
    the sky, aglow with splendour.
   Whose limbs uplifted fire and heat the heavens: hither he shines-
    with beams of golden colour.
   This God, etc.
 [1300317]He beside whom his bay steeds bear the Adityas, by whom as
    sacrifice go many knowing.
   The sole light shining spread through various places.
   This God, etc.
 [1300318]This seven make the one-wheeled chariot ready: bearing seven
    names the single courser draws it.
   The wheel, three-naved, is sound and undecaying: thereon these
    worlds of life are all dependent.
   This God, etc.
 [1300319]Eight times attached the potent Courser draws it, Sire of the
   Gods, father of hymns and praises.
   So Matarisvan, measuring in spirit the thread of Order, purifies
    all regions.
   This God, etc.
 [1300320]The thread that goes through all celestial quarters within the
   Gayatri, womb of life eternal.
   This God, etc.
 [1300321]There are the settings, three the upward risings, three are the-
    spaces, yea, and three the heavens.
   We know thy triple place of birth, O Agni, we know the deities''
    triple generations. [p. 123]
 [1300322]He who, as soon as born, laid broad earth open, and set the
    ocean in the air's mid-region, This God, etc.
 [1300323]Thou, Agni, kind with lights and mental powers, hast up in
    heaven shone as the Sun, enkindled.
   The Maruts, sons of Prisni, sang his praises what time the Gods
    gave Rohita his being. This God, etc.
 [1300324]Giver of breath, giver of strength and vigour, he whose com-
    mandment all the Gods acknowledge,
   He who is Lord of this, of man and cattle, This God, etc.
 [1300325]The single-footed hath outstepped the biped, the biped overtakes
    the triple-footed.
   The quadruped hath wrought when bipeds called him, standing
    and looking on the five collected.
   This God is wroth offended by the sinner that wrongs the
   Brahman who hath gained this knowledge.
   Agitate him, O Rohita; destroy him: entangle in thy snares the
   Brahman's tyrant.
 [1300326]Born is the darksome Mother's Son, the whitely shining Calf of
   Night.
   He, Rohita, ascendeth up to heaven, hath mounted to the
    heights.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 124]

  

HYMN IV

  

A glorification of the Sun as the only Deity

[1300401]Down looking, on the ridge of sky Savitar goes to highest
    heaven.
 [1300402]To misty cloud filled with his rays Mahendra goes encompassed
    round.
 [1300403]Creator and Ordainer, he is Vayu, he is lifted cloud.
 [1300404]Rudra, and Mahadeva, he is Aryaman and Varuna.
 [1300405]Agni is he, and Siirya, he is verily Mahayama.
 [1300406]Calves, joined, stand close beside him, ten in number, with one
    single head.
 [1300407]From west to east they bend their way: when he mounts up he
    shines afar.
 [1300408]His are these banded Maruts: they move gathered close like
    porters' thongs. [p. 125]
 [1300409]To misty cloud filled with his rays Mahendra goes encompassed
    round,
 [1300410]His are the nine supports, the casks set in nine several places
    here.
 [1300411]He keeppeth watch o'er creatures, all that breatheth and that
    breatheth not.
 [1300412]This conquering might hath entered him, He is the sole the
    simple One, the One alone.
 [1300413]In him these Deities become simple and One
 [1300414]Renown and glory, and force and cloud, the Brahman's
    splendour, and food, and nourishment,
 [1300415]To him who knoweth this God as simple and one.
 [1300416]Neither second, nor third, nor yet fourth is he called;
 [1300417]He is called neither fifth, nor sixth, nor yet seventh
 [1300418]He is called neither eighth, nor ninth, nor yet tenth.
 [1300419]He watcheth over creatures, all that breatheth and that breatheth
    not.
 [1300420]This conquering might hath entered him. He is the sole, the
    simple One, the One alone,
 [1300421]In him these Deities become simple and One
 [1300422]Devotion and Religious Fervour, and renown and glory, and
    force and cloud, the Brahman's splendour, and food and
    nourishment.
 [1300423]And past and future, and Faith and lustre, and heaven and sweet
    oblation,
 [1300424]To him who knoweth this God as simple and One.
 [1300425]He, verily, is death, he is immortality, he is the monster, he is
    the fiend.
 [1300426]He is Rudra, winner of wealth in the giving of wealth; in uttering
    homage he is the sacrificial exclamation Vashat duly employed.
 [1300427]All sorcerers on earth obey with reverence his high behest.
 [1300428]All constellations yonder, with the Moon, are subject to his will.
 [1300429]He was brought forth from Day: and Day derives his origin.
    from him.
 [1300430]He was brought forth from Night: and Night derives her origins
    from him.
 [1300431]He was produced from Air: and Air derives its origin from him.
 [1300432]He was produced from Wind: and Wind derives his origin from.
    him. [p. 126]
 [1300433]From Heaven was he produced: and Heaven derives his origin
    from him.
 [1300434]He sprang from regions of the sky: from him the heavenly
    regions sprang.
 [1300435]He is the offspring of the Earth: Earth hath her origin from
    him.
 [1300436]He was produced from fire: and fire derives its origin from
    him.
 [1300437]He is the waters' offspring: and from him the waters were
    produced.
 [1300438]From holy verses was he born: from him the holy verses
    sprang.
 [1300439]He is the son of sacrifice: and sacrifice was born from him.
 [1300440]Sacrifice, sacrifice's Lord, he was made head of sacrifice.
 [1300441]He thundereth, he lighteneth, he casteth down the thunder-stone
 [1300442]For misery or happiness, for mortal man or Asura.
 [1300443]Whether thou formest growing plants, or sendest rain for
    happiness, or hast increased the race of man,
 [1300444]Such is thy greatness, liberal Lord! A hundred bodily forms are
    thine.
 [1300445]Millions are in thy million, or thou art a billion in thyself.
 [1300446]Stronger than immortality is Indra: stronger thou than deaths;
 [1300447]Yea, stronger than Malignity art thou, O Indra, Lord of Might.
   Calling thee Master, Sovran Chief, we pay our reverence to
    thee.
 [1300448]Worship to thee whom all behold! Regard me, thou whom all
    regard,
 [1300449]With food, and fame, and vigour, with the splendour of a
   Brahman's rank
 [1300450]We pay thee reverence calling thee strength, power, and might,
    and conquering force.
 [1300451]We pay thee reverence calling thee red power, the silvery
    expanse.
 [1300452]We pay thee reverence calling thee vast, wide, the good, the
    universe.
 [1300453]We pay thee reverence, calling thee extension, compass, width,
    and world.
 [1300454]We pay thee reverence, calling thee rich, opulent in this and that,
    with wealth unceasing and secure [p. 127]
 [1300455]Worship to thee whom all behold! Regard me, thou whom all
    regard.
 [1300456]With food, and fame, and vigour, with the splendour of a
   Brahman's rank.

[p. 128]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

BOOK XIV

  

HYMN I

  

On the Bridal of Surya, marriage ceremonies in general

[1400101]Truth is the base that bears the earth; by Surya are the heavens
    upheld.
   By Law the Adityas stand secure, and Soma holds his place in
    heaven.
 [1400102]By Soma are the Adityas strong, by Soma mighty is the earth:
   Thus Soma in the lap of all these constellations hath his home.
 [1400103]One thinks, when men have brayed the plant, that he hath drunk
    the Soma's juice.
   Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma never mortal eats.
 [1400104]When they begin to drink thee, then, O God, thou swellest out
    again.
   Vayu in Soma's sentinel. The month is that which shapes the
    years.
 [1400105]Soma, preserved by covering rules, guarded by hymns in Brihati,
   Thou standest listening to the stones; none tastes of thee who
    dwells on earth.
 [1400106]Thought was her coverlet, the power of sight was unguent for her
    eyes:
   Her treasure-chest was earth and heaven, when Surya went unto
    her lord.
 [1400107]Raibhi was her dear bridal friend, and Narasatisi led her home.
   Lovely to see was Surya's robe: by Gatha beautified she moves
 [1400108]Songs were the cross-bars of the pole, Kurira metre docked her
    head.
   Both Asvins were the paranymphs: Agni was leader of the
    train.
 [1400109]Soma was he who wooed the maid: the groomsmen were both.
   Asvins, when
   The Sun-God Savitar bestowed his willing Surya on her lord.
 [1400110]Her spirit was the bridal car, the canopy thereof was heaven:
   Two radiant oxen formed the team when Surya came unto her
    lord. [p. 130]
 [1400111]Steadily went the steers upheld by holy verse and song of praise,
   The chariot-wheels were listening ears: thy path was tremulous
    in the sky.
 [1400112]Pure, as thou wentest, were thy wheels, breath was the axle pier-
    cing them.
   Surya advancing to her lord rode on the chariot of her heart.
 [1400113]The bridal pomp of Surya, which Savitar started, moved along.
   In Magha days are oxen slain, in Phalgunis they wed the bride.
 [1400114]When on your three-wheeled chariot, O ye Asvins, ye came as
    suitors unto Surya's bridal,
   Where was one chariot-wheel of yours? Where stood ye for the
    sire's command?
 [1400115]Twin Lords of Lustre, at the time when ye to Surya's wooing
    came,
   Then all the Gods agreed to your proposal Pushan as son elected
    you as father.
 [1400116]Two wheels of thine the Brahmans know, Surya! according to
    their times.
   That which is hidden only those who know the highest truths
    have learned.
 [1400117]Worship we pay to Aryaman, finder of husbands, kindly friend.
   As from its stalk a cucumber, from here I loose thee, not from
    there
 [1400118]Hence and not thence I send her free. I make her softly fettered
    there.
   That, bounteous Indra! she may live blest in her fortune and
    her sons.
 [1400119]Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee, where with the bless-
    ed Savitar hath bound thee.
   May bless be thine together with thy wooer in Order's dwelling,
    in the world of virtue.
 [1400120]Let Bhaga take thy hand and hence conduct thee: let the two
   Asvins on their car transport thee.
   Go to the house to be the household's mistress, and speak as
    lady to thy gathered people.
 [1400121]Happy be thou and prosper with thy children here: be vigilant
    to rule the household in this home.
   Closely unite thy body with this man thy lord. So shalt thou,
    full of years, address thy company. [p. 131]
 [1400122]Be not divided; dwell ye here; reach the full time of human
    life.
   With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing in your happy
    home.
 [1400123]Moving by magic power from east to westward, these children
    twain go sporting round the ocean.
   The one beholds all creatures: thou, the other, art born anew,
    duly arranging seasons.
 [1400124]Thou, born afresh, art new and new for ever; ensign of days,
    before the Dawns thou goest.
   Coming, thou orderest for Gods their portion. Thou lengthenest,
   Moon, the days of our existence.
 [1400125]Give thou the wollen robe away: deal treasure to the Brahman-
    priests.
   This Witchery hath got her feet: the wife attendeth on her lord.
 [1400126]It turneth dusky-red: the witch who clingeth close is driven off.
   Well thrive the kinsmen of this bride: the husband is bound
    fast in bonds.
 [1400127]Unlovely is his body when it glistens with that wicked fiend,
   What time the husband wraps about his limbs the garment of
    his wife.
 [1400128]The butchering, the cutting-up, the severing of limb and joint--
   Behold the forms which Surya wears: yet these the Brahman
    purifies,
 [1400129]Pungent is this, bitter is this, filled as it were with arrow barbs,
    empoisoned and not fit for use.
   The Brahman who knows Surya well deserves the garment of
    the bride.
 [1400130]The Brahman takes away the robe as a fair thing that brings good
    luck.
   He knows the expiating rite whereby the wife is kept unharmed.
 [1400131]Prepare, ye twain, happy and prosperous fortune, speaking the
    truth in faithful utterances.
   Dear unto her, Brihaspati, make the husband, and pleasant be
    these words the wooer speaketh.
 [1400132]Remain ye even here and go no farther: strengthen this man, ye
   Cows, with plenteous offspring.
   May Dawns that come for glory, bright with Soma, here may all
   Gods fix and enchant your spirits. [p. 132]
 [1400133]Come, O ye Cows, with offspring dwell around him: he doth not
    stint the Gods' alloted portion.
   To him, your friend, may Pushan, all the Maruts, to him may
   Dhatar, Savitar send vigour.
 [1400134]Straight in direction be the paths, and thornless, whereby our
    fellows travel to the wooing.
   With Bhaga and with Aryaman Dhatar endue the pair with
    strength!
 [1400135]Whatever lustre is in dice, whatever lustre is in wine,
   Whatever lustre is in cows, Asvins, endue this dame therewith.
 [1400136]With all the sheen that balmeth wine, or thigh of female para-
    mour,
   With all the sheen that balmeth dice, even with this adorn the
    dame.
 [1400137]He who in water shines unfed with fuel, whom sages worship in
    their sacrifices.
   May he, the Waters' Child, send us sweet waters those that en-
    hanced the power of mighty Indra.
 [1400138]I cast away a handful here, hurtful, injurious to health.
   I lift another handful up, sparkling and bringing happiness.
 [1400139]Hither let Brahmans bring her bathing water; let them draw
    such as guards the lives of heroes.
   Aryaman's fire let her encircle, Pushan! Fathers-in-law stand,
    with their sons, expectant.
 [1400140]Blest be the gold to thee, and blest the water, blest the yoke's
    opening, and blest the pillar.
   Blest he the waters with their hundred cleansings: blest be thy
    body's union with thy husband.
 [1400141]Cleansing Apala, Indra! thrice, thou gavest sunbright skin to
    her
   Drawn, Satakratu! through the hole of car, of wagon, and of
    yoke.
 [1400142]Saying thy prayer for cheerfulness, children, prosperity, and
    wealth,
   Devoted to thy husband, gird thyself for immortality.
 [1400143]As vigorous Sindhu won himself imperial lordship of the
    streams,
   So be imperial queen when thou hast come within thy husband's
    home.
 [1400144]Over thy husband's fathers and his brothers be imperial queen. [p. 133]
   Over thy husband's sister and, his mother bear supreme control.
 [1400145]They who have spun, and woven, and extended Goddesses who
    have drawn the ends together,
   May they invest thee for full long existence. Heiress of lengthen-
    ed life, endue this garment,
 [1400146]They mourn the living, they arrange the sacred rite: the men
    have set their thoughts upon a distant cast:
   They who have brought the Fathers this delightful gift, when
    wives allowed their lords the joy of their embrace.
 [1400147]I place upon the lap of Earth the Goddess, a firm auspicious
    stone to bring thee children.
   Stand on it, thou, greeted with joy, resplendent: a long long
    life may Savitar vouchsafe thee.
 [1400148]As Agni in the olden time took the right hand of this our Earth.
   Even so I take and hold thy hand: be not disquieted, with me,
    with children and with store of wealth.
 [1400149]God Savitar shall take thy hand, and Soma the King shall make
    thee rich in goodly offspring,
   Let Agni, Lord Omniscient, make thee happy, till old old age a
    wife unto thy husband.
 [1400150]I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that thou mayst reach
    old age with me thy consort,
   Gods, Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi, have given thee to be
    my household's mistress.
 [1400151]Bhaga and Savitar the God have clasped that hand of thine in
    theirs,
   By rule and law thou art my wife: the master of thy house am I.
 [1400152]Be it my care to cherish her: Brihaspati hath made thee mine.
   A hundred autumns live with me thy husband, mother of my
    sons!
 [1400153]Tvashtar, by order of the holy sages, hath laid on her Brihas-
    pati's robe for glory,
   By means of this let Savitar and Bhaga surround this dame, like
   Surya, with her children.
 [1400154]May Indra-Agni, Heaven-Earth, Matarisvan, may Mitra-Varuna,
   Bhaga, both the Asvins,
   Brihaspati, the host of Maruts, Brahma, and Soma magnify this
    dame with offspring.
 [1400155]It was Brihaspati who first arranged the hair on Surya's head, [p. 134]
   And therefore, O ye Asvins, we adorn this woman for her lord.
 [1400156]This lovely form the maiden wears in spirit I long to look on
    as my wife approaching,
   Her will I follow with my nine companions. Who is the sage
    that loosed the bonds that held her?
 [1400157]I free her: he who sees, within my bosom, my heart's nest
    knows how her fair form hath struck me.
   I taste no stolen food: myself untying Varuna's nooses I am
    freed in spirit.
 [1400158]Now from the bond of Varuna I loose thee, wherein the blessed
   Savitar hath bound thee.
   O bride, I give thee here beside thy husband fair space and room
    and pleasant paths to travel.
 [1400159]Lift up your weapons. Drive away the demons. Transport this
    woman to the world of virtue.
   Dilator, most wise, hath found for her a husband. Let him who
    knows, King Bhaga, go before her.
 [1400160]Bhaga hath formed the four legs of the litter, wrought the four
    pieces that compose the frame-work.
   Tvashtar hath decked the straps that go across it, May it be
    blest, and bring us happy fortune.
 [1400161]Mount this, all-hued. gold tinted, strong wheeled, fashioned of
   Kinsuka, this chariot lightly rolling,
   Bound for the world of life immortal, Surya! Made for thy
    lord a happy bride's procession.
 [1400162]To us, O Varuna, bring her, kind to brothers; bring her, Brihas-
    pati, gentle to the cattle.
   Bring her, O Indra, gentle to her husband: bring her to us, O
   Savitar, blest with children.
 [1400163]Hurt not the girl, ye Pillars twain upon the path which Gods
    have made.
   The portal of the heavenly home we make the bride's auspicious
    road.
 [1400164]Let prayer he offered up before and after, prayer in the middle,
    lastly, all around her.
   Reaching the Gods' inviolable castle shine in thy lord's world
    gentle and auspicious.

[p. 135] [p. 136] [p. 137] [p. 138]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

  

HYMN II

  

On the Bridal of Surya, marriage ceremonies in general, continued

[1400201]For thee with bridal train they first escorted Surya to her home,
   Give to the husband in return, Agni, the wife with future sons.
 [1400202]Agni hath given the bride again with splendour and a lengthened.
    life.
   Long-lived be he who is her lord: a hundred autumns let him
    live.
 [1400203]She was the wife of Soma first: next the Gandharva was thy
    lord.
   Agni was the third husband: now one born of woman is thy
    fourth.
 [1400204]Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave.
   Now, Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and this my
    bride.
 [1400205]Your favouring grace hath come, ye who are rich in spoil!
   Asvins, your longings are stored up within your hearts.
   Ye, Lords of Splendour have become our twofold guard: may
    we as dear friends reach the dwelling of the friend.
 [1400206]Thou, Dame, rejoicing, take with kindly spirit wealth worthy to
    be famed, with all thy heroes.
   Give, Lords of Light a fair ford, good to drink at: remove the
    spiteful stump that blocks the pathway.
 [1400207]May all the Rivers, all the Plants, may all the Forests, all the
   Fields,
   O Bride, protect thee from the fiend, guard his sons' mother for
    her lord. [p. 140]
 [1400208]Our feet are on this pleasant path, easy to travel, bringing bliss,
   Whereon no hero suffers harm, which wins the wealth of other
    men.
 [1400209]Here these my words, ye men, the benediction through which
    the wedded pair have found high fortune.
   May the divine Apsarases, Gandharvas, all they who are these
    fruitful trees' protectors,
   Regard this bride with their auspicious, favour, nor harm the
    nuptial pomp as it advances.
 [1400210]Consumptions, which, through various folk, attack the bride's
    resplendent train,
   These let the holy Gods again bear to the place from which they
    sprang.
 [1400211]Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find the wedded
    pair.
   Let wicked men's malignities go elsewhere by an easy path.
 [1400212]I look upon the house and bride's procession with prayer and
    with the gentle eye of friendship.
   All that is covered there in perfect beauty may Savitar make
    pleasant to the husband.
 [1400213]She hath come home this dame come home to bless us: this her
    appointed world hath Dhatar shown her.
   So may Prajapati, and both the Asvins, Aryaman, Bhaga gladden
    her with offspring.
 [1400214]This dame hath come, an animated corn-field: there sow, thou
    man, the seed of future harvest.
   She from her teeming side shall bear thee children, and feed
    them from the fountain of her bosom.
 [1400215]Take thou thy stand, a Queen art thou, like Vishnu here,
   Sarasvati!
   O Sinivali, let her bear children, and live in Bhaga's grace.
 [1400216]So let your wave bear up the pins, and ye, O Waters, spare the
    thongs;
   And never may the holy pair, sinless and innocent, suffer harm.
 [1400217]Not evil-eyed no slayer of thy husband, be strong, mild, kind,
    and gentle to thy household.
   Mother of heroes, love thy husband's father: be happy, and
    through thee may we too prosper.
 [1400218]No slayer of thy husband or his father, gentle and bright, bring
    blessing on the cattle. [p. 141]
   Loving thy husband's father, bring forth heroes. Tend well this
    household fire: be soft and pleasant.
 [1400219]Up and begone! What wish hath brought thee hither from thine
    own house? Thy mightier, I conjure thee.
   Vain is the hope, O Nirriti, that brought thee. Fly off, Malignity;
    stay here no longer.
 [1400220]As first of all this woman hath adored the sacred household
    fire.
   So do thou, Dame, pay homage to the Fathers and Sarasvati.
 [1400221]Take thou this wrapper as a screen, to be a covering for the
    bride
   O Sinivali, let her bear children, and live in Bhaga's grace.
 [1400222]Let her who shall be blest with sons, the maid who finds a.
    husband, step
   Upon the rough grass that ye spread and on the skin ye lay
    beneath.
 [1400223]Over the ruddy-coloured skin strew thou the grass, the Balbuja.
   Let her, the mother of good sons, sit there and serve this Agni
    here.
 [1400224]Step on the skin and wait upon this Agni: he is the God who
    drives away all demons.
   Here bear thou children to this man thy husband: let this thy
    boy be happy in his birthnight.
 [1400225]Let many babes of varied form and nature spring in succession
    from this fruitful mother.
   Wait on this fire, thou bringer of good fortune. Here with thy
    husband serve the Gods with worship.
 [1400226]Bliss-bringer, furthering thy household's welfare, dear gladdening
    thy husband and his father, enter this home, mild to thy hus-
    band's mother.
 [1400227]Be pleasant to the husband's sire, sweet to thy household and thy
    lord,
   To all this clan be gentle, and favour these men's prosperity.
 [1400228]Signs of good fortune mark the bride. Come all of you and look
    at her.
   Wish her prosperity: take on you her evil lucks and go your
    way.
 [1400229]Ye youthful maidens, ill-disposed, and all ye ancient woman
    here, [p. 142]
   Give all your brilliance to the bride, then to your several homes
    depart!
 [1400230]Surya the child of Savitar mounted for high felicity Her litter
    with its cloth of gold, wearing all forms of loveliness.
 [1400231]Rise, mount the bridal bed with cheerful spirit. Here bring forth
    children to this man thy husband.
   Watchful and understanding like Indrani wake thou before the
    earliest light of Morning.
 [1400232]The Gods at first lay down beside their consorts; body with
    body met in close embracement.
   O Dame, like Surya perfect in her grandeur, here rich in future
    children, meet thy husband.
 [1400233]Rise and go hence, Visvavasu: with reverence we worship thee.
   Steal to her sister dwelling with her father: this is the share--
    mark this--of old assigned thee.
 [1400234]Apsarases rejoice and feast together between the sun and place
    of sacrificing.
   These are thy kith and kin: go thou and join them: I in due
    season worship thee Gandharva.
 [1400235]Homage we pay to the Gandharva's favour, obeisance to his eye
    and fiery anger.
   Visvavasu, with prayer we pay thee homage. Go hence to those
   Apsarases thy consorts.
 [1400236]May we be happy with abundant riches. We from this place
    have banished the Gandharva.
   The God is gone to the remotest region, and we have come
    where men prolong existence.
 [1400237]In your due season, Parents! come together. Mother and sire be
    ye of future children.
   Embrace this woman like a happy lover. Raise ye up offspring
    here: increase your riches.
 [1400238]Send her most rich in every charm, O Pushan, her who shall be
    the sharer of my pleasures;
   Her who shall twine her eager arms about me, and welcome all
    my love and soft embraces.
 [1400239]Up, happy bridegroom! with a joyous spirit caress thy wife and
    throw thine arm around her.
   Here take your pleasure, procreate your offspring. May Savitar
    bestow long life upon you. [p. 143]
 [1400240]So may the Lord of Life vouchsafe you children, Aryaman bind
    you, day and night, together.
   Enter thy husband's house with happy omens, bring blessing to
    our quadrupeds and bipeds.
 [1400241]Sent by the Gods associate with Manu, the vesture of the bride,
    the nuptial garment,
   He who bestows this on a thoughtful Brahman, drives from the
    marriage-bed all evil demons.
 [1400242]The priestly meed wherewith ye twain present me, the vesture of
    the bride, the nuptial garment,
   This do ye both, Brihaspati and Indra, bestow with loving-kind-
    ness on the Brahman.
 [1400243]On your soft couch awaking both together, revelling heartily with
    joy and laughter,
   Rich with brave sons, good cattle, goodly homestead, live long to
    look on many radiant mornings.
 [1400244]Clad in new garments, fragrant, well-apparelled, to meet reful-
    gent Dawn have I arisen.
   I, like a bird that quits the egg, am freed from sin and purified.
 [1400245]Splendid are Heaven and Earth, still near to bless us, mighty in
    their power;
   The seven streams have flowed: may they, Goddesses, free us
    from distress
 [1400246]To Surya and the Deities, to Mitra and to Varuna,
   Who know aright the thing that is, this adoration have I paid.
 [1400247]He without ligature, before making incision in the neck.
   Closed up the wound again, most wealthy Bounteous Lord who
    healeth the dissevered parts.
 [1400248]Let him flash gloom away from us, the blue, the yellow and the
    red.
   I fasten to this pillar here the burning pest Prishataki.
 [1400249]All witcheries that hang about this garment, all royal Varuna's
    entangling nooses.
   All failure of success and all misfortunes here I deposit fastened
    to the pillar.
 [1400250]My body that I hold most dear trembles in terror at this robe.
   Tree, make an apron at the top. Let no misfortune fall on us.
 [1400251]May all the hems and borders all the threads that form the web
    and woof. [p. 144]
   The garment woven by the bride, be soft and pleasant to our
    touch.
 [1400252]These maids who from their father's house have come with long-
    ing to their lord have let the preparation pass. All hail!
 [1400253]Her whom Brihaspati hath loosed the Visve Devas keep secure.
   With all the splendour that is stored in cows do we enrich this.
    girl.
 [1400254]Her whom Brihaspati hath loosed the Visve Devas keep secure.
   With all the vigour that is stored in cows do we enrich this girl.
 [1400255]Her whom Brihaspati, etc.
   With all good fortune, etc.
 [1400256]Her whom Brihaspati, etc.
   With all the glory, etc.
 [1400257]Her whom Brihaspati, etc.
   With all the milky store possessed by cows do we enrich this
    girl.
 [1400258]Her whom Brihaspati hath freed the Visve Devas keep secure.
   With all the store of sap that cows contain do we enrich this.
    girl.
 [1400259]If, wearing long loose hair, these men have danced together in
    thy house, committing sin with shout and cry,
   May Agni free thee from that guilt, may Savitar deliver thee,
 [1400260]If in thy house thy daughter here have wept, with wild dishevel-
    led locks, committing sin with her lament.
   May Agni, etc.
 [1400261]If the bride's sisters, if young maids have danced together in thy
    house, committing sin with shout and cry.
   May Agni free thee from that guilt, may Savitar deliver thee.
 [1400262]If any evil have been wrought by mischief-makers that affects
    thy cattle progeny or house,
   May Agni free thee from the woe, may Savitar deliver thee.
 [1400263]This woman utters wish and prayer, as down she casts the husks
    of corn:
   Long live my lord and master! yea, a hundred autumns let him
    live!
 [1400264]Join thou this couple, Indra! like the Chakravaka and his.
    mate:
   May they attain to full old age with children in their happy
    home. [p. 145]
 [1400265]Whatever magic hath been wrought on cushion, chair, or
    canopy.
   Each spell to mar the wedding rites, all this we throw into the
    bath.
 [1400266]Whatever fault or error was in marriage or in bridal pomp.
   This woe we wipe away upon the cloak the interceder wears.
 [1400267]We, having laid the stain and fault upon the interceder's cloak,
   Are pure and meet for sacrifice. May he prolong our lives for
    us.
 [1400268]Now let this artificial comb, wrought with a hundred teeth,
    remove
   Aught of impurity that dims the hair upon this woman's head.
 [1400269]We take away consumption from each limb and member of the
    bride.
   Let not this reach Earth, nor the Gods in heaven, let it not reach
    the sky or air's wide region.
   Let not this dust that sullies reach the Waters, nor Yama, Agni,
    nor the host of Fathers.
 [1400270]With all the milk that is in Earth I gird thee, with all the milk
    that Plants contain I dress thee.
   I gird thee round with children and with riches. Do thou, thus
    girt, receive the offered treasure.
 [1400271]I am this man, that dame art thou I am the psalm and thou the
    verse. I am the heaven and thou the earth.
   So will we dwell together here, parents of children yet to be.
 [1400272]Unmarried men desire to wed; bountiful givers wish for sons.
   Together may we dwell with strength unscathed for high pros-
    perity.
 [1400273]May they, the Fathers who, to view the bride, have joined this
    nuptial train,
   Grant to this lady and her lord children and peaceful happiness.
 [1400274]Her who first guided by a rein came hither, giving the bride, here
    offspring and possessions,
   Let them convey along the future's pathway. Splendid, with
    noble children, she hath conquered.
 [1400275]Wake to long life, watchful and understanding, yea, to a life shall
    last a hundred autumns
   Enter the house to be the household's mistress. A long long life
    let Savitar vouchsafe thee.

[p. 146] [p. 147] [p. 148]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

  

BOOK XV

  

HYMN I

  

The hyperbolical glorification of the Vratya or Aryan Non-conformist

[1500101]There was a roaming Vratya. He roused Prajapati to action.
 [1500102]Prajapati beheld gold in himself and engendered it.
 [1500103]That became unique, that became distinguished, that became
    great, that became excellent, that became Devotion, that be-
    came holy Fervour, that became Truth: through that he was
    born.
 [1500104]He grew, he became great, he became Mahadeva.
 [1500105]He gained the lordship of the Gods. He became Lord.
 [1500106]He became Chief Vratya. He held a bow, even that Bow of
   Indra.
 [1500107]His belly is dark-blue, his back is red.
 [1500108]With dark-blue he envelops a detested rival, with red he pierces
    the man who hates him: so the theologians say.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

HYMN II

  

The same, continued

[1500201]He arose and went his way to the eastern region. The Brihat,
    the Rathantara, the Adityas and all the Gods followed him.
   That man is alienated from the Brihat, the Rathantara, the
   Adityas, and all Gods who reviles the Vratya who possesses
    this knowledge. He who hath this knowledge becomes the
    beloved home of the Brihat, the Rathantara the Adityas, and
    all the Gods. In the eastern region Faith is his leman, the
    hymn his panegyrist, knowledge his vesture, day his turban,
    night his hair, Indra's two Bays his circular ornaments, the
    splendour of the stars his jewel. Present and Future are his
    running footmen, mind is his war-chariot, Matarisvan and
   Pavamana are they who draw it, Vita is his charioteer, Storm
    his goad, Fame and Glory are his harbingers. Fame and
   Glory come to him who hath this knowledge.
 [1500202]He arose and went away to the southern region. Yajnayajniya
    and Vamadevya and Sacrifice and Sacrificer and sacrificial
    victims followed him. The man who reviles the Vratya
    possessing this knowledge is alienated from Yajnayajniya and
   Vamadevya, Sacrifice, Sacrificer and sacrificial victims. He
    who hath this knowledge becomes the beloved home of
   Yajnayajniya,Vamadevya, Sacrifice, Sacrificer, and sacrificial
    victims. In the southern region Dawn is his leman, Mitra his
    panegyrist, knowledge his vesture, day his turban, night his
    hair, Indra's two Bays are his circular ornaments, New Moon
   Night and Full Moon Night are his running attendants, Mind,
    etc. as in stanza 1.
 [1500203]He arose and went away to the western region. Vairupa and
   Vairaja, the Waters, and King Varuna followed him. He who
    reviles the Vratya possessing this knowledge is alienated from
   Vairupa and Vairaja, the Waters and Varuna the King. He
    who possesses this knowledge becomes the dear home of
   Vairupa and Vairaja, the Waters and King Varuna. In the [p. 151]
    western region Ira is his leman, Laughter his panegyrist,
    knowledge, etc., as above. Day and Night are his running
    attendants, Mind, etc., as above.
 [1500204]He arose and went away to the northern region. Syaita and
   Naudhasa, the Seven Rishis, and King Soma followed him.
   He who reviles the Vratya possessing this knowledge is
    alienated from Syaita, etc. He who hath this knowledge be-
    comes the dear home of Syaita, etc. In the northern region
   Lightning is his leman, thunder his panegyrist, etc. as above.
   Revelation and Tradition are his running attendants, Mind,
    etc., as above.

[p. 152]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN III

[1500301]For a whole year he stood erect. The Gods said unto him, Why
    standest thou, O Vratya? He answered and said, Let them
    bring my couch.
 [1500303]They brought the couch for that Vratya.
 [1500304]Two of its feet were Summer and Spring, and two were Autumn
    and the Rains.
 [1500305]Brihat and Rathantara were the two long boards, Yajnayajniya
    and Vamadevya the two cross-boards.
 [1500306]Holy verses were the strings lengthwise, and Yajus formulas the
    cross-tapes.
 [1500307]Sacred lore was the blanket, Devotion the coverlet.
 [1500308]The Saman was the Cushion, and chanting the bolster.
 [1500309]The Vratya ascended that couch.
 [1500310]The hosts of Gods were his attendants, solemn vows his
    messengers, and all creatures his worshippers.
 [1500311]All creatures become the worshippers of him who possesses this
    knowledge.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

[1500401]For him they made the two Spring months protectors from the
    eastern region, and Brihat and Rathantara superintendents.
   The two Spring months protect from the eastern region, and
   Brihat and Rathantara superintend, the man who possesses this
    knowledge. For him they made the two Summer months pro-
    tectors from the southern region, and Yajnayajniya and
   Vamadevya superintendents. The two Summer months, etc. as
    in Verse 1,
 [1500403]They made the two Rain months, his protectors from the western
    region, and Vairupa and Vairaja superintendents. The two
   Rain months, etc. as above.
 [1500404]They made the two Autumn months his protectors from the
    northern region, and Syaita and Naudhasa superintendents.
   The two Autumn months. etc. as above.
 [1500405]They made the two Winter months his protectors from the
    region of the nadir, and earth and Agni superintendents. The
    two Winter months, etc. [p. 153]
 [1500406]They made the two Dewy months his protectors from the region
    of the zenith, and Heaven and the Adityas superintendents.
   The two Dewy months, etc.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

[1500501]For him they made the Archer Bhava a deliverer from the inter-
    mediate space of the eastern region. Bhava the Archer, a
    deliverer, delivers him from the intermediate space of the
    eastern region. Neither Sarva nor Bhava nor Isana slays him
    who possesses this knowledge, or his cattle, or his kinsmen.
 [1500502]They made Sarva the Archer his deliverer from the intermediate
    space of the southern region, etc, as in verse 1.
 [1500503]They made Pasupati the Archer his deliverer from the inter-
    mediate space of the western region, etc.
 [1500504]They made the Awful God, the Archer, his deliverer from the
    intermediate space of the northern region, etc, as above.
 [1500505]They made Rudra the Archer his deliverer from the intermediate
    space of the region of the nadir etc.
 [1500506]They made Mahadeva his deliverer from the intermediate space
    of the region of the zenith, etc.
 [1500507]They made Isana the Archer his deliverer from all the inter-
    mediate regions. Isana the Archer, a deliverer, delivers him
    from all the intermediate regions. Neither Sarva nor Bhava,
    nor Isana slays him who possesses this knowledge, or his cattle,
    or his kinsmen.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 154]

  

HYMN VI

[1500601]He went his way to the region of the nadir. Earth and Agni and
    herbs and trees and shrubs and plants followed him. He who
    possesses this knowledge becomes the dear home of Earth and
   Agni and herbs and trees and shrubs and plants.
 [1500602]He went his way to the region of the zenith. Right and Truth
    and Sun and Moon and Stars followed him. He who possesses
    this knowledge becomes, etc., as in verse 1. mutatis mutandis.
 [1500603]He went away to the last region. Richas, Samans Yajus formulas
    and Devotion followed him. He who, etc., as above.
 [1500604]He went away to the great region. Itihasa and Purana and
   Gathas and Narasansis followed him. He who, etc.
 [1500605]He went away to the supreme region. The Ehavaniya, Garha-
    patya, and Southern Fires, and Sacrifice, and Sacrificer, and
    sacrificial victims followed him. He who, etc.
 [1500606]He went away to the unindicated region. The Seasons, groups of
    seasons, the worlds and their inhabitants, the months and
    half-months, and Day and Night followed him. He who, etc.
 [1500607]He went away to the unfrequented region. Thence he thought
    that he should not return. Diti and Aditi and Ida and Indrani
    followed him. He who, etc.
 [1500608]He went away to the regions. Viraj and all the Gods and all the
   Deities followed him. He who, etc.
 [1500609]He went away to all the intermediate spaces. Prajapati and
   Parameshthin and the Father and the Great Father followed
    him. He who possesses this knowledge becomes the beloved
    home of Prajapati and Parameshthin and the Father and the
   Great Father.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

[1500701]He, having become moving majesty, went to the ends of the
    earth. He became the sea. [p. 155]
 [1500702]Prajapati and Parameshthin and the Father and the Great Father
    and the Waters and Faith, turned into rain, followed him.
 [1500703]The Waters, Faith, and rain approach him who possesses this
    knowledge.
 [1500704]Faith, and Sacrifice and the world, having become food and
    nourishment, turned toward him.
 [1500705]Faith Sacrifice, the world, food and nourishment approach him
    who possesses this knowledge.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

[1500801]He was filled with passion: from him sprang the Rajanya.
 [1500802]He came to the people, to kinsmen, food and nourishment.
 [1500803]He who possesses this knowledge becomes the dear home of the
    people, kinsmen, food and nourishment.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

[1500901]He went away to the people.
 [1500902]Meeting and Assembly and Army and Wine followed him.
 [1500903]He who hath this knowledge becomes the dear home of Meeting,
   Assembly, Army, and Wine.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156]

  

HYMN X

[1501001]So let the King, to whose house the Vratya who possesses this
    knowledge comes as a guest.
 [1501002]Honour him as superior to himself. So he Both not act against
    the interests of his princely rank or his kingdom.
 [1501003]From him, verily, sprang Priesthood and Royalty. They said,
   Into whom shall we enter?
 [1501004]Let Priesthood enter into Brihaspati, and Royalty into Indra,
    was the answer.
 [1501005]Hence Priesthood entered into Brihaspati and Royalty into
   Indra.
 [1501006]Now this Earth is Brihaspati, and Heaven is Indra.
 [1501007]Now this Agni is Priesthood, and yonder Sun is Royalty.
 [1501008]Priesthood comes to him, and he becomes endowed with priestly
    lustre.
 [1501009]Who knows that Earth is Brihaspati and Agni Priesthood.
 [1501010]Great power comes to him and he becomes endowed with great
    power.
 [1501011]Who knows that Aditya is Royalty and that Heaven is Indra.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XI

[1501101]Let him to whose house the Vratya who possesses this knowledge
    comes as a guest.
 [1501102]Rise up of his own accord to meet him, and say, Vratya, where
    didst thou pass the night? Vratya, here is water, Let them
    refresh thee. Vratya, let it be as thou pleasest. Vratya, as thy
    wish is so let it be. Vratya, as thy desire is so be it.
 [1501103]When he says to his guest, Where didst thou pass the night? he
    reserves for himself thereby the paths that lead to the Gods.
 [1501104]When he says to him, Here is water, he secures thereby water
    for himself.
 [1501105]When he says to him, Let them refresh thee, he thereby wins
    vital breath to exceeding old age.
 [1501106]When he says to him, Vratya, let it be as thou pleasest, he
    secures to himself thereby what is pleasant. [p. 157]
 [1501107]That which is pleasant comes to him, and he is the beloved of
    the beloved, who is possessed of this knowledge.
 [1501108]When he says to him, Vratya, as thy will is so let it be, he
    secures to himself thereby the fulfilment of his will.
 [1501109]Authority comes to him who possesses this knowledge, and he
    becomes the controller of the powerful.
 [1501110]When he says to him, Vratya, as thy desire is so be it, he secures
    to himself thereby the attainment of his desire.
 [1501111]His desire comes to him who possesses this knowledge and he
    gains the complete satisfaction of his wish.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XII

[1501201]The man, to whose house, when the fires have been taken up
    from the hearth and the oblation to Agni placed therein, the
   Vratya possessing this knowledge comes as a guest.
 [1501202]Should of his own accord rise to meet him and say, Vratya, give
    me permission. I will sacrifice.
 [1501203]And if he gives permission he should sacrifice, if he does not
    permit him he should not sacrifice.
 [1501204]He who sacrifices when permitted by the Vratya who possesses
    this knowledge.
 [1501205]Well knows the path that leads to the Fathers and the way that.
    leads to the Gods.
 [1501206]He does not act in opposition to the Gods. It becomes his
    sacrifice.
 [1501207]The abode of the man who sacrifices when permitted by the
   Vratya who possesses this knowledge is long left remaining in
    this world.
 [1501208]But he who sacrifices without the permission of the Vratya who-
     possesses this knowledge.
 [1501209]Knows not the path that leads to the Fathers nor the way that
    leads to the Gods.
 [1501210]He is at variance with the Gods. He hath offered no accepted.
    sacrifice. [p. 158]
 [1501211]The abode of the man who sacrifices without the permission of
    the Vratya who possesses this knowledge is not left remaining
    in this world.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIII

[1501301]He in whose house the Vratya who possesses this knowledge
    abides one night secures for himself thereby the holy realms
    that are on earth.
 [1501302]A second night . . . . the holy realms that are in the firma-
    ment (the rest as in verse 1).
 [1501303]A third night . . . the holy realms that are in heaven.
 [1501304]A fourth night . . . . the holy realms of the Holy.
 [1501305]Unlimited nights . . . . unlimited holy realms.
 [1501306]Now he to whose house a non-Vratya, calling himself a Vratya,
    and one in name only, comes as a guest.
 [1501307]Should punish him and not punish him.
 [1501308]He should serve him with food saying to himself, To this Deity
   I offer water: I lodge this Deity; I wait upon this, this
   Deity.
 [1501309]To that Deity the sacrifice of him who has this knowledge is
    acceptable.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIV

[1501401]He when he went away to the eastern region, went away having
    become the Marut host, and having made Mind an eater of
    food. He who hath this knowledge eats food with Mind as
    food-eater. [p. 159]
 [1501402]He, when he went away to the southern region, went away
    having become Indra, and having made Strength an eater of
    food. He who hath this knowledge eats food with strength as
    food-eater.
 [1501403]He, when he went away to the western region, went away having
    become King Varuna, and having made the Waters eaters of
    food. He who hath this knowledge eats food with the Waters
    as food-eaters.
 [1501404]He, when he went away to the northern region, went away
    having become King Soma and having made the Seven Rishis'
    oblation an eater of food. He who hath this knowledge eats
    food with oblation as food-eater.
 [1501405]He, when he went away to the stedfast region, went away having
    become Vishnu and having made Viraj an eater of food. He
    who hath this knowledge eats food with Viraj as food-eater.
 [1501406]He, when he went away to animals, went away having become
   Rudra and having made herbs eaters of food. He who hath
    this knowledge eats food with herbs as food-eaters.
 [1501407]He, when he went away to the Fathers, went away having be-
    come King Yama and having made the exclamation Svadha
    an eater of food. He who hath this knowledge eats food with
    the exclamation Svadha as food-eater.
 [1501408]He, when he went away to men, went away having become Agni
    and having made the exclamation Svaha an eater of food. He
    who hath this knowledge eats food with the exclamation
   Svaha as food-eater.
 [1501409]He, when he went away to the upper region, went away having
    become Brihaspati and having made the exclamation Vashat
    an eater of food. He who hath this knowledge eats food with
    the exclamation Vashat as food-eater.
 [1501410]He, when he went away to the Gods, went away having become
   Isana and having made Passion an eater of food. He who hath
    this knowledge eats food with Passion as food-eater.
 [1501411]He, when he went away to creatures, went away having become
   Prajapati and having made vital breath an eater of food. He who
    hath this knowledge eats food with vital breath as foodeater.
 [1501412]He, when he went away to all the intermediate spaces, went
    away having become Parameshthin and having made Devotion
    an eater of food. He who hath this knowledge eats food with
   Devotion as food-eater.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 160]

  

HYMN XV

[1501501]Of that Vratya.
 [1501502]There are seven vital airs, seven downward breaths, seven diff-
    used breaths.
 [1501503]His first vital breath, called Upward, is this Agni.
 [1501504]His second vital breath, called Mature, is that Aditya.
 [1501505]His third vital breath, called Approached, is that Moon.
 [1501506]His fourth vital breath, called Pervading is this Pavamana.
 [1501507]His fifth vital breath, called Source, are these Waters.
 [1501508]His sixth vital breath, called Dear, are these domestic animals.
 [1501509]His seventh vital breath, called Unlimited, are these creatures.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

HYMN XVI

[1501601]His first downward breath is the time of Full Moon.
 [1501602]His second downward breath is the eighth day after Full Moon.
 [1501603]His third downward breath is the night of New Moon.
 [1501604]His fourth downward breath is Faith.
 [1501605]His fifth downward breath is Consecration.
 [1501606]His sixth downward breath is Sacrifice.
 [1501607]His seventh downward breath are these sacrificial fees.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVII

[1501701]His first diffused breath is this Earth.
 [1501702]His second diffused breath is that Firmament.
 [1501703]His third diffused breath is that Heaven.
 [1501704]His fourth diffused breath are those Constellations.
 [1501705]His fifth diffused breath are the Seasons.
 [1501706]His sixth diffused breath are the Season-groups.
 [1501707]His seventh diffused breath is the year.
 [1501708]With one and the same object the Gods go round the Year and
    the Seasons follow round the Vratya.
 [1501709]When they surround the Sun on the day of New Moon, and that
    time of Full Moon.
 [1501710]That one immortality of theirs is just an oblation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVIII

[1501801]Of that Vratya.
 [1501802]The right eye is the Sun and the left eye is the Moon.
 [1501803]His right ear is Agni and his left ear is Pavamana.
 [1501804]Day and Night are his nostrils. Diti and Aditi are his head and
    skull.
 [1501805]By day the Vratya is turned westward, by night he is turned
    eastward. Worship to the Vratya!

[p. 162]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

BOOK XVI

  

HYMN I

  

On the preparation and use of holy water, with, a prayer for purification and freedom from sin

[1600101]The Bull of the Waters hath been let go; the heavenly fires have
    been let go.
 [1600102]Breaking, breaking down, crushing, crushing to pieces,
 [1600103]Mroka, mind-destroying, rooting up, consuming, ruiner of the
    soul, ruiner of the body.
 [1600104]Here I let him go: thou washest me clean of him.
 [1600105]With this we let him loose who hates us and whom we hate.
 [1600106]Thou art in front of the waters. I let loose your sea.
 [1600107]I let loose the Agni who is within the waters, Mroka the up-
    rooter, the destroyer of the body.
 [1600108]Your Agni who entered into the waters, even he here is that very
    dread of yours.
 [1600109]May he anoint you with Indra's own mighty power!
 [1600110]May stainless waters cleanse us from defilement.
 [1600111]May they carry sin away from us, may they carry away from us
    the evil dream.
 [1600112]Look on me with a friendly eye, O, Waters, and touch my skin
    with your auspicious body.
 [1600113]We call the gracious Fires that dwell in waters. Goddesses, grant
    me princely power and splendour.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 164]

  

HYMN II

  

A charm to secure various blessings

[1600201]Away from distasteful food, strength and sweet speech,
 [1600202]Are pleasant. May I obtain a pleasant voice.
 [1600203]I have invoked the Protector; I have invoked his protection.
 [1600204]Quick of hearing are mine ears; mine ears hear what is good-
   Fain would I hear a pleasant sound.
 [1600205]Let not good hearing and overhearing fail the Eagle's eye, the
    undecaying light.
 [1600206]Thou art the couch of the Rishis. Let worship be paid to the
    divine couch.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN III

  

A charm to secure power and long life

[1600301]I am the head of riches. Fain would I be the head of mine
    equals.
 [1600302]Let not Ruja and Vena desert me. Let not the Head and the
   Preserver forsake me.
 [1600303]Let not the Boiler and the Cup fail tme: let not the Supporter
    and the Sustainer abandon me.
 [1600304]Let not Unyoking and the Moist-fellied car desert me: let not
    the Sender of Moisture and Matarisvan forsake me.
 [1600305]Brihaspati is my soul, he who is called the Friend of man, dear
    to my heart.
 [1600306]My heart is free from sorrow; spacious is my dwelling-place. I
    am the sea in capacity.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

  

HYMN IV

  

A charm to secure long life and success

[1600401]I am the:centre of riches. Fain would I be the centre of mine
    equals.
 [1600402]Pleasant art thou to sit by one, a mother: immortal among
    mortals.
 [1600403]Let not inward breath desert me; let not outward breath depart
    and leave me.
 [1600404]Let Surya protect me from Day, Agni from Earth, Vayu from
   Firmament, Yama from men, Sarasvati from dwellers on the
    earth.
 [1600405]Let not outward and inward breath fail me. Be not thou destruc-
    tive among the men.
 [1600406]Propitious to-day be dawns and evenings. May I drink water with
    all my people safe around me.
 [1600407]Mighty are ye, domestic creatures. May Mitra-Varuna stand
    beside me. May Agni give me inward and outward breath.
   May,he give me ability.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

  

A charm against evil dreams

[1600501]We know thine origin, O Sleep. Thou art the son of Grahi, the
    minister of Yama. Thou art the Ender, thou art Death. As
    such, O Sleep, we know thee well. As such preserve us from
    the evil dream.
 [1600502]We know thine origin, O Sleep. Thou art the son of Destruction,
    the minister of Yama, etc. (as in verse 1). [p. 166]
 [1600503]We know thine origin, O Sleep. Thou art the son of Misery,
    etc.
 [1600504]We know thine origin, O Sleep. Thou art the son of Disappear-
    ance, etc.
 [1600505]We know thine origin, O Sleep. Thou art the son of Defeat etc.
 [1600506]We know thine origin, O Sleep. Thou art the son of the sisters
    of the Gods, the minister of Yama. Thou art the Ender, thou
    are Death. As such, O Sleep, we know thee well. As such,
    preserve us from the evil dream.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

A charm to avert evil dreams, and to transfer them to an enemy

[1600601]Now have we conquered and obtained: we have been freed
    from sin to-day.
 [1600602]Let Morning with her light dispel that evil dream that frightened
    us.
 [1600603]Bear that away to him who hates, away to him who curses us.
 [1600604]To him whom we abhor, to him who hates us do we send it hence.
 [1600605]May the Goddess Dawn in accord with Speech, and the Goddess
   Speech in accord with Dawn,
 [1600606]The Lord of Dawn in accord with the Lord of Speech and the
   Lord of Speech in accord with the Lord of Dawn,
 [1600607]Carry away to Such-an-one niggard fiends, hostile demons, and
   Sadanvas,
 [1600608]Kumbhikas, Dushikas, and Piyakas,
 [1600609]Evil day-dream, evil dream in sleep,
 [1600610]Wishes for boons that will not come, thoughts of poverty, the
    snares of the Druh who never releases.
 [1600611]This, O Agni, let the Gods bear off to Such-an-one that he may
    be a fragile good-for-nothing eunuch.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 167]

  

HYMN VII

  

An imprecation on an enemy

[1600701]Herewith I pierce this man. With poverty I pierce him. With
    disappearance I pierce him. With defeat I pierce him. With
   Grahi I pierce him. With darkness I pierce him.
 [1600702]I summon him with the awful cruel orders of the Gods.
 [1600703]I place him between Vaisvanara's jaws.
 [1600704]Thus or otherwise let her swallow him up.
 [1600705]Him who hates us may his soul hate, and may he whom we
    hate hate himself.
 [1600706]We scorch out of heaven and earth and firmament the man who
    hates us.
 [1600707]Suyaman son of Chakshus.
 [1600708]Here I wipe away the evil dream on the descendant of Such-an-
    one, son of Such-a-woman.
 [1600709]Whatsoever I have met with, whether at dusk or during early
    night,
 [1600710]Whether waking or sleeping, whether by day or by night.
 [1600711]Whether I meet with it day by day, from that do I bribe him
    away.
 [1600712]Slay him; rejoice in this; crush his ribs.
 [1600713]Let him not live. Let the breath of life forsake him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VIII

  

An imprecation on an enemy

[1600801]Whatever we have gained, whatever hath accrued to us, our
   Right, our energy, our Devotion, our heavenly light, our [p. 168]
    sacrifice, our domestic animals, our offspring, our men,--from
    all share herein we exclude Such-an-one, descendant of Such-
    an-one, son of Such-a-woman. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of Grahi. Here I bind up his splendour, his energy, his
    vital breath, his life, and cast him down beneath me.
 [1600802]Whatever we have gained, etc. (as in verse 1). Let him not be
    freed from the noose of Nirriti, etc.
 [1600803]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of misery, etc.
 [1600804]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of disappearance, etc.
 [1600805]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of defeat, etc.
 [1600806]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of the sisters of the Gods, etc.
 [1600807]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of Brihaspati, etc.
 [1600808]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of Prajapati, etc.
 [1600809]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of the Rishis, etc.
 [1600810]Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed from the
    noose of the Rishis' children, etc.
 [1600811]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Angirases, etc.
 [1600812]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Angirases, etc.
 [1600813]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Atharvans, etc.
 [1600814]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Atharvans, etc.
 [1600815]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Trees, etc.
 [1600816]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of
   Shrubs, etc.
 [1600817]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Seasons, etc.
 [1600818]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Season-groups, etc. [p. 169]
 [1600819]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the
   Months, etc.
 [1600820]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of the Half-
    months, etc.
 [1600821]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of Day and
   Night, etc.
 [1600822]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of continued
   Day, etc.
 [1600823]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of Heaven
    and Earth, etc.
 [1600824]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of Indra-
   Agni, etc.
 [1600825]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of Mitra-
   Varuna, etc.
 [1600826]Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose of King
   Varuna, etc.
 [1600827]Whatever we have gained, whatever hath accrued to us, our
   Right, our energy, our Devotion, our heavenly light, our
    sacrifice, our domestic animals, our offspring, our men,--from
    all share herein we exclude Such-as-one, descendant of Such-
    an-one, son of Such-a-woman. Let him not be freed from the
    fetter and noose of Death. Here I bind up his splendour, his
    energy, his vital breath, his life, and cast him down beneath
    me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

  

A charm to secure wealth and felicity

[1600901]Ours is superior place and ours is conquest: may I in all fights
    tread down spite and malice.
 [1600902]This word hath Agni, this hath Soma spoken. May Pushan set
    me in the world of virtue.
 [1600903]We have come to the light of heaven; to the light of heaven
    have we come: we have united with the light of Surya.
 [1600904]Sacrifice is fraught with wealth for the increase of prosperity. I
    would win riches; fain would I be wealthy. Do thou bestow
    wealth upon me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170]

  

BOOK XVII

  

HYMN I

  

A prayer to Indra, Identified with Vishnu and the Sun, for the love of Gods, men, and beasts, general protection and prosperity, and all earthly and heavenly blessings

[1700101]Vanquishing, overpowering, a conqueror, exceeding strong,
   Victorious, winner of the light, winner of cattle and of spoil,.
   Indra by name, adorable, I call: a long, long life be mine!
 [1700102]Vanquishing etc.
   Indra by name, adorable I call: May I be dear to Gods.
 [1700103]Vanquishing, etc.
   Indra by name, adorable, I call: may creatures love me well.
 [1700104]Vanquishing, etc.
   Indra by name, adorable, I call: may cattle hold me dear.
 [1700105]Vanquishing, etc.
   Indra by name, adorable, I call: may equals love me well.
 [1700106]Rise up, O Surya, rise thou up; with strength and splendour
    rise on me.
   Let him who hates me be my thrall; let me not be a thrall to him.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
   Sate us with cattle of all forms and colours: set me in happiness,
    in loftiest heaven.
 [1700107]Rise up, O Surya, rise thou up; with strength and splendour rise
    on me.
   Make me the favourite of all, of those I see and do not see.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700108]Let not the fowlers who are standing ready injure thee in the
    flood, within the waters.
   Ascend this heaven, leaving each curse behind thee, Favour us:
    let thy gracious love attend us.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700109]Do thou, O Indra, for our great good fortune, with thine in-
    violable rays protect us.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700110]Be thou most gracious unto us, Indra, with favourable aid,
   Rising to heaven's third sphere, invoked with song to quaff the
   Soma juice, loving thy home to make us blest. [p. 171]
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700111]Thou art the vanquisher of all, O Indra, omniscient Indra, and
    invoked of many.
   Indra, send forth this hymn that fitly lauds thee. Favour us
    let thy gracious love attend us.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700112]In heaven and on the earth thou art uninjured, none reach thy
    greatness in the air's mid region.
   Increasing by inviolate devotion as such in heaven grant us pro-
    tection, Indra.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700113]Grant us protection, Indra, with that body of thine that is on
    earth, in fire, in waters,
   That dwells within light-finding Pavamana, wherewith thou hast
    pervaded air's mid region.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700114]Indra, exalting thee with prayer, imploring, Rishis have sat them
    down in holy Session.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu,
 [1700115]Round Trita, round the spring with thousand currents thou
    goest, round the light-finding assembly.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700116]Thou guardest well the four celestial regions, pervading heaven,
    and earth with light and splendour.
   Thou givest help to all these living creatures, and, knowing,.
    followest the path of Order.
   Manifold are thy great deed, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700117]With five thou sendest heat: with one removing the curse thou
    comest in bright sunshine hither.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700118]Indra art thou, Mahendra thou, thou art the world, the Lord of
   Life.
   To thee is sacrifice performed: worshippers offer gifts to thee.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
 [1700119]What is based on what is not: the present lies on that which is..
   Present on future is imposed and future on the present based.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
   Sate us with cattle of all varied colour. Set me in happiness, in
    loftiest heaven. [p. 172]
 [1700120]Bright art thou, and refulgent: as thou shinest with splendour
    so I fain would shine with splendour.
 [1700121]Lustre art thou, illuming: as thou glowest with lustre so I too
    would shine with cattle, with all the lustre of a Brahman's
    station.
 [1700122]Glory to him when rising, when ascending! Glory to him when
    he hath reached the zenith!
   To him far-shining, him the self-refulgent, to him the Sovran
   Lord and King be glory!
 [1700123]Worship to him when he is turning westward, to him when set-
    ting, and when set be worship!
   To him far-shining, him the self-refulgent, to him the Sovran
   Lord and King be glory!
 [1700124]With all his fiery fervour this Aditya hath gone up on high,
   Giving my foes into my hand. Let me not by my foeman's prey.
   Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu.
   Sate us with cattle of all varied colours. Set me in happiness, in
    loftiest heaven.
 [1700125]Thou for our weal, Aditya, hast mounted thy ship with hundred
    oars.
   Thou hast transported me to day: so bear me evermore to
    night.
 [1700126]Thou for our weal, O Surya, hast mounted thy ship with hundred
    oars.
   Thou hast transported me to night: so bear me evermore to
    day.
 [1700127]Encompassed by Prajapati's devotion as shield, with Kasyapa's
    bright light and splendour,
   Reaching old age, may I made strong and mighty live through a
    thousand years with happy fortune.
 [1700128]Compassed am I with prayer, my shield and armour; compassed
    with Kasyapa's bright light and splendour.
   Let not shafts reach me shot from heaven against me, nor those
    sent forth by men for my destruction.
 [1700129]Guarded am I by Order and the Seasons, protected by the past
    and by the future.
   Let not distress, yea, let not Death come nigh me: with water
    of my speech have I o'erwhelmed them.
 [1700130]On every side let Agni guard and keep me; the rising Sun drive
    off the snares of Mrityu! [p. 173]
   Let brightly flushing Mornings, firm-set mountains, and lives a
    thousand be with me united.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 174]

  

BOOK XVIII

  

HYMN I

  

An accompaniment to funeral ceremonies and sacrificial offerings to ancestral spirits

[1800101]Fain would I win my friend to kindly friendship. So may the
   Sage, come through the air's wide ocean,
   Remembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a son the
    issue of his father.
 [1800102]Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers her who is
    near in kindred as a stranger.
   Sons of the mighty Asura, the heroes, supporters of the heaven,
    see far around them.
 [1800103]Yea, this the Immortals seek of thee with longing, a scion of the
    only man existing.
   Then let thy soul and mine be knit together. Embrace thy con-
    sort as her loving husband.
 [1800104]Shall we do now what we ne'er did aforetime? we who spoke
    righteously now talk impurely?
   Gandharva in the floods, the Dame of Waters--such is our
    bond, such our most lofty kinship.
 [1800105]Even in the womb God Tvashtar, vivifier, shaping all forms,
   Creator, made us consorts.
   Ne'er are his holy statutes violated: that we are his the heaven
    and earth acknowledge.
 [1800106]Who yokes to-day unto the pole of Order the strong and passio-
    nate steers of checkless spirit,
   With shaft-armed mouths, heart-piercing, joy-bestowing? Long
    shall he live who duly pays them service.
 [1800107]Who knows that earliest day whereof thou speakest, Who hath
    beheld it? Who can here declare it?
   Great is the law of Varuna and Mitra. What, wanton, wilt thou
    say to men to tempt them?
 [1800108]Yami am possessed by love of Yama, that I may rest on the
    same couch beside him.
   I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like car-wheels let
    us speed to meet each other. [p. 175]
 [1800109]They stand not still, they never close their eyelids, those senti-
    nels of Gods who wander round us.
   Not me--go quickly, wanton, with another, and hasten like a
    chariot-wheel to meet him.
 [1800110]May Surya's eye with days and nights endow him, and ever may
    his light spread out before him.
   In heaven and earth the kindred pair commingle. On Yami be
    the unbrotherly act of Yama.
 [1800111]Sure there will come succeeding times when brothers and sisters
    will do acts unmeet for kinsfolk.
   Not me, O fair one--seek another husband, and make thine arm
    a pillow for thy consort.
 [1800112]Is he a brother when no help is left her? Is she a sister when
   Destruction cometh?
   Forced by my love these many words I utter. Come near, and
    hold me in thy close embraces,
 [1800113]I am no help for thee, no refuge, Yami, I will not clasp and
    press thee to my bosom.
   This is abhorrent to my mind and spirit--a brother on the couch
    beside a sister.
 [1800114]I will not fold mine arms about thy body: they call it sin when
    one comes near a sister.
   Not me--prepare thy pleasure with another. Thy brother seeks
    not this from thee, O fair one.
 [1800115]Alas; thou art indeed a weakling Yama. We find in thee no trace
    o f heart or spirit.
   As round a tree the woodbine clings, another will cling about
    thee girt as with a girdle.
 [1800116]Embrace another, Yami. Let some other, even as the woodbine
    rings a tree, enfold thee.
   Win thou his heart and let him win thy fancy; so make with
    him a bond of blest alliance.
 [1800117]Three hymns the Sages have disposed in order, the many-formed,
    the fair, the all-beholding.
   These in one single world are placed and settled--the growing
    plants, the breezes, and the waters.
 [1800118]The Bull hath yielded for the Bull the milk of heaven: inviolable
    is the Son of Aditi.
   According to his wisdom Varuna knoweth all: he halloweth, the
    holy, times for sacrifice. [p. 176]
 [1800119]Gandharvi spake. May she, the Lady of the Flood amid the
    river's roaring leave my heart untouched.
   May Aditi accomplish all that we desire, and may our eldest
   Brother tell us this as chief.
 [1800120]Yea, even this blessed Morning, rich in store of food, splendid,
    with heavenly lustre, hath shone out for man,
   Since they as was the wish of yearning Gods, brought forth that
    yearning Agni for the assembly as the Priest.
 [1800121]And the fleet Falcon brought for sacrifice from afar this flowing.
    drop most excellent and passing wise,
   Then when the Aryan tribes chose as invoking Priest Agni the
    wonder-worker, and the hymn rose up.
 [1800122]Still art thou kind to him who feeds thee as with grass, and.
    skilled in sacrifice offers thee holy gifts.
   When thou having received the sage's strengthening food with
    lauds, after long toil comest with many more.
 [1800123]Urge thou thy Parents, as a lover, to delight: the lovely One
    desires and craves it from his heart.
   As Priest he calls aloud, as Warrior shows his skill, as Asura tries
    his strength, and with the hymn is stirred.
 [1800124]Far famed is he, the mortal man, O Agni thou Son of strength,
    who hath obtained thy favour.
   He, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, makes his,
    days lovely in his might and splendour.
 [1800125]Hear us, O Agni, in the great assembly: harness thy rapid car,.
    the car of Amrit.
   Bring Heaven and Earth, the Deities' Parents, hither: stay with
    us here, nor from the Gods be absent.
 [1800126]When, holy Agni, the divine assembly, the holy synod mid the
   Gods, is gathered,
   And when thou, godlike One, dealest forth treasures vouchsafe
    us too our portion of the riches.
 [1800127]Agni hath looked upon the van of Mornings, and on the days.
    the earliest Jatavedas.
   After the Dawns, after their rays of brightness, Surya hath enter-
    ed into earth and heaven.
 [1800128]Agni hath looked against the van of Mornings, against the days-
    the earliest Jatavedas;
   In many a place against the beams of Surya, against the heavens
    and earth hath he extended. [p. 177]
 [1800129]Heaven and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speakers of truth,
    are near enough to hear us,
   When the God, urging men to worship, sitteth as Priest, assum-
    ing all his vital vigour.
 [1800130]As God comprising Gods by Law eternal, bear, as the chief who
    knoweth, our oblation,
   Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, better to praise
    and worship, Priest for ever.
 [1800131]I praise your work .that ye may make me prosper: hear, Heaven
    and Earth, twain worlds that drop with fatness!
   While days and Gods go to the world of spirits, have let the
   Parents with sweet mead refresh us.
 [1800132]When the Cow's nectar wins the God completely, men here
    below are heaven's and earth's sustainers
   All the Gods come to this thy heavenly Yajus which from the
    motley Pair milked oil and water
 [1800133]Hath the King seized us? How have we offended against his
    holy Ordinance? Who knoweth?
   For even Mitra mid the Gods is angry. There are both song and
    wealth for those who come not.
 [1800134]'Tis hard to understand the Immortal's nature, where she who
    is akin becomes a stranger.
   Guard ceaselessly, great Agni, him who ponders Yama's name
    easy to be comprehended.
 [1800135]They in the synod where the Gods rejoice them, where they are
    seated in Vivasvan's dwelling,
   Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splendour: the
    two unweariedly maintain their brightness.
 [1800136]The counsel which the Gods meet to consider, their secret plan,
    of that we have no knowledge.
   There let God Savitar, Aditi, and Mitra proclaim to Varuna that
    we are sinless.
 [1800137]Companions, let us learn a prayer to Indra whom the thunder
    arms,
   To glorify your bold and most heroic Friend.
 [1800138]For thou by slaying Vritra art the Vritra-slayer, famed for
    might.
   Thou, Hero, in rich gifts surpassest wealthy chiefs.
 [1800139]O'er the broad land thou goest like a Stega: here on vast earth
    let breezes blow upon us, [p. 178]
   Here hath our dear Friend Varuna, united, like Agni in the
    wood, shot forth his splendour.
 [1800140]Sing praise to him the chariot-borne, the famous, Sovran of men,
    the dread and strong destroyer.
   O Rudra, praised be gracious to the singer; let thy darts spare
    us and smite down another.
 [1800141]The pious call Sarasvati, they worship Sarasvati while sacrifice
    proceedeth.
   The virtuous call Sarasvati to hear them. Sarasvati send bliss to
    him who giveth!
 [1800142]Sarasvati is called on by the Fathers who come right forward to
    our solemn worship.
   Seated upon this sacred grass rejoice you. Give thou us
    strengthening food that brings no sickness.
 [1800143]Sarasvati, who comest with the Fathers, joying in hymns, O
   Goddess, and oblations,
   Give plenteous wealth to this the sacrificer, a portion, worth a
    thousand, of refreshment.
 [1800144]May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the Fathers, who
    deserve a share of Soma.
   May they who have attained to life, the Fathers, righteous and
    gentle, aid us when we call them.
 [1800145]I have attained the gracious-minded Fathers, I have gained son
    and progeny from Vishnu.
   They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation, seated on sacred
    grass, come oftenest hither.
 [1800146]Now be this homage offered to the Fathers, to those who passed
    of old and those who followed,
   Those who have rested in the earthly region and those who
    dwell among the happy races.
 [1800147]Matali prospers there with Kavyas, Yama with Angiras' sons,
   Brihaspati with singers.
   Exalters of the Gods, by Gods exalted, aid us those Fathers in
    our invocations?
 [1800148]Yes, this is good to taste and full of sweetness, verily it is strong
    and rich in flavour.
   No one may conquer Indra in the battle when he hath drunken
    of the draught we offer.
 [1800149]Honour the King with your oblations, Yama, Vivasvan's son, who
    gathers men together. [p. 179]
   Even him who travelled o'er the mighty rivers, who searches out
    and shows the path to many.
 [1800150]Yama first found for us the road to travel: this pasture never
    can be taken from us.
   Men born on earth tread their own paths that lead them whither
    our ancient Fathers have departed.
 [1800151]Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come, help us: these offsprings
    have we made for you; accept them.
   So come to us with most auspicious favour: bestow on us
    unfailing health and plenty.
 [1800152]Bowing their bended knees and seated southward let all accept
    this sacrifice with favour.
   Punish us not for any sin, O fathers which we through human
    frailty have committed.
 [1800153]Tvashtar prepares the bridal for his daughter: therefore the
    whole of this our world assembles.
   But Yama's mother, spouse of great Vivasvan, vanished as she
    was carried to her dwelling.
 [1800154]Go forth, go forth upon the homeward pathways whither our
    sires of old have gone before us.
   Then shalt thou look on both the Kings enjoying their sacred
    food, God Varuna and Yama.
 [1800155]Go hence, depart ye, fly in all directions. This world for him the
   Fathers have provided.
   Yama bestow upon this man a dwelling adorned with days and
    beams of light and waters.
 [1800156]We set thee down with yearning, and with yearning we enkindle
    thee,
   Yearning, bring yearning Fathers nigh to eat the food of
    sacrifice.
 [1800157]We, splendid men, deposit thee, we, splendid men, enkindle thee.
   Splendid, bring splendid Fathers nigh to eat the sacrificial food.
 [1800158]Our Fathers are Angirases, Navagvas, Atharvans, Bhrigus, who
    deserve the Soma.
   May these, the holy, look on us with favour; may we enjoy
    their gracious loving-kindness.
 [1800159]Come, Yama, with Angirases, the holy; rejoice thee here with
    children of Virupa.
   Seated on sacred grass at this oblation: I call Vivasvan too, thy
    father, hither. [p. 180]
 [1800160]Come, seat thee on this bed of grass. O Yama, accordant with
   Angirases and Fathers.
   Let texts recited by the sages bring thee. O. King, let this
    oblation make thee joyful.
 [1800161]He hath gone hence and risen on high mounting heaven's ridges
    by that path
   Whereon the sons of Angiras, the conquerors of earth, went up.

[p. 181] [p. 182] [p. 183]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

  

HYMN II

  

A funeral hymn, taken mainly from the Rigveda

[1800201]For Yama Soma juice flows clear, to Yama is oblation paid.
   To Yama sacrifice prepared, and heralded by Agni, goes.
 [1800202]Offer to Yama sacrifice most sweet in savour and draw near.
   Bow down before the Rishis of the olden time, the ancient ones
    who made the path.
 [1800203]Offer to Yama, to the King, butter and milk in sacrifice.
   So may he grant that we may live long days of life mid living
    men,
 [1800204]Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni. Let not his
    body or his skin be scattered.
   O Jatavedas, when thou hast matured him, then send him on
    his way unto the Fathers.
 [1800205]When thou hast made him ready, Jatavedas, then do thou give
    him over to the Fathers. [p. 185]
   When he attains unto the life that waits him he will obey the
   Deities' commandment.
 [1800206]With the three jars Brihat alone makes pure the six wide-spread-
    ing realms.
   The Gayatri, the Trishtup, all metres in Yama are contained.
 [1800207]The Sun receive thine eye, the wind thy spirit; go, as thy merit
    is, to earth or heaven.
   Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters: go, make thy home in
    plants with all thy members.
 [1800208]Thy portion is the goat: with heat consume him: let thy fierce
    flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him.
   With thine auspicious forms, O Jatavedas, bear this man to the
    region of the pious.
 [1800209]Let all thy rapid flames, O Jatavedas, wherewith thou fillest
    heaven and earth's mid-region,
   Follow the goat as he goes on, united: then with the others,
    most auspicious, aid us.
 [18002110]Away O Agni, to the Fathers, send him who, offered in thee,
    goes with our oblations.
   Wearing new life let him approach his offspring, and splendid, be
    invested with a body,
 [1800211]Run and outspeed the two dogs, Sarama's offspring, brindled,
    four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway.
   Draw nigh thou to the gracious-minded Fathers who take their
    pleasure in the feast with Yama.
 [1800212]And those two dogs of thine, Yama, the watchers, four-eyed
    who look on men and guard the pathway
   Entrust this man, O King, to their protection, and with prosperity
    and health endow him.
 [1800213]Dark-hued, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama's two envoys
    roam among the people.
   May they restore to us a fair existence here and to-day that we
    may see the sunlight.
 [1800214]For some the Soma juice runs clear some sit by sacrificial oil.
   To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to those let him
    depart.
 [1800215]Let him, O Yama, go to those Rishis austere, of Fervour born,
   First followers of Law, the sons of Law, upholders of the Law.
 [1800246]Invincible through Fervour, they who by their Fervour went to
    heaven. [p. 186]
   Who practised great austerity,--even to those let him depart.
 [1800217]The heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away.
   Or who give guerdon thousandfold,--even to those let him
    depart.
 [1800218]Let him, O Yama, go to those Rishis austere, of Fervour born,
   Skilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages who protect the
   Sun.
 [1800219]Be pleasant unto him, O Earth, thornless and lulling him to rest.
   Vouchsafe him shelter broad and sure.
 [1800220]In the free amplitude of earth take roomy space to lodge thee in.
   Let all oblations which in life thou paidest drop thee honey now.
 [1800221]Hither I call thy spirit with my spirit. Come thou; delighted,
    to these dwelling-places.
   Unite thee with the Fathers and with Yama: strong and
    delicious be the winds that fan thee.
 [1800222]Floating in water, bringing streams, let Maruts carry thee aloft,
   And causing coolness by their rush sprinkle thee with their fall-
    ing rain.
 [1800223]I have recalled thy life to life, to being, power, and energy.
   Let thy soul go unto its own: so to the Fathers hasten thou.
 [1800224]Let not thy soul be left behind: here let not aught of thee
    remain,
   Of spirit, body, members, sap.
 [1800225]Let not a tree oppness thee, nor Earth the great Goddess weigh
    thee down.
   Among the Fathers find thy home, and thrive mid those whom
   Yama rules.
 [1800226]Each parted member, severed from thy body, thy vital breaths
    that in the wind have vanished,
   With all of these, piece after piece, shall Fathers who dwell to-
    gether meet and reunite thee.
 [1800227]Him have the living banished from their houses: remove him to
    a distance from the hamlet.
   Yama's observant messenger was Mrityu he hath despatched
    men's lives unto the Fathers.
 [1800228]Those Dasyus who, not eating our oblations, come wilh friends'
    faces mingled with the Fathers,
   Those who wear gross those who wear subtile bodies,--from this.
    our sacrifice let Agni blast them. [p. 187]
 [1800229]Bringing delight, prolonging our existence, here let our own, the
   Fathers, dwell together.
   Coming with sacrifice may we assist them, living long lives
    through many autumn seasons.
 [1800230]Now by this cow I bring thee, by the boiled rice set in milk for
    thee,
   Be the supporter of the folk left here without a livelihood.
 [1800231]Prolong the pleasant Dawn enriched with horses-or bearing us.
    anew beyond the darkness.
   Adjudged to die be he, the man who slew thee: this portion let
    him find, and not another.
 [1800232]Yama is higher and Vivasvan lower: nothing whatever do I see
    above him.
   This sacrifice of mine is based on Yama, Vivasvan spread the
    atmosphere about us.
 [1800233]From mortal men they hid the immortal Lady, made one like
    her and gave her to Vivasvan.
   Saranyu brought to him the Asvin brothers, and then deserted
    both twinned pairs of children.
 [1800234]Bring thou the Fathers one and all Agni, to eat the sacrifice.
   The buried, and the cast away, those burnt with fire, and those
    exposed.
 [1800235]Those, whether flames have burnt or not consumed them, who in
    the midst of heaven enjoy oblations--
   Let them, when thou dost know them, Jatavedas, accept with
    sacred food the axe and worship.
 [1800236]Burn gently, Agni, burn not up the body with too fervent heat.
   Let all thy force and fury be expended on the woods and earth.
 [1800237]I give this place to him who hath come hither and now is mine,
    to be a home to rest in:
   This was the thought of Yama when he answered: This man is.
    mine. Let him come here to riches.
 [1800238]This date we settle once for all, that it may ne'er be fixt again_
   A hundred autumns; not before.
 [1800239]This date we order, etc.
 [1800240]This date we limit, etc.
 [1800241]This date we measure, etc.
 [1800242]This date we mete out, etc.
 [1800243]This date we stablish, etc.
 [1800244]This date we mete and measure out, that it may ne'er be fixt. [p. 188]
    again. A hundred autumns: not before.
 [1800245]The period I have measured--come to heaven. I would my life
    were long
   Not to be measured out again; a hundred autumns, not before.
 [1800246]Inbreath and outbreath, breath diffused, life, sight to look upon
    the Sun
   Seek by a straight unwinding path the Fathers whom King
   Yama rules,
 [1800247]Unmarried men who toiled and have departed, the childless,
    having left their foes behind them,
   Have found on high the world whereto they mounted, reflecting
    on the ridge of vaulted heaven.
 [1800248]The lowest is the Watery heaven, Pilumati the middlemost;
   The third and highest, that wherein the Fathers dwell, is called
   Pradyaus.
 [1800249]The Fathers of our Father, his Grandfathers, those who have
    entered into air's wide region,
   Those who inhabit earth or dwell in heaven, these Fathers will
    we worship with oblation.
 [1800250]Thou seest now, and ne'er again shalt look upon, the Sun in
    heaven.
   Cover him as a mother draws her skirt about her son, O Earth!
 [1800251]This once,,and at no other time hereafter in a lengthened life:
   Cover him, as a wife, O Earth, covers her husband with her
    robe!
 [1800252]Round thee auspiciously I wrap the vesture of our Mother
   Earth:
   Be bliss among the living mine, oblation mid the Fathers thine!
 [1800253]Ye have prepared, pathmakers, Agni-Soma, a fair world for the
   Gods to be the it treasure.
   Go to that world and send us Pushan hither to bear us on the
    paths the goat hath trodden.
 [1800254]Guard of the world, whose cattle ne'er are injured, may Pushan
    bear thee hence, for he hath knowledge.
   May he consign thee to these Fathers' keeping, and to the
    gracious Gods let Agni give hee.
 [1800255]Lord of all life, let Ayu guard thee, Pushan convey thee forward
    on the distant pathway.
   May Savitar the God conduct thee thither where dwell the pious
    who have gone before thee. [p. 189]
 [1800256]For thee I yoke these carriers twain to bear thee to the spirit.
    world.
   Hasten with them to Yama's home and join his gathered.
    companies.
 [1800257]This is the robe that first was wrapped about thee: cast off the
    robe thou worest here among us.
   Go, knowing, to the meed of virtuous action, thy many gifts.
    bestowed upon the friendless.
 [1800258]Mail thee with flesh against the flames of Agni; encompass thee
    about with fat and marrow;
   So will the bold One eager to attack thee with fierce glow fail to
    girdle and consume thee.
 [1800259]From his dead hand I take the staff he carried, together with his
    lore and strength and splendour.
   There art thou, there; and here with good men round us may
    we o'ercome all enemies and foemen.
 [1800260]From his dead hand I take the bow he carried, together with his.
    power and strength and splendour.
   Having collected wealth and ample treasure, come hither to the-
    world of living beings.

[p. 190]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 191]

  

HYMN III

  

A funeral hymn, taken partly from the Rigveda

[1800301]Choosing her husband's world, O man, this woman lays herself
    down beside thy lifeless body. [p. 192]
   Preserving faithfully the ancient custom. Bestow upon here both
    wealth and offspring.
 [1800302]Rise, come unto the world of life, O woman: come, he is lifeless
    by whose side thou liest.
   Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion who took thy
    hand and wooed thee as a lover.
 [1800303]I looked and saw the youthful dame escorted, the living to the
    dead: I saw them, bear her.
   When she with blinding darkness was enveloped, then did I turn
    her back and lead her homeward.
 [1800304]Knowing the world of living beings, Aghnya! treading the path.
    of Gods which lies before thee,
   This is thy husband: joyfully receive him and let him mount
    into the world of Svarga.
 [1800305]The speed of rivers craving heaven and cane, thou, Agni, art the
    waters' gall.
 [1800306]Cool, Agni, and again refresh the spot which thou hast scorched
    and burnt.
   Here let the water-lily grow, and tender grass and leafy plant.
 [1800307]Here is one light for thee, another yonder: enter the third and
    be therewith united.
   Uniting with a body be thou lovely, dear to the Gods in their
    sublimest mansion.
 [1800308]Rise up, advance, run forward: make thy dwelling in water
    that shall be thy place to rest in
   There dwelling in accordance with the Fathers delight thyself
    with Soma and libations.
 [1800309]Prepare thy body: speed thou on thy journey: let not thy limbs,.
    thy frame be left behind thee.
   Follow to its repose thy resting spirit: go to whatever spot of
    earth thou lovest.
 [1800310]With splendour may the Fathers, meet for Soma, with mead and.
    fatness may the Gods anoint me.
   Lead me on farther to extended vision, and prosper me through
    life of long duration.
 [1800311]May Agni balm me thoroughly with splendour; may Vishnu.
    touch my lips with understanding.
   May all the Deities vouchsafe me riches, and pleasant Waters
    purify and cleanse me. [p. 193]
 [1800312]Mitra and Varuna have stood about me. Adityas, Sacirifical
   Posts exalt me!
   May Indra balm my hands with strength and splendour. A long,
    long life may Savitar vouchsafe me.
 [1800313]Worship with sacrificial gift King Yama, Vivasvan's son who
    gathers men together,
   Yama who was the first to die of mortals, the first who travelled
    to the world before us.
 [1800314]Depart, O Fathers, and again come hither; this sacrifice of yours
    is balmed with sweetness.
   Enrich us here with gift of great possessions; grant blessed
    wealth with ample store of heroes.
 [1800315]Kanva, Kakshivan, Purumidha, Agastya, Syavasva Sobhari, and
   Archananas,
   This Visvamitra, Jamadagni, Atri, Kasyapa, Vamadeva be our
    helpers!
 [1800316]Vasishtha, Jamadagni, Visvamitra, Gotama, Vamadeva, Bhara-
    dvaja!
   Atri hath won your favour with homage. Gracious to us be ye
    praiseworthy Fathers.
 [1800317]They, making for themselves a new existence, wash off defilement
    in the brazen vessel.
   May we be fragrant in our houses, ever increasing in our
    children and our riches.
 [1800318]They balm him, balm him over, balm him thoroughly, caress
    the mighty power and balm it with the mead,
   They seize the flying steer at the stream's breathing-place:
    cleansing with gold they grasp the animal herein.
 [1800319]Fathers, be glorious in yourselves, and follow all that is glad in
    you and meet for Soma.
   Give ear and listen, swiftly-moving Sages, benevolent, invoked in
    our assembly.
 [1800320]Atris, Angirases, Navagvas, givers of liberal gifts, continual
    sacrificers,
   Devout and pious, granting guerdon freely, sit on this holy grass
    and be ye joyful.
 [1800321]As in the days of old our ancient Fathers, speeding the work of
    sacred worship, Agni!
   Sought pure light and devotion, singing praises, they cleft the
    ground and made red Dawns apparent. [p. 194]
 [1800322]Gods, doing holy acts, devout, resplendent, smelting like ore
    their human generation,
   Brightening Agni and exalting Indra, they came encompassing
    the stall of cattle.
 [1800323]Strong One! he marked them, and the gods before them, like
    herds of cattle in a foodful pasture.
   There man moaned forth their strong desires, to strengthen even
    the true; the nearest One, the living.
 [1800324]We have worked for thee, we have toiled and laboured: bright
   Dawns have shed their light upon our worship.
   All that the Gods regard with love is blessed. Loud may we
    speak, with heroes, in assembly.
 [1800325]From eastward Indra, Lord or Maruts, guard me, as in her
    arms Earth guards the heaven above us!
   Those who give room, who made the paths, we worship, you,
    mid the Gods, who share the gifts we offer.
 [1800326]Dhatar with Nirriti save me from southward, etc. (as in stanza
   25).
 [1800327]From westward Aditi was Adityas save me! etc.
 [1800328]From westward with the All-Gods save me Soma! etc.
 [1800329]May the strong firm Sustainer bear thee upright, as Savitar bears
    light above the heaven.
   Those who give room, who made the paths, we worship, you
    mid the Gods, whe share the gifts we offer.
 [1800330]Toward the eastward region I supply thee before thou goest
    homeward, with oblation, as in her arms, etc. (as in stanza 25).
 [1800331]Toward the southern region, etc.
 [1800332]Toward the western region, etc.
 [1800333]Toward the northern region, etc.
 [1800334]Toward the stedfast region, etc.
 [1800335]Toward the upmost region I supply thee, before thou goest
    homeward, with oblation, as in her arms Earth bears the
    heaven above us.
   Those who give room, who made the paths, we worship, you,
    mid the Gods, who share the gifts we offer.
 [1800336]Thou art the Bull, Supporter, and Upholder,
 [1800337]Who purifiest wind and mead and water.
 [1800338]From this side and from that let both assist me. As, speeding,
    ye have come like two twin sisters, [p. 195]
   Religious-hearted votaries brought you forward. Knowing your
    several places be ye seated.
 [1800339]Sit near, sit very near beside our Soma: for you I fit the ancient
    prayer with homage.
   The praise-song, like a chieftain on his pathway, spreads far and
    wide. Let all Immortals hear it.
 [1800340]Three paces hath the stake gone up, and followed her, the four-
    footed, with devout observance.
   He with the Syllable copies the praise-song; he thoroughly
    purifies at Order's centre.
 [1800341]Chose he then, death for Gods to be their portion? Why chose
    he not for men a life eternal?
   Brihaspati span sacrifice, the Rishi; and Yama yielded up his
    own dear body.
 [1800342]Thou, Agni Jatavedas, when entreated, didst bear our offerings,
    having made them fragrant.
   And give them to the Fathers who consumed them with Svadha.
   Eat, thou God, the gifts we bring thee.
 [1800343]Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give riches to the
    man who brings oblations.
   Grant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, present, give
    them energy, O Fathers.
 [1800344]Fathers whom Agni's flames have tasted, come ye nigh: in per-
    fect order take ye each your proper place.
   Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass: grant riches with a
    multitude of hero sons.
 [1800345]May they, the Fathers who deserve the Soma, invited to their
    favourite oblations.
   Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen. May they be
    gracious unto us and bless us.
 [1800346]Our Father's Fathers and their sires before them who came,
    most noble, to the Soma banquet,
   With these let Yama, yearning with the yearning, rejoicing eat
    our offerings at his pleasure.
 [1800347]Come to us, Agni, with the gracious Fathers who dwell in glow-
    ing light, the very Sages,
   Who thirsted mid the Gods, who hasten hither, oblation-winners,
    theme of singers' praises.
 [1800348]Come, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers, dwellers in
    light, primeval, God-adorers, [p. 196]
   Eaters and drinkers of oblation, truthful, who travel with the
   Deities and Indra.
 [1800349]Betake thee to the lap of Earth, our mother, of Earth far-spread-
    ing, very kind and gracious.
   May she, wool-soft unto the guerdon-giver, guard thee in front
    upon the distant pathway.
 [1800350]Heave thyself, Earth, nor press him downward heavily: afford
    him easy access pleasant to approach,
   Cover him as a mother wraps her skirt about her child, O
   Earth!
 [1800351]Now let the heaving earth be free from motion: yea, let a
    thousand clods remain above him.
   Be they to him a home distilling fatness: here let them ever be
    his place of refuge.
 [1800352]I stay the earth from thee, while over thee I place this piece of
    earth. May I be free from injury.
   The Fathers firmly fix this pillar here for thee; and there let
   Yama make thee an abiding-place.
 [1800353]Forbear, O Agni, to upset this chalice: the Gods and they who
    merit Soma love it.
   This cup, yea this which serves the Gods to drink from,--in this
    let the Immortals take their pleasure.
 [1800354]The chalice brimming o'er which erst Atharvan offered to Indra,
   Lord of wealth and treasure,
   Indu therein sets draught of virtuous action, and ever purifies
    himself within it.
 [1800355]What wound soe'er the dark bird hath inflicted, the emmet, or
    the serpent, or the jackal,
   May Agni who devoureth all things heal it, and Soma, who hath
    passed into the Brahmans.
 [1800356]The plants of earth are rich in milk, and rich in milk is this my
    milk.
   With all the milky essence of the Waters let them make me
    clean.
 [1800357]Let these unwidowed dames with goodly husbands adorn them-
    selves with fragrant balm and unguent.
   Decked with fair jewels, tearless, free, from trouble, first let the
    dames go up to where he lieth.
 [1800358]Meet Yama, meet the Fathers, meet the merit of virtuous action
    in the loftiest heaven. [p. 197]
   Leave sin and evil, seek anew thy dwelling: so bright with glory
    let him join his body.
 [1800359]Our Father's Fathers and their sires before them, they who have
    entered into air's wide region,
   For them shall self-resplendent Asuniti form bodies now accord-
    ing to her pleasure.
 [1800360]Let the hoar-frost be sweet to thee. sweetly on thee the rain
    descend!
   O full of coolness, thou cool Plant, full of fresh moisture, fresh-
    ening Herb,
   Bless us in waters, female Frog: calm and allay this Agni here.
 [1800361]Vivasvan make us free from fear and peril, good rescuer, quick-
    pouring, bounteous giver!
   Many in number be these present heroes! Increase of wealth be
    mine in kine and horses!
 [1800362]In immortality Vivasvan set us! Go from us Death, come to us
    life eternal!
   To good old age may he protect these people: let not their
    spirits pass away to Yama.
 [1800363]The Sage of Fathers, guardian of devotions who holds thee up
    with might in air's mid-region,--
   Praise him ye Visvamitras, with oblation. To lengthened life
    shall be, this Yama, lead us.
 [1800364]Mount and ascend to highest heaven, O Rishis: be ye not afraid.
   Soma-drinkers to you is paid this Soma-lover's sacrifice. We
    have attained the loftiest light.
 [1800365]Agni is shining forth with lofty banner: the Bull is bellowing to
    earth and heaven.
   From the sky's limit even hath he stretched near us: the Steer
    hath waxen in the waters' bosom.
 [1800366]They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on an eagle
    that is mounting skyward;
   On thee with wings of gold, Varuna's envoy, the Bird that
    hasteth to the home of Yama.
 [1800367]O Indra, bring us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons.
   Guide us, O much-invoked in this our way: may we still living
    look upon the Sun.
 [1800368]Let these which Gods have held for thee, the beakers covered
    o'er with cake,
   Be full of sacred food for thee, distilling fatness, rich in mead. [p. 198]
 [1800369]Grains which for thee I scatter, mixt with Sesamum, as holy
    food,
   May they for thee be excellent and potent: King Yama look on
    them as thine with favour!
 [1800370]O Tree, give back again this man who is deposited on thee.
   That he may dwell in Yama's home addressing the assemblies
    there.
 [1800371]Seize hold O Jatavedas; let thy flame be full of fervent heat.
   Consume his body: to the world of pious ones transport this
    man.
 [1800372]To these, thy Fathers who have passed away at first and after-
    ward,
   Let the full brook of butter run, o'erflowing with a hundred
    streams.
 [1800373]Mount to this life, removing all defilement: here thine own
    kindred shine with lofty splendour.
   Depart thou; be not left behind: go forward, first of those here,
    unto the world of Fathers.

[p. 199] [p. 200]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

HYMN IV

  

A funeral hymn, composed partly of verses from the Rigveda

[1800401]Rise to your mother, flames of Jatavedas! I send you up by
    paths which Fathers traverse.
   With headlong speed the Oblation bearer bore our gifts: toil ye,
    and place the offerer where the righteous dwell.
 [1800402]The Seasons, Deities, form and order Worship, butter, cake,
    ladles, sacrificial weapons.
   Tread thou God-travelled paths whereby the righteous, payers
    of sacrifices, go to Svarga.
 [1800403]Carefully look on Sacrifice's pathway whereon the Angirases,
    the righteous, travel.
   By those same pathways go thou up to Svarga where the
   Adityas take their fill of sweetness, There make thy home in
    the third vault of heaven,
 [1800404]Three eagles in the region's roar are standing high on heaven's
    ridge in their appointed station.
   The worlds of Svarga shall, filled full of Amrit, yield food and
    power to him who sacrificeth. [p. 202]
 [1800405]Upabhrit stablished air, Juhu the heaven, Dhruva supported
    earth securely founded.
   As meed, the Svarga worlds, o'erspread with fatness shall yield
    the sacrificer all his wishes.
 [1800406]Dhruva, ascend thou earth the all sustainer: go thou, O Upa-
    bhrit, to air's mid-region.
   Juhu, go skyward with the sacrificer; go, and with Sruva be thy
    calf beside thee drain all the swelling unreluctant quarters.
 [1800407]They ford the mighty rivers by the pathway which they who
    sacrifice, the righteous, travel.
   There they gave room unto the sacrificer when they made regions
    and existing creatures.
 [1800408]The Angirases' pathway is the eastern Agni, the Adityas' path-
    way is the Garhapatya:
   The southward Agni is the way of Southerns.
   To Agni's greatness whom the prayer divideth go powerful, un-
    scathed with all thy members.
 [1800409]Eastward let east fire happily consume thee, and westward
    happily the Garhapatya.
   Burn southern fire, thine armour and protection: from air's-
    mid-region from the north and centre, on all sides, Agni,
    guard thou him from horror.
 [1800410]Do ye, with your most kindly forms, O Agni, waft, turned to
    rapid steeds whose ribs bear burthens,
   The sacrificer to the world of Svarga where with the Gods they
    banquet and are joyful.
 [1800411]Happily from the rear burn this man, Agni, happily from before,
    above, and under.
   One, triply parted, Jatavedas, place him happily in the world
    that holds the righteous.
 [1800412]Happily lit, let fires, each Jatavedas, seize on Prajapati's appoint-
    ed victim.
   Let them not cast it down while here they cook it.
 [1800413]Sacrifice, duly offered, comes preparing the sacrificer for the.
    world of Svarga,
   Let all the fires, each Jatavedas, welcome Prajapati's completely
    offered victim.
   Let them not cast it down while here they cook it.
 [1800414]Fain to fly up from the sky's ridge to heaven, the worshipper
    hath mounted visible Agni. [p. 203]
   Lucid from out the mist to him, the pious, gleams the God-
    travelled path that leads to Svarga.
 [1800415]On thy right hand let Indra be thy Brahman, Brihaspati Adh-
    varyu Agni Hotar.
   This ordered sacrifice goes offered thither whither presented
    gifts have gone aforetime.
 [1800416]Enriched with cake and milk here let the Charu rest.
   World-makers, makers of the path we worship you of the Gods
    who here partake oblations.
 [1800417]Enriched with cake and curds, etc. (as in stanza 16).
 [1800418]Enriched with cake and drops, etc.
 [1800419]Enriched with cake and butter, etc.
 [1800420]Enriched with cake and flesh, etc.
 [1800421]Enriched with cake and food, etc.
 [1800422]Enriched with cake and mead, etc.
 [1800423]Enriched with cake and juice, etc.
 [1800424]Here, mixt with cake and water rest the Charu!
   World-makers, makers of the path, we worship those Gods of
    you who here partake oblations.
 [1800425]Let these which Gods have held for thee, these beakers covered
    o'er with cake,
   Be full of sacred food for thee, distilling fatness, rich in mead.
 [1800426]Grains which for thee I scatter, mixt with Sesamum, as holy
    food.
   May they for thee be excellent and potent. King Yama look on,
    them as thine with favour!
 [1800427]More immortality!
 [1800428]On all the earth, to heaven, the drop descended, on this place
    and on that which was before it.
   I offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the drop which still
    to one same place is moving.
 [1800429]Those who observe men look on wealth as Vayu with countless.
    streams, and as light-finding Arka;
   Those drain out Guerdon sprung from seven mothers, who satis-
    fy and evermore give presents.
 [1800430]They for their weal drain out the cask, the beaker four-holed,.
    the milch-cow Ida full of sweetness,
   Injure not, Agni, in the loftiest heaven Aditi heightening strength
    among the people.
 [1800431]On thee doth Savitar the God bestow this vesture for thy wear. [p. 204]
   Clothe thee herein, and find meet robe in Yama's realm to cover
    thee.
 [1800432]The grains of corn have now become a cow, the Sesamum her
    calf.
   He in the realm of Yama lives on her the inexhaustible.
 [1800433]Let these become thy milch-kine, man! supplying all thy heart's
    desires.
   There, speckled, white, like-hued and various-coloured, with
    calves of Sesamum let them stand beside thee.
 [1800434]Let the green grains become thy white, and speckled, The dusky
    corns become thy ruddy milch-kine.
   Let those with calves of Sesamum for ever yield strength to him
    and never flinch from milking.
 [1800435]I offer in Vaisvanara this oblation, thousandfold spring that
    pours a hundred steamlets.
   This with a swelling flow supports the Father, supports grand-
    fathers and their sires before them.
 [1800436]Beside the spring with hundred, thousand currents, expanding
    on the summit of the water,
   Exhaustless, yielding strength, never reluctant, the Fathers with
    their sacred food are seated.
 [1800437]This pile of wood, collected, heaped together, regard it, O ye,
    kinsmen, and come near it.
   To immortality this mortal goeth: prepare a home for him, all
    ye his kindred.
 [1800438]Be here, even here, acquiring wealth, here be thou thoughts here
    be thou strength.
   Be stronger here in manly power, life-giver, never beaten back.
 [1800439]Giving the son and grandson satisfaction, let these the present
   Waters full of sweetness,
   Pouring forth food and Amrit for the Fathers, refresh both these
    and those, the Goddess Waters.
 [1800440]40. Waters, send Agni forward to the Fathers: let them accept the
    sacrifice I offer.
   May they who follow Vigour that abideth there send us down
    wealth with full store of heroes.
 [1800441]Lover of butter, deathless, him, Oblation-bearer, they inflame.
   He knoweth well the treasured stores gone to the Fathers, far
    away. [p. 205]
 [1800442]The mingled draught, the mess of rice, the flesh which I present
    to thee,
   May these be full of food for thee, distilling fatness, rich in
    sweets.
 [1800443]Grains which for thee I scatter, mixt with Sesamum as sacred
    food,
   May these for thee be excellent and potent. King Yama look on,
    them, as thine, with favour.
 [1800444]This is the ancient, this the recent pathway, by which thy sires
    of olden time departed.
   They who first travelled it, and they who followed, convey thee
    to the world where dwell the righteous.
 [1800445]The pious call Sarasvati: they worship Sarasvati while sacrifice
    proceedeth.
   The righteous doers of good deeds invoke her: Sarasvati send
    bliss to him who giveth!
 [1800446]Approaching on the south our solemn worship, the Fathers call-
   Sarasvati to hear them.
   Sit on this holy grass and be ye joyful: give thou us strengthen-
    ing food that brings no sickness.
 [1800447]Sarasvati, who tamest with them, joying in hymns and food, O
   Goddess, with the Fathers,
   Here give the Sacrificer growth of riches, a portion, worth a
    thousand, of refreshment.
 [1800448]As Prithivi rests on earth, so do I seat thee. May the God Dhatar
    lengthen our existence.
   For you may he who parts in turn find treasures, but let the
   Dead among the Fathers.
 [1800449]Depart ye two: wipe ye away whatever omens of evil fortune
    here have told you.
   Go from this man, both Steers, to him who wills it: ye are my
    joys here by the giver's Fathers.
 [1800450]From a good quarter have we gained this guerdon, gift of this
    man, strength giving, plenteous milker.
   Bringing in youth old age unto the living, may she bear these
    together to the Fathers.
 [1800451]I bring this clipped grass hither for the Fathers: grass living,.
    higher, for the Gods I scatter.
   Mount this, O man, as victim: let the Fathers recognize thee:
    when thou hast travelled yonder. [p. 206]
 [1800452]Set on this grass thou hast become a victim. Fathers shall know
    thee yonder when they meet thee.
   Gather thy body, limb by limb, together: I by the power of
    prayer arrange thy members.
 [1800453]The royal Parna is the caldrons' cover: strength have we gained,
    force, power, and might, and vigour.
   Bestowing length of life upon the living, for long existence
    through a hundred autumns.
 [1800454]The share of vigour which gave this man being, the stone won
    lordship over foods that nourish.
   Hymn this with your oblations, Visvamitras: may he, may Yama,
    lengthen our existence.
 [1800455]As the Five Races of mankind for Yama set apart a house.
   Even so I set a house apart that greater numbers may be mine.
 [1800456]Take thou and wear this piece of gold, the gold thy father used
    to wear.
   Wipe tenderly the right hand of thy sire who goes away to
    heaven.
 [1800457]To all, the living and the dead, all that are born, the worshipful.
   Let the full brook of fatness run, o'erflowing, with stream of
    mead.
 [1800458]Far-seeing he flows on, the Bull, the Lord of hymns, promoter
    of the Sun, of Days, of Dawns, of Heaven.
   Breath of the rivers he hath roared into the jars, and through
    his wisdom entered into Indra's heart.
 [1800459]Let thy bright smoke envelop thee, spread forth, O Bright One,
    in the sky.
   For, Purifier, like the Sun thou shinest with thy radiant glow.
 [1800460]Indu is moving forth to Indra's destined place, and slights not
    as a friend the promise of his friend.
   Thou, Soma, comest nigh as bridegroom meets the bride, reach-
    ing the beaker by a course of hundred paths.
 [1800461]Well have they eaten and rejoiced: their dear ones have they
    shaken off.
   Sages, self-luminous, have praised: we who are youngest
    supplicate.
 [1800462]Come hither, Fathers, who deserve the Soma, by the deep path-
    ways which the Fathers travel.
   Bestow upon us life and store of children, and favour us with
    increase of our riches. [p. 207]
 [1800463]Depart, O Fathers, ye who merit Soma, by the deep pathways
    which the Fathers travel;
   But in a month, rich in fair sons and heroes, come back into
    our homes to eat oblation.
 [1800464]If Agni Jatavedas, as he bore you hence to the Fathers' world,
    hath left one single.
   Limb of your bodies, here do I restore it. Fathers, rejoice in
    heaven with all your members!
 [1800465]Meet for men's praises, Agni Jatavedas was sent as envoy when
    the day was closing.
   Thou gavest to the Fathers with oblation. They ate; eat, God,
    our offered sacrifices.
 [1800466]Here hast thou left thy heart; O man, as sisters leave their little
    pet. Do thou, O earth, envelop him.
 [1800467]Bright be to thee those worlds where dwell the Fathers! I seat
    thee in that sphere which they inhabit.
 [1800468]Thou art the grass whereon our Fathers seat them.
 [1800469]Loosen, O Varuna, the bond that binds us; loosen the bond
    above, between, and under.
   Then under thy protection, O Aditya, may we be sinless and
    restored to freedom.
 [1800470]From all those bonds, O Varuna, release us, wherewith a man
    is bound at length and cross-wise.
   Then may we live a hundred autumn seasons guarded by thee,
   O King, by thee protected.
 [1800471]To Agni, bearer of oblation to the Manes, be Hail! and
    homage!
 [1800472]To Soma connected with the Fathers Hail! and homage!
 [1800473]To the Fathers connected with Soma Hail! and homage!
 [1800474]To Yama connected with the Fathers Hail! and homage!
 [1800475]To thee, O Great-grandfather, and those with thee be this cry of
   Hail
 [1800476]To thee, Great-grandfather, and to those with thee be this cry of
   Hail!
 [1800477]To thee, O Fathers, be this cry of Hail!
 [1800478]Hail to the Fathers who inhabit earth!
 [1800479]Hail to the Fathers who inhabit the firmament!
 [1800480]Hail to the Fathers who dwell in heaven!
 [1800481]Hail, Fathers, to your energy! Hail, Fathers, to your sap!
 [1800482]Hail Father; to your wrath! Hail, Fathers, to your ardour! [p. 208]
 [1800483]Hail, Fathers, to what is awful! Hail to what is terrible in you!'
 [1800484]Hail, Fathers, to all that is propitious! Hail to all that is plea-
    sant in you!
 [1800485]Homage to you Fathers! Hail to you, Fathers!
 [1800486]All Fathers who are here, the Fathers here are you: let then-
     follow you. May ye be the most excellent of these.
 [1800487]All living fathers who are here are we here: let them follow us.
   May we be the most excellent of these.
 [1800488]Bright Agni, we will kindle thee, rich in thy splendour, fading.
    not.
   So that this glorious fuel may send forth to heaven its light for
    thee. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.
 [1800489]Within the waters runs the Moon, the strong-winged Eagle soars.
    in heaven.
   Ye Lightnings with your golden wheels, men find not your abid-
    ing-place. Hear this my call, O Heaven and Earth.

[p. 209] [p. 210]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 211]

  

BOOK XIX

  

HYMN I

  

An accompaniment to the offering of a Mixt Oblation

[1900101]Let the streams flow together, let the winds and birds assembled
    come.
   Strengthen this sacrifice of mine, ye singers. I offer up a duly
    mixt oblation.
 [1900102]O Burnt Oblations, aid, and ye, Blent Offerings, this my
    sacrifice.
   Strengthen this sacrifice of mine, ye singers. I offer up a duly
    mixt oblation.
 [1900103]Each several form, each several force I seize, and compass round
    this man.
   May the Four Quarters strengthen this my sacrifice. I offer up a
    duly mixt oblation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN II

  

A hymn to all waters

[1900201]Blest be the Streams from hills of snow, sweet be spring Waters
    unto thee.
   Sweet be swift-running Waters, sweet to thee be Water of the
   Rains. [p. 212]
 [1900202]Sweet unto thee be Waters of the waste and Waters of the pool.
   Sweet be the Waters dug from earth, to thee, and Waters
    brought in jars.
 [1900203]To those who delve without a tool to dig, the wise, the deeply
    moved,
   To Waters better healers than physicians we address our prayer.
 [1900204]Bathed in the Waters verily divine, in water of the streams,
   Bathed in the Waters verily, O Horses, be ye fleet and strong.
 [1900205]Blest be the Waters unto thee, suspicious Waters, bringing.
    health.
   They cure the injured place for thee even as thy comfort craveth
    it.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN III

  

A hymn to Agni for protection and prosperity

[1900301]Whithersoe'er, from sky, earth, air's mid-regions from plants ands
    herbs, from tall trees, Jatavedas.
   Is carried here and there to divers places, even thence come thou
    to us with loving-kindness.
 [1900302]All majesty of thine in floods, in forest, in plants, in cattle, in
    the depths of waters
   Closely uniting all thy forms, O Agni, come unto us wealth-giv-
    ing, undecaying.
 [1900303]Thy majesty among the Gods in Svarga, thy body which hath
    past into the Fathers.
   Thy plenty far-diffused mid human beings, even with this, O
   Agni, give us riches.
 [1900304]To him the wise, the famous, swift to listen, with words and
    verses I come nigh for bounty.
   May we be safe from threatening danger. Soften by sacrifice the-
    wrath of Gods, O Agni.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

  

A prayer, accompanying sacrifice, for the attainment of a wish

[1900401]The first oblation that Atharvan oared, earliest sacrifice paid by
   Jatavedas, [p. 213]
   Even this I, foremost, with repeated worship, now offer unto
    thee. May Agni carry the sacrificer's present. Hail to Agni!
 [1900402]In front I set Intention, blessed Goddess. Mother of thought,
    may she be prompt to hear us.
   Mine, and mine only, be the hope I fashion! May I gain this
    that hath possessed my spirit.
 [1900403]With Purpose, O Prajapati, with Purpose come thou near to us.
   Bestow on us a share of luck, and so be swift to hear our call.
 [1900404]Prajapati Angirasa with favour regard this word and this my
    settled purpose!
   May he, whence Gods and Deities had being Kama attend us
    with his gentle guidance.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

  

A prayer for riches

[1900501]King of the living world and men is Indra, of all in varied form
    that earth containeth.
   Thence to the worshipper he giveth riches: may he enrich even
    us when we have praised him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

  

The purusha-Sukta, on the mystical Sacrifice of Purusha

[1900601]Purusha hath a thousand arms, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet.
   On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide.
 [1900602]He with three quarters rose to heaven here reappeared a fourth
    of him.
   Thence he strode forth on every side to all that eats not and that
    eats.
 [1900603]So mighty is his grandeur, yea, greater than this is Purusha.
   All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths what dieth
    not in heaven. [p. 214]
 [1900604]Purusha is in truth this All, what hath been and what yet shall;
    be
   Lord, too, of immortality--and what hath grown with some-
    what else.
 [1900605]When they divided Purusha how many portions did they make?
   What was his mouth? what were his arms? what are the names
    of thighs and feet?
 [1900606]The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the Rajanya
    made.
   His waist became the Vaisya, from his feet the Sudra was
    produced.
 [1900607]The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the
   Sun had birth.
   Indra and Agni from his mouth were born and Vayu from his
    breath.
 [1900608]Forth from his navel come mid-air; the sky was fashioned from
    his head.
   Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions. Thus they
    formed the worlds.
 [1900609]In the beginning rose Viraj: Purusha from Viraj was born.
   As soon as he was born he spread westward and eastward o'er
    the earth.
 [1900610]When Gods performed the sacrifice with Purusha as their
    offering.
   Spring was the butter, summer was the fuel, autumn was the
    gift.
 [1900611]That sacrifice, first-born Purusha, they hallowed with the sprink-
    led Rains.
   The Deities, the Sadhyas, all the Vasus sacrificed with him.
 [1900612]From it were horses born, from it all creatures with two rows of
    teeth.
   From it were generated kine, from it were goats and sheep
    produced.
 [1900613]From that great general sacrifice Richas and Sama hymns were
    born;
   Therefrom the metres were produced: the Yajus had its birth
    from it.
 [1900614]From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gathered up:
   It formed the creatures fleet as wind, and animals both wild and
    tame. [p. 215]
 [1900615]Seven fencing-logs had he, thrice seven layers of fuel were
    prepared.
   When, offering sacrifice, the Gods bound as their victim Purusha.
 [1900616]Forth from head of the high God seven-and-seventy bright
    beams.
   Sprang into being, of the King Soma produced from Purusha.

[p. 216]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

  

A Prayer to the Lunar Mansions and other Powers for protection and prosperity

[1900701]The brilliant lights shining in heaven together, which through
    the world glide on with rapid motion.
   And Days, and Firmament with songs I worship, seeking the
   Twenty-eight-fold for its favour.
 [1900702]Krittikas, Rohini be swift to hear me! Let Mrigasiras bless me,
    help me Ardra!
   Punarvasu and Sunrita, fair Pushya, the Sun, Asleshas, Magha
    lead me onward!
 [1900703]My bliss be Svati and benignant Chitra, my right First Phalgunis [p. 217]
    and present Hasta.
   Radhas, Visakhas, gracious Anuradha, Jyeshtha and happy-
    starred uninjured Mula.
 [1900704]Food shall be earlier Ashadhas grant me; let those that follow
    bring me strength and vigour;
   With virtuous merit Abhijit endow me! Sravana and Sravishthas
    make me prosper.
 [1900705]Satabhishak afford me ample freedom, and both the Proshtha-
    padas guard me safely.
   Revati and the Asvayujas bring me luck, and the Bharanis
    abundant riches!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 218]

[1900801]Benign to me be all those Lunar Mansions to which the Moon
    as he moves on doth honour.
   All that are in the sky, the air, the waters, on earth, on moun-
    tains, in the heavenly regions.
 [1900802]Propitious, mighty, let the eight-and-twenty together deal me
    out my share of profit.
   Profit and wealth be mine, and wealth and profit! To Day and
   Night be adoration rendered!
 [1900803]Fair be my sunset, fair my morn and evening and day with.
    lucky chase and happy omens;
   With blessing and success, immortal Agni, go to the mortal and.
    return rejoicing.
 [1900804]Excitement and invoking cry, ill-omened sneezing and reproof,
   All sounds of empty pitchers send into the distance, Savitar!
 [1900805]May we escape an evil sneeze, enjoy the sneeze of happy luck,
   And may our nostrils smelling what is pleasant pour forth
    fragrant scent.
 [1900806]These flames of Brahmanaspati borne to all quarters in the-
    wind,
   Turn them all hither, Indra, and make them most gracious unto,
    me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 219]

  

HYMN IX

  

A prayer for general protection and prosperity

[1900901]Gentle be heaven, gentle be earth, gentle this spacious,
    atmosphere.
   Gentle be waters as they flow, gentle to us be plants and herbs!
 [1900902]Gentle be signs of coming change, and that which is and is not.
    done!
   Gentle be past and future, yea, let all be gracious unto us.
 [1900903]Quickened by Prayer, this Goddess Vak who standeth in the
    highest place,
   By whom the awful spell was made, even through her to us be
    peace!
 [1900904]Or, made more keen by Prayer, this mind that standeth in the
    highest place,
   Whereby the awful spell was made, even through this be peace
    to us!
 [1900905]These five sense-organs with the mind as sixth, sharpened by
   Prayer, abiding in my heart,
   By which the awful spell was made, even by these be peace to
    us.
 [1900906]Favour us Mitra, Varuna, and Vishnu, and Prajapati! Gracious*
    to us be Indra and Brihaspati and Aryaman.
 [1900907]Favour us Mitra, Varuna, Vivasvan, and the Finisher,
   Portents on earth and in the air, and planets wandering in
    heaven!
 [1900908]Gracious to us be trembling earth, gracious the flaming meteor
    stroke!
   Gracious be kine who yield red milk, gracious be earth when
    sinking down!
 [1900909]Gracious be meteor-stricken constellation, gracious to us be
    magic spells and witchcraft!
   Gracious to us be buried charms, and gracious the meteors and
    the portents of the region!
 [1900910]Kind be the Powers who seize the Moon, with Rahu be Adityas
    kind!
   Favour us Death and Cornet, and Rudras with penetrating.
    might!
 [1900911]Rudras and Vasus favour us, Adityas, Agnis favour us!
   Favour us mighty Rishis, Gods, Goddesses, and Brihaspati!
 [1900912]Brahma, Dhatar, Prajapati, Worlds, Vedas, Agnis, Rishis Seven. [p. 220]
   All these have blessed my happy way. May Indra be my
    guardian, may Brahma protect and shelter me.
 [1900913]May all the Gods protect me, may the Gods united shield me
    well.
   May all alleviations in the world which the Seven Rishis know.
   Be kind and gracious unto me. Bliss and security be mine!
 [1900914]Earth alleviation, air alleviation, heaven alleviation, waters
    alleviation, plants alleviation, trees alleviation, all Gods my al-
    leviation, collective Gods my alleviation, alleviation by allevia-
    tions. By these alleviations, these universal alleviations, I allay
    all that is terrific here, all that is cruel, all that is wicked. This
    hath been calmed, this is now auspicious.
   Let all be favourable to us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN X

  

A prayer for the same

[1901001]Befriend us with their aids Indra and Agni, Indra and Varuna
    who receive oblations!
   Indra and Soma give health, wealth and comfort, Indra and
   Pushan be our strength in battle!
 [1901002]Auspicious friends to us be Bhaga. Sansa, auspicious be Pur-
    andhi and all Riches,
   The blessing of the true and well-conducted and Aryaman in
    many forms apparent.
 [1901003]Kind unto us be Maker and Sustainer and the far-reaching
   One with godlike nature.
   Auspicious unto us be Earth and Heaven, the Mountain and the
   Gods' fair invocations. [p. 221]
 [1901004]Favour us Agni with his face of splendour, and Varuna and'
   Mitra and the Asvins.
   Favour us noble actions of the pious; impetuous Vata blow on,
    us with favour!
 [1901005]Early invoked may Heaven and Earth be friendly, and Air's
    mid-region good for us to look on.
   To us may herbs and forest trees be gracious, gracious the Lord
    victorious of the region.
 [1901006]Be the God Indra with the Vasus friendly, and with Adityas
   Varuna who blesseth.
   Kind with the Rudras be the healer Rudra, and with the Dames
    here Tvashtar kindly hear us.
 [1901007]Kind unto us be Soma and Devotions, kind be the sacrifice and
   Stones for pressing.
   Kind be the fixing of the Sacred Pillars, kind be the tender
   Grass, and kind the Altar.
 [1901008]May the far-seeing Sun rise up to bless us: be the four quarters-
    of the heaven auspicious.
   Auspicious be the firmly-seated Mountains, auspicious be the
   Rivers and the Waters.
 [1901009]May Aditi through holy works be gracious, and may the Maruts,_
    loud in song, be friendly.
   May Vishnu give felicity, and, Pushan, and Air that cherisheth.
    our lives, and Vayu.
 [1901010]Prosper us Savitar, the God who rescues, and let the radiant.
   Mornings be propitious.
   Propitious to our children be Parjanya, kind to us be the field's
    benign Protector!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 222]

  

HYMN XI

  

A continuation of Hymn 10

[1901101]May the great Lords of Truth protect and aid us: blest to us be
    our horses and our cattle.
   Kind be the pious, skilful-handed Ribhus, kind be the Fathers
    at our invocations
 [1901102]Kind to us be the Gods and Visve Devas, Sarasvati with Holy
   Thoughts be gracious.
   Friendly be they, the Liberal Ones, who seek us, yea, those who
    dwell in-heaven, on earth, in waters.
 [1901103]May Aja-Ekapad the God be gracious, gracious the Dragon of
    the Deep, and Ocean.
   Gracious be he, the swelling Child of Waters, gracious be Prisni
    who hath Gods to guard her.
 [1901104]So may the Rudras, Vasus, and Adityas accept the new hymn we
    now are making.
   May all the Holy Ones of earth and heaven, and the Cow's off-
    spring hear our invocation.
 [1901105]Priests of the Gods, worthy of sacrifices, immortal, knowing
   Law, whom man must worship.
   May these to-day give us broad paths to travel. Preserve us
    evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 223]

  

HYMN XII

  

A prayer to Ushas or Dawn for wealth and long life

[1901201]Dawn drives away her sister's gloom, and through her excellence
    makes her retrace her path.
   Through her may we gain God-appointed treasure, and with
    brave sons be glad through hundred winters.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIII

  

A prayer for aid and victory in battle

[1901301]These the two sturdy, manly arms of Indra, these that are won-
    drous, mighty, and successful
   First, when the need hath come will I employ them by which
    the heaven of Asuras was conquered.
 [1901302]Swift, like a dread bull sharpening his weapons, rapidly striking,
    stirring up the people,
   Loud shouting, vigilant, the one sole Hero, Indra subdued a
    hundred hosts together.
 [1901303]With him loud-roaring, ever watchful, victor bold, hard to over-
    throw, whom none may vanquish,
   Indra the strong whose hand bears arrows, conquer, ye heroes
    now, now vanquish in the combat.
 [1901304]He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, Indra who
    with his hand brings hosts together,
   Foe-conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker,
    with mighty bow, shooting with well-laid arrows.
 [1901305]Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, mighty and
    fierce, victorious, all-subduing,
   O'ercoming might, excelling men and heroes, mount the kine-
    winning conquering car, O Indra.
 [1901306]Troop-vanquisher, kine-winner, armed with thunder, who quells
    an army and with might destroys it,
   Follow him, comrades! quit yourselves like heroes, and like this
   Indra show your zeal and courage.
 [1901307]Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra the pitiless
    hero, wild with anger, [p. 224]
   Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless,--may he protect our
    armies in our battles.
 [1901308]Brihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of demons, driving.
    off our foemen.
   Be thou protector of our bodies, crushing our enemies, destroy-
    ing those who hate us.
 [1901309]Indra guide these! Brihaspati, the Guerdon, and Soma, and the
   Sacrifice precede them!
   And let the banded Maruts march in forefront of heavenly hosts
    that conquer and demolish.
 [1901310]Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, King Varuna, and
   Maruts and Adityas.
   Uplifted is the shout of Gods who conquer, high-minded God
    who cause the world to tremble.
 [1901311]May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered: victorious be th
    arrows of our army.
   May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye Gods, protect u
    in the shouts of onset.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIV

  

A hymn after victory

[1901401]I have attained this goodliest place to rest in. Both Heaven and,
   Earth have shown me grace and favour.
   Without a foe for me be all the regions! We hate thee not. May
    we have peace and safety.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

  

HYMN XV

  

A prayer for peace and security

[1901501]Indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid.
   Help us, O Maghavan, let thy succour grant us this: drive foes
    and enemies afar.
 [1901502]We call on Indra, on the liberal giver: we will be prosperous in
    men and cattle.
   Let not the hosts of cruel fiends approach us. Drive of the
   Druhs to every side, O Indra.
 [1901503]Best, making household wealth increase. Indra our saviour, kills
    the foe.
   May he from outmost point be our potector, and from the
    centre and from west and eastward.
 [1901504]Lead us to ample room. O thou who knowest, to happiness
    security, and sunlight.
   Strong, Indra, are the arms of thee the mighty: may we betake
    us to their lofty shelter.
 [1901505]May air's mid-region give us peace and safety, safety may both
    these, Heaven and Earth, afford us.
   Security be ours from west, from eastward, from north and
    south may we be free from danger.
 [1901506]Safety be ours from friend and from the unfriendly, safety from
    what we know and what we know not.
   Safety be ours by night and in the day-time! friendly to me be
    all my hopes and wishes!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVI

  

A prayer for security from danger

[1901601]Peace hath been given us from the east, and from the west
    security.
   Savitar guard me from the south, and from the north the Lord
    of Might.
 [1901602]May the Adityas from the sky protect me, Agni from the
    earth. [p. 226]
   May Indra-Agni guard me from the eastward, on all sides may
    the Asvins give me shelter.
   May Jatavedas guard, sidelong, our cattle.
   Our shield on all sides be the World-Creators!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVII

  

A prayer for protection from dangers in all directions

[1901701]Agni from eastward guard me with the Vasus! To him I go, in
    him I rest: this fort I seek for refuge.
   May he protect me, may he be my guardian. I give my soul--All
    hail! into his keeping.
 [1901702]Vayu with Air protect me from this region. To him I go, etc.
 [1901703]May Soma from the south, with Rudras, guard me. To him, etc.
 [1901704]Varuna with Adityas guard me from this region! To him etc.
 [1901705]Surya with Earth and Heaven from the western region guard me
    well. To him, etc.
 [1901706]May Waters joined with Plants protect me from this region. To
    them I go, in them I rest: this fort I seek for refuge.
   May they protect me, may they be my guardians. I give my
    soul--All hail! --into their keeping.
 [1901707]May Visvakarman with the Seven Rishis be my protector from
    the northern region. To him, etc.
 [1901708]May Indra, Marut-girt, protect me from this region. To him,
    etc.
 [1901709]Prajapati, of generative power, with the Pratishlha save me from
    the nadir! To him, etc.
 [1901710]Brihaspati, joined by the Visvedevas, protect me from the region
    of the zenith! To him, I go, in him I rest; this fort I seek
    for refuge.
   May he protect me, may he be my guardian. I give my soul--
   All hail!--into his keeping.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 227]

  

HYMN XVIII

  

A prayer for security and peace on all sides

[1901801]Let those who vex me from the eastern region, sinners, praise
   Agni followed by the Vasus.
 [1901802]Let those who vex me from this quarter, sinners, praise Vayu
    compassed by the Air's mid region.
 [1901803]Let those who vex me from the southern quarter, sinners, sing
    praise to Soma with the Rudras.
 [1901804]Let those who vex me from this quarter, sinners, praise Varuna
    connected with Adityas.
 [1901805]Let those who vex me from the western quarter, sinners, praise
   Surya linked with Earth and Heaven.
 [1901806]Let those who vex me from this quarter, sinners give praise to
    plants' associates the Waters.
 [1901807]Let those who from the north side vex me, sinners, praise
   Visvakarman with the Seven Rishis.
 [1901808]Let those who vex me from this quarter, sinners, praise Indra
    with the Marut host about him.
 [1901809]Let those who vex me from the nadir, sinners, extol Prajapati
    of genial power.
 [1901810]Let those who vex me from the zenith, sinners, extol Brihaspati
    with the Visve Devas.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIX

  

A hymn recommending the protection of various Gods

[1901901]Mitra arose with Earth. To that fort I lead you: enter it,
    occupy it. Let it give you protection and defence.
 [1901902]Vayu arose with Air. To that fort, etc.
 [1901903]Surya arose with Heaven. To that fort, etc.
 [1901904]Chandramas arose with the Constellation. To that fort, etc.
 [1901905]Sacrifice arose with Priestly Fees. To that fort, etc.
 [1901906]Ocean arose with the Rivers. To that fort, etc.
 [1901907]Brahma arose with the Brahmacharis. To that fort, etc.
 [1901908]Indra arose with Might. To that fort, etc. [p. 228]
 [1901909]The Gods arose with Immortality. To that fort, etc.
 [1901910]Prajapati arose with Creatures. To that fort I lead you: enter
    it, occupy it give you protection and defence.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XX

  

A prayer for protection from death and misfortune

[1902001]May Soma, Varuna the King, both Asvins, Yama and Pushan
    guard us well from Mrityu--
   Death caused by men, which Indra-Agni, Dhatar, Brihaspati and
   Savitar appointed.
 [1902002]All that the World's Lord made, all that for creatures Prajapati
    and Matarisvan fashioned,
   All things within the quarters and their spaces, let all these be
    my manifold defences.
 [1902003]That which the Gods bound on them when they battled for their
    royal sway.
   What Indra made his shield, may that protect us well on every
    side,
 [1902004]My shield is Heaven and Earth, my shield is the bright Day, my
    shield the Sun.
   The Visva Devas made my shield. Let not misfortune fall on
    me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXI

  

A single line giving the names of the chief Vedic metres

[1902101]Gayatri, Ushnih, Anushtup, Brihati, Trishtup, Jagati.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXII

  

A prose hymn of homage to various portions of the Atharva-veda, to the Rishis, and to Brahma

[1902201]With the first five chapters of the Angirases, Hail! [p. 229]
 [1902202]To the sixth, Hail!
 [1902203]To the seventh and eight, Hail!
 [1902204]The black-clawed ones, Hail!
 [1902205]To the golden-hued ones, Hail!
 [1902206]To the small ones, Hail!
 [1902207]To those composed in strophes, Hail!
 [1902208]To the first shells, Hail!
 [1902209]To the second shells, Hail!
 [1902210]To the third shells, Hail!
 [1902211]To the penultimates, Hail.
 [1902212]To the last ones, Hail!
 [1902213]To the latter ones, Hail!
 [1902214]To the Rishis, Hail!
 [1902215]To those with hair in tufts, Hail!
 [1902216]To the Ganas, Hail!
 [1902217]To the great Ganas, Hail!
 [1902218]To all the Vidagana Angirases, Hail!
 [1902219]To those two with separate thousands, Hail!
 [1902220]To Brahma, Hail!
 [1902221]Collected manly powers are topped by Brahma. Brahma at first
    spread out the loftiest heaven.
   Brahma was born first of all things existing. Who then is meet
    to be that Brahma's rival?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIII

  

A prose hymn of homage to various portions of the Atharva-vada classed according to the number of verses which their hymns contain

[1902301]Hail to the four-verse strophes of the Atharvanas!
 [1902302]Hail to the five-versed! [p. 230]
 [1902303]Hail to the six-versed!
 [1902304]Hail to the seven-versed!
 [1902305]Hail to the eight-versed!
 [1902306]Hail to the nine-versed!
 [1902307]Hail to the ten-versed!
 [1902308]Hail to the eleven-versed!
 [1902309]Hail to the twelve-versed!
 [1902310]Hail to the thirteen-versed
 [1902311]Hail to the fourteen-versed!
 [1902312]Hail to the fifteen-versed!
 [1902313]Hail to the sixteen-versed!
 [1902314]Hail to the seventeen-versed!
 [1902315]Hail to the eighteen-versed!
 [1902316]Hail, nineteen!
 [1902317]Hail, twenty!
 [1902318]Hail to the Great Section!
 [1902319]Hail to the triplets!
 [1902320]Hail to the single-versed hymns!
 [1902321]Hail to the little ones!
 [1902322]Hail to the single non-Rich-versed ones!
 [1902323]Hail to the Rohitas!
 [1902324]Hail to the two Surya hymns!
 [1902325]Hail to the two Vratya hymns!
 [1902326]Hail to the two Prajapati hymns!
 [1902327]Hail to the hymn of victory!
 [1902328]Hail to the hymns for happiness!
 [1902329]Hail to Brahma!
 [1902330]Collected manly powers are topped by Brahma. Brahma at first
    spread out the loftiest heaven.
   Brahma was born first of all things existing. Who then is fit to
    be this Brahma's rival?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

  

HYMN XXIV

  

A benediction on a newly elected King

[1902401]Do ye, O Brahmanaspati, invest for the royal sway this man.
   With that wherewith the Deities invested Savitar the God.
 [1902402]Invest this Indra for long life, invest him for great princely
    power,
   That I may lead him on to eld, that the man watch his
    princedom long.
 [1902403]Invest this Soma for long life, invest him for great hearing
    power.
   That I may lead him on to eld, that he may watch o'er hearing
    long.
 [1902404]For us, surround him, cover him with splendour, give him long
    life, and death when age removes him.
   This garment hath Brihaspati presented to Soma, to the King,
    to wrap about him.
 [1902405]Advance to good old age: endue the mantle. Be thou our
    heifers' guard from imprecation.
   Live thou a hundred full and plenteous autumns, and wrap thee
    in prosperity of riches.
 [1902406]Thou for weal hast clothed thee in this garment: thou hast
    become our cows' sure guard from curses.
   Live thou a hundred full and plenteous autumns: then living,
    fair thyself, shalt deal forth treasures.
 [1902407]In every need, in every fray we call, as friends, to succour us,
   Indra the mightiest of all.
 [1902408]Gold-coloured, undecaying, blest with heroes, dwell, dying in
    old age, with children round thee.
   This is the spoken word of Agni, Soma, Brihaspati and Savitar,
    and Indra.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 232]

  

HYMN XXV

  

A charm to be used when a young ox is first yoked

[1902501]I yoke thee with the mind of one unwearied still and first of all.
   Be thou a bearer up the hill: run hither bearing up thy load.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVI

  

A hymn accompanying investiture with an amulet of gold

[1902601]Gold that was born from Fire is immortal hath been deposited
    with mortal creatures.
   He who knows this deserves to own this jewel, and in extreme
    old age dies he who wears it.
 [1902602]The men of ancient time with children round them longed for
    this Gold, bright with the Sun's own colour,
   This shall endow thee, as it shines, with splendour, and long
    shall be the life of him who wears it.
 [1902603]Long life and splendour let it bring energy and strength to thee.
   That thou mayst shine among the folk with all the brightness of
    the Gold.
 [1902604]What Varuna the King knows well, and what the God
   Brihaspati,
   And Indra, Slayer of the Foe, may that bestow long life on thee,
    may that increase thy splendid strength.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVII

  

A benedictory hymn

[1902701]Let the Bull guard thee with the kine, the Stallien with the fleet-
    foot steeds. [p. 233]
   Let Vayu keep thee safe with prayer, and Indra with his mighty
    power.
 [1902702]Let Soma guard thee with the plants, Surya protect thee with
    the stars;
   With breath let Wind protect thee, and the Moon, foe-slayer,
    with the months.
 [1902703]Three are the earths, they say, and three the heavens, three are
    the atmospheres, and four the oceans.
   Threefold the hymn of praise, threefold the Waters. Let these
    with triple song and triplets guard thee.
 [1902704]Three vaults of heaven, and three seas, three bright, three
    stationary ones,
   Three Matarisvans, and three suns, protectors, I arrange for
    thee.
 [1902705]Increasing thee with butter I, Agni! with fatness sprinkle thee.
   Let not magicians harm the life of Agni or of Moon or Sun.
 [1902706] Let not magicians mar your heat, your vital or diffusive breath.
   Brilliant and all-possessing Gods, run ye your course with God-
    like power.
 [1902707]Fire they endow with vital breath, Wind is compact, with vital
    breath:
   With vital breath the Gods produced the Sun whose face turn
    every way.
 [1902708]Live with the Life-Creators' life. Die not, live on to lengthened
    age.
   Live with the breath of men with souls. Submit not to the power
    of Death.
 [1902709]The secret treasure of the Gods which Indra, by pathways
    travelled by the Gods, discovered,
   That gold the Waters with the triplets guarded. May they keep
    thee with threebold hymn and triplets.
 [1902710]With friendly thoughts the Deities, three-and thirty, and three
    great Powers preserved it in the Waters.
   He made heroic powers with the gold that lies upon this Moon.
 [1902711]O ye eleven Gods who are in heaven, accept this sacrifice.
 [1902712]O ye eleven Gods who are in air, accept this sacrifice.
 [1902713]O ye eleven Gods who are on earth, accept this sacrifice.
 [1902714]15 repeated from XIX. 16. 1, 2.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234]

  

HYMN XXVIII

  

A charm for the destruction of enemies

[1902801]On thee I bind this Amulet for lengthened life and brilliancy.
   The rival-quelling Darbha grass that burns the spirit of a foe.
 [1902802]Burning the spirit of the foe, vexing the heart of enemies.
   Darbha, on every side, like heat, inflame all evil-hearted men.
 [1902803]O Darbha, burning round like heat, consuming foes, O Amulet,.
   Like Indra rending Vala cleave mine adversaries' hearts in twain.
 [1902804]Cleave through. O Darbha, Amulet, my foes', mine adversaries'.
    heart.
   Rise thou and batter down their heads like growth that coverethl
    the earth.
 [1902805]Cleave thou my rivals, Darbha, cleave the men who fain would,
    fight with me.
   Cleave all who wish me evil, cleave the men who hate me,.
   Amulet!
 [1902806]Wound thou, my rivals, Darbha, etc. (as in 5, substituting.
   'wound' for cleave.)
 [1902807]Tear thou my rivals, Darbha, etc.
 [1902808]How thou my rivals, Darbha, etc.
 [1902809]Carve thou my rivals, Darbha, etc.
 [1902810]Pierce thou my rivals, Darbha, pierce the men who fain would
    fight with me.
   Pierce those who wish me evil, pierce the men who hate me,
    Amulet!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 235]

  

HYMN XXIX

  

A charm for the destruction of enemies, continued from 28

[1902901]Pierce thou my rivals, Darbha, pierce the men who fain would
    fight with me.
   Pierce all who wish me evil, pierce the men who hate me,.
   Amulet!
 [1902902]Split thou my rivals, Darbha, etc. (as in 1, with 'split' for
   'pierce' throughout).
 [1902903]Check thou, etc.
 [1902904]Crush thou, etc.
 [1902905]Shake thou, etc.
 [1902906]Bruise thou, etc.
 [1902907]Burn thou, etc.
 [1902908]Consume, etc.
 [1902909]Slay thou my rivals. Darbha, slay the men who fain would fight
    with me.
   Slay all who wish me evil, slay the men who hate me, Amulet.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXX

  

A protective charm accompanying investiture with an amulet of Darbha grass

[1903001]Darbha, with that good shield of thine, of hundred guards tilt
    death in eld,
   Arm thou this man, and with thy might strike thou his adver-
    saries down.
 [1903002]Darbha, thou hast a hundred shields, thou hast a thousand.
    manly powers.
   All Gods have given thee to him to bear thee till extreme old
    age.
 [1903003]They call thee, 'Darbha, shield of Gods, they call the Brahmanas-
    pati.
   They call thee shield of Indra: thou protectest kingdoms from
    attack.
 [1903004]Darbha, destroyer of the foe, vexing the hearts of enemies,
   An Amulet that strengthens rule I make thee, and the body's.
    guard.
 [1903005]What time Parjanya roared to it with lightning flashes in the sea,
   Thence came the drop, the golden drop, thence Darbha into
    being sprang.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 236]

  

HYMN XXXI

  

A charm to ensure general prosperity, accompanying self-investiture with an amulet of Udumbara

[1903101]Savitar make all cattle grow and prosper in my stable with.
   Amulet of Udumbara, helper of him who longs for wealth!
 [1903102]May he who was our Household Fire, the ruler of our cattle,
    strong.
   Amulet of Udumbara endow us with prosperity.
 [1903103]By power of the Udumbara Charm may Dhatar give me plenty,
    rich.
   In the kine's droppings and in fruit, and, in our dwelling, food,
    and drink.
 [1903104]I win great plenty, while I wear the Amulet of Udumbara.
   Of quadrupeds and bipeds, of juices and food of every sort.
 [1903105]I have obtained abundant wealth of cattle, bipeds and quad-
    rupeds, and corn in plenty.
   Savitar and Brihaspati vouchsafe me the milk of kine and herbs'
    refreshing juices!
 [1903106]Fain would I be the lord of herds of cattle: may he who rules
    o'er riches send me riches!
   May the Udumbara Amulet vouchsafe possessions unto me.
 [1903107]To me with wealth and children come the Amulet of Udumbara.
   With splendour come the Amulet hastened by Indra on its way!
 [1903108]Divine, foe-quelling Amulet, wealth-winner for the gain of
    wealth--
   May it give store of beasts and food and cause our kine to
    multiply.
 [1903109]As thou, O Forest Tree, wast born with increase when thy life
    began,
   So let Sarasvati bestow abundant growth of wealth on me.
 [1903110]Sarasvati vouchsafe me wealth, household prosperity, and corn!
   Let Sinivali bring them, and this Amulet of Udumbara.
 [1903111]The Lord of amulets art thou, most mighty: in thee wealth's
    ruler hath engendered riches,
   These gains are lodged in thee, and all great treasures. Amulet,
    conquer thou: far from us banish malignity and indigence,
    and hunger. [p. 237]
 [1903112]Vigour art thou, in me do thou plant vigour: riches art thou, so
    do thou grant me riches.
   Plenty art thou, so prosper me with plenty: House-holder, hear"
    a householder's petition.
 [1903113]Amulet of Udumbara, enrich us: vouchsafe us wealth with all
    good men about us. I bind thee on for increase of possessions.
 [1903114]For hero is this hero bound, Amulet of Udumbara.
   So may he make our offering sweetly-savoured, and grant us
    wealth with all good men about us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXII

  

A charm, with an amulet of Darbha grass, to subdue enemies and win the affection of others

[1903201]For lengthened life I bind on thee the Darbha grass, the mighty
    plant.
   Excellent, hard to overthrow, with hundred stems and thousand
    blades.
 [1903202]They cut not off his hair, they strike blow upon the breast for'
    him.
   To whom one gives protection by Darbha that hath uninjured
    leaves.
 [1903203]O Plant, thy root is in the sky, and thou art stationed on the
    earth:
   With thee who hast a thousand stalks we strengthen all the
    powers of life.
 [1903204]Through all three skies the plant hath pierced, and the three
    regions of the earth;
   With thee I split in twain the tongue and words of the bad-
    hearted man.
 [1903205]Thou art victorious in thy might I am endowed with conquering
    strength:
   Possessed of overpowering force we two will quell our enemies.
 [1903206]Subdue our foeman, overcome the men who fain would fight:
    with us. [p. 238]
   Conquer all evil-hearted ones: make many well-disposed to me.
 [1903207]With Darbha that hath sprung from Gods, stationed in heaven,
    full many a time.
   With this have I won many men, have won and may I win them
    still.
 [1903208]Do thou, O Darbha, make me dear to Brahman and Rajanya,
    dear to Sudra, and to Arya dear,
   Yea, dear to every man we love, to every man with eyes to see.
 [1903209]He who first born fixed earth in her position, he who established
    heaven and air's mid-region,
   Whom sinner ne'er hath known as his supporter,--this Darbha
    be our shelter and protection!
 [1903210]First of all plants it sprang into existence, victorious, hundred-
    stemmed, the foe-subduer,
   So may this Darbha from all sides protect us: with this may I
    subdue our foes in battle.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIII

  

A protective and benedictive charm

[1903301]Hundred stemmed, succulent, and worth a thousand, the Royal
   Rite of plants, the Water's Agni,
   Let this same Darbha guard us from all quarters. This Godlike
   Amulet shall with life endow us.
 [1903302]Drawn forth from butter, juicy, sweetly-flavoured, firm as the
    earth, unshaken, overthrowing.
   Driving off foes and casting them beneath me, mount with the
    strength of mighty Ones, O Darbha.
 [1903303]Thou movest o'er the earth with vigour: lovely in sacrifice thou
    sittest on the altar.
   The Rishis bear thee as a purifier: cleanse thou us from all evil
    deeds' defilement.
 [1903304]A stern and all-victorious king, foe-queller, dear to every man--
   That energy of Gods and mighty power, I bind this on thee for
    long life and welfare. [p. 239]
 [1903305]Achieve heroic deeds with Darbha, wearing this Darbha never
    let thy soul be troubled.
   In splendour and precedence over others illumine like the Sun
    the heaven's four regions.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIV

  

A protective charm addressed to the panacea called A Jangida

[1903401]Jangida, thou art Angiras: thou art a guardian, Jangida.
   Let Jangida, keep safely all our bipeds and our quadrupeds.
 [1903402]Dice-witcheries, the fifty-threes, the hundred witchcraft-practi-
    sers,
   All these may Jangida make weak, bereft of their effectual
    force.
 [1903403]Baffle the loud factitious howl, make impotent the seven decays.
   As when an archer speeds the shaft, drive away want, O
   Jangida,
 [1903404]This counteracts the sorceress, this banishes malignity: Then
    may victorious Jangida's prolong the days we have to live.
 [1903405]Let Jangida's protecting might encompass us on every side.
   Wherewith he quells Vishkandha and Sanskandha, might by
    greater might.
 [1903406]Three times the Gods engendered thee fixt on the surface of the
    earth;
   The Brahmans of the olden time knew that thy name was
   Angiras;
 [1903407]The ancient plants surpass thee not, nor any herbs of recent
    days.
   A potent charm is Jangida, a most felicitous defence.
 [1903408]Then when thou sprangest into life, Jangida of un-measured
    strength,
   Indra, O mighty One, bestowed great power upon thee from the
    first. [p. 240]
 [1903409]To thee in truth, O Forest Tree, Indra the mighty One gave
    strength.
   Driving away all maladies, strike thou the demons down, O
   Plant.
 [1903410]Lumbago and rheumatic pain, consumptive cough, and pleurisy,
   And fever which each Autumn brings, may Jangida make-
    powerless.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXV

  

A similar charm addressed to the same

[1903501]While their lips uttered Indra's name the Rishis gave us Jangida..
   Which in the earliest time Gods made a remedy, Vishkandha's-
    cure.
 [1903502]So may this Jangida guard us, even as a treasurer guards wealth,.
   Even this which Gods and Brahmans made a malice-quelling sure
    defence.
 [1903503]Hard-hearted men, the cruel eye, the sinner who hath come to-
    us,
   Destroy thou these with watchful care, O thou who hast a.
    thousand eyes. Thou, Jangida, art my defence.
 [1903504]Guard me from earth and guard me from the heavens, guard
    me from middle air, from plants protect me.
   Protect me from the present and the future. From every region
   Jangida preserve us!
 [1903505]All sorcerers made by the Gods, all that arise from mortal men,.
   These, one and all, let Jangida, healer of all, make impotent.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 241]

  

HYMN XXXVI

  

A charm against disease and evil spirits

[1903601]The Hundred-haired hath banished hence fiends and Consump-
    tions by its might.
   With splendour hath the charm that scares demons of ill-name
    mounted up.
 [1903602]It drives off demons with its horns and sorceresses with its root,
   It stays Consumption with its waist: from this no wickedness
    escapes.
 [1903603]Consumptions, light and serious, and those which sounds
    accompany,
   All these the Amulet, Hundred-haired, scarer of fiends, hath
    banished hence.
 [1903604]A hundred men hath it produced, hundred Consumptions chased
    away,
   All fiends of evil-name it hath smitten, and shakes the
   Rakshasas.
 [1903605]The Bull that weareth horns of gold, this Amulet with hundred
    hairs,
   Hath cleft the demons of ill-name and overcome the Rakshasas.
 [1903606]Hundred she-fiends, a hundred of Gandharvas and Apsarasas,
   A hundred of dog-mated nymphs, I keep away with Hundred-
   Hair

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVII

  

A charm to secure long life and dominion to a prince

[1903701]To me hath come this word given by Agni, fame, force and
    might, and strength, and life, and lustre.
   May Agni too bestow on me three-times a hundred manly
    powers.
 [1903702]For mighty strength, for action, I receive thee, for manly power,
    to last a hundred autumns. [p. 242]
 [1903703]For conquering strength and energy and vigour
   I fasten thee for chieftainship, for bearing royal dominion
    through a hundred autumns.
 [1903704]With Seasons and with Season-groups, for vigour and extended
    life.
   With splendour of the perfect year we fasten thee about the
    neck.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVIII

  

A protective charm

[1903801]Never Consumption, never curse touches the man, Arundhati!
   Whom the delicious odour of the healing Bdellium penetrates
 [1903802]Consumptions flee apart from it as from a wild beast fly the
    deer.
   If thou, O Bdellium, art produced from Sindhu or hast come
    from sea,
   The quality of both have I taken to keep this man unscathed.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIX

  

A protective charm

[1903901]Let Kushtha from the Hill of Snow come, a divine deliverer.
   Banish thou all Consumption, drive all sorceresses far away.
 [1903902]Kushtha, three several names hast thou, Naghamara,
   Nagharisha: let not mishap befall this man,
   For whom I make a charm of thee at eve, at morning, and by
    day.
 [1903903]Jivala is thy mother's name, thy father's name is Jivala; let not
    mishap, etc.
 [1903904]Thou art the best amid the plants, even as the ox is best of
    tame, the tiger of rapacious beasts: let not mishap, etc.
 [1903905]Born thrice from the Adityas, thrice from Bhrigus, thrice from
   Angiras' sons, born from the Visve Devas thrice, [p. 243]
   Healer of every malady, that Kushtha stands by Soma's side.
   Banish thou all Consumption, drive all sorceresses far away.
 [1903906]In the third heaven above us stands the Asvattha tree, the seat
    of Gods:
   There is embodiment of life that dies not: thence was Kushtha
    born.
 [1903907]There moved through heaven a golden ship, a ship with cordage
    wrought of gold:
   There is embodiment of life that dies not; thence was Kushtha
    born.
 [1903908]Where is the Sinking of the Ship, the summit of the Hill of
   Snow,
   There is embodiment of life that dies not: thence was Kustha
    born.
   Healer of every malady, that Kushtha stands by Soma's side.
   Banish thou all Consumption, drive all sorceresses far away.
 [1903909]Thou whom Ikshvaku's ancestor, whom he who well-loved
   Kushtha, knew,
   Whom Vayasa and Matsya knew, hence healer of all ills art
    thou.
 [1903910]O thou who hast all-reaching might drive away Fever, drive it
    down,
    racking Fever, tertian, continual, lasting for a year.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 244]

  

HYMN XL

  

A prayer for pardon of error in sacrifice, and for wisdom, strength, and life

[1904001]For each defect of mine in voice and spirit I have approached
   One vehement and ardent.
   With all the Deities, fully approving, Brihaspati supply the
    want!
 [1904002]Disturb ye not our intellect, O Waters, nor the power of prayer_
   Glide on your way, strength-giving, invocated: may I be vigor-
    ous and wise.
 [1904003]Mar not our consecrating rite, our intellect, or fervent zeal.
   Gracious to us for lengthened life, propitious let the Mothers
    be.
 [1904004]Vouchsafe to us, ye Asvins twain, such strength as, with atten-
    dant light,
   May through the darkness carry us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLI

  

A benediction on a newly elected king

[1904101]Desiring bliss, at first, light-finding Rishis began religious rite
    and holy fervour.
   Thence energy was born, and might, and kingship: so to this
    man let gathered Gods incline them.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLII

  

In praise of Brahma, Prayer, or Devotion

[1904201]Brahma is Hotar, sacrifice: with Brahma are the stakes set up.
   From Brahma was the Adhvaryu born, from Brahma hidden
    offering.
 [1904202]Brahma is fatness-dropping scoops: with Brahma was the altar
    reared. [p. 245]
   Brahma is worship, lengthened rite, the Rishis who pay sacrifice,
    the victim's Immolators. Hail!
 [1904203]To him who frees from woe mine hymn I offer, to the Good
   Guardian, as I seek his favour.
   Accept this offering of mine, O Indra. Fulfilled be all the sacri-
    ficer's wishes!
 [1904204]With prayer I call on him who frees from trouble, Prince of
   Gods, Splendid, chief of sacrifices,
   I call the Waters' Child and both the Asvins, Vigour is mine,
    and strength bestowed by Indra.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIII

  

In praise of Brahma, Prayer, or Devotion

[1904301]Whither men versed in Brahma go, with fervour and the cleans-
    ing rite,
   Thither let Agni lead me, let Agni give me intelligence, All hail
    to Agni!
 [1904302]Whither etc.
   Thither let Vayu lead me, let Vayu vouchsafe me vital breath.
   All hail to Vayu!
 [1904303]Whither, etc.
   Thither let Surya lead me, let Surya vouchsafe me power of
    sight. All hail to Surya
 [1904304]Whither, etc.
   Thither let Chandra lead me, let Chandra vouchsafe me intellect.
   All hail to Chandra!
 [1904305]Whither, etc.
   Thither let Soma lead me, let Soma vouchsafe me vital sap. All
    hail to Soma!
 [1904306]Whither, etc. [p. 246]
   Thither let Indra lead me, let Indra bestow upon me power. All
    hail to Indra!
 [1904307]Whither, etc.
   Thither, let Waters lead me, let the Waters give me deathless
    life. All hail to Waters!
 [1904308]Whither, etc.
   Thither let Brahma lead me, let Brahma give Brahma unto me.
   All hail to Brahma!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIV

  

A curative and protective charm

[1904401]Thou art the lengthening of life, thy name is Universal Cure:
   Then, Ointment! send felicity; Waters, send happiness and
    peace.
 [1904402]The yellow hue, the feverish heat, the shooting pain that rends II
    the limbs,
   All the consumptive malady let the Ointment drive from out
    thy frame.
 [1904403]Let the Salve born upon the earth, benignant, giving life to man.
   Make the swift rider on the car sinless, exempt from sudden
    death.
 [1904404]Preserve our breath, O Vital Breath, have mercy on our life, O
   Life.
   From snares of Nirriti do thou, O Nirriti, deliver us.
 [1904405]Thou art the babe of Sindhu, thou art lightnings' flower, wind,
    breath, and Sun: thou art the eye and milk of heaven.
 [1904406]Gods' Ointment from the Three Peaked Hill, preserve thou me
    on every side.
   No plants of earth surpass thee, none from mountain or from
    cultured ground.
 [1904407]Now hath it gently crept within, fiend-slaying, chasing malady.
   And driving all diseases hence, and evil omens, banished them.
 [1904408]Full many a falsehood, O thou King Varuna, man hath uttered
    here:
   Do thou who hast a thousand powers preserve us from that
    misery. [p. 247]
 [1904409]If we have cried, O Waters! Cows! if we have cried, O
   Varuna!
   For this endowed with thousand powers! deliver us from
    misery.
 [1904410]Mitra and Varuna, O Salve have closely followed after thee
   May they, when they have followed thee afar, restore thee for
    our use.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLV

  

A curative and protective charm

[1904501]As debt from debt repay and send sorcery to the sorcerer's
    house.
   Split, Salve! the cruel villain's ribs whose evil eye bewitches us.
 [1904502]Whatever evil dream we have, what'er befall our kine or home,
   Be this that is salubrity, the evil-hearted's foe applied.
 [1904503]Increasing from the Waters' strength and vigour, sprung into life
    from Agni Jatavedas,
   Strong as four heroes, mountain born, this Ointment make for
    thee quarters and mind-points auspicious!
 [1904504]On thee is laid the Chaturvira Ointment: let all the regions give
    thee peace and safety.
   Secure like precious Savitar thou standest: to thee let all these
    regions bring their tribute.
 [1904505]Make one thy salve, thine amulet another, drink one, and with
    another bathe thy body.
   So let the Chaturvira keep us guarded from the four bonds of
   Nirriti and Grahi.
 [1904506]May Agni protect me with fire for inspiration and expiration,
    for strength, for energy, for vigour, for weal and prosperity.
   All Hail!
 [1904507]May Indra protect me with his Indra-power for inspiration, etc. [p. 248]
 [1904508]May Soma protect me with Soma-power, etc.
 [1904509]May Bhaga with good fortune protect me, etc.
 [1904510]May the Maruts protect me with their troops for inspiration
    and expiration, for strength, for energy, for vigour, for weal
    and prosperity. All Hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVI

  

A charm accompanying investiture with an amulet that ensures safety and victory

[1904601]For manly strength Prajapati bound thee on first, invincible.
   This for long life on thee I bind for splendour, strength, and
    energy. Invincible, let it guard thee well.
 [1904602]Erect, invincible, be this man's watchful keeper: let not the
   Panis or the sorcerers harm thee.
   Shake off thy foes as Indra scattered Dasyus: quell all enemies.
   Invincible, let it guard thee well.
 [1904603]Indra hath lent the power of sight, and vital breath and strength
    to this.
   Whom even a hundred combatants, striking, have failed to over-
    come. Invincible, let it guard thee well.
 [1904604]Around thy limbs I place the mail of Indra who hath become
    the Gods' imperial Sovran.
   Again let all the Deities bring thee hither. Invincible let it guard
    thee well.
 [1904605]One and a hundred manly powers, a thousand lives hath this
   Amulet, unconquered ever.
   Go forth a tiger, strike down all thy foemen: let him who would
    oppose fall low beneath thee. Invincible, let it guard thee
    well.
 [1904606]Drawn forth from butter, rich in milk and sweetness, hundred-
    lived, thousand-homed, bestowing vigour,
   Kindly, delightsome, full of sap, and mighty, invincible let it
    guard thee well.
 [1904607]That thou mayst be pre-eminent, slayer of rivals, rivalless, [p. 249]
   May Savitar cause thee to be chief and controller of thy kin.
   Invincible, let it guard thee well.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVII

  

A hymn to Night for protection from fiends, robbers, snakes and wolves

[1904701]Night! the terrestrial realm hath been filled with the Father's
    power and might.
   Thou spreadest forth on high unto the seats of Heaven: dark-
    ness that strikes with awe comes near.
 [1904702]Each moving thing finds rest in her whose yonder boundary is
    not seen, nor that which keeps her separate.
   O spacious, darksome Night, may we uninjured reach the end of
    thee, reach, O thou blessed One, thine end.
 [1904703]Thy ninety-nine examiners, O Night, who look upon mankind,
   Eighty-and-eight in number, or seven-and-seventy are they.
 [1904704]Sixty-and-six, O opulent, fifty-and-five, O happy One,
   Forty-and-four and thirty-three are they, O thou enriched with
    spoil.
 [1904705]Twenty-and-two hast thou, O Night, eleven, yea, and fewer still.
   With these protectors guard us well. O Daughter of the Sky, to-
    day.
 [1904706]Let not a fiends or spiteful man, let no ill-wisher master us.
   Let not the robber seize our cows, nor the wolf take our sheep
    today.
 [1904707]Let not the thief, O Blessed, seize our horses, nor she-fiends our
    men.
   Let thief and robber run away on pathways most remote from
    us.
 [1904708]Far from us let Rope with Fangs, far from us let the wicked
    flee.
   Do thou make blind and headless. Night, the serpent with his
    pungent breath.
 [1904709]Crush the wolf's jaws in pieces, strike the robber dead against a
    post. [p. 250]
   In thee, O Night, do we abide: we here will sleep. Be watchful
    thou.
 [1904710]Give thou protection to our kine; and to our horses, and our
    men.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVIII

  

A hymn to Night for protection

[1904801]Then all that we accumulate, all that the treasure-chest contains,.
   All this do we entrust to thee.
 [1904802]Entrust thou us to Dawn, O Mother Night.
   May Dawn entrust us to the Day, and Day to thee, O splendid.
   One.
 [1904803]Whatever flying thing be here, whatever thing that creeps and.
    crawls.
   Whatever fastens on a joint, therefrom do thou protect us,
   Night.
 [1904804]So guard thou us from west and east, protect us from the north
    and south.
   O splendid One, preserve us: we, the singers of thy praise, are
    here.
 [1904805]They who are followers of Night, and they who watch o'er
    living things.
   They who protect all cattle, they keep watch and ward over our
    lives, over our herds keep watch and ward.
 [1904806]Verily, Night, I know thy name, Dropper of Fatness art thou
    called.
   Thee Bharadvaja knew as such: as such be watchful o'er our
    wealth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 251]

  

HYMN XLIX

  

A hymn of Praise and prayer to Night

[1904901]Friend of the home, the strong and youthful maiden, Night, dear
    to Savitar the God, and Bhaga,
   All-compassing, all-glorious, prompt to listen, hath with her
    greatness filled the earth and heaven.
 [1904902]Over all depths hath she gone up, and mounted, most mighty
   One, the sky's exalted summit.
   Over me now the loving Night is spreading with her auspicious.
   Godlike ways like Mitra.
 [1904903]Excellent, high-born, blissful, meet for worship, Night, thou hast
    come: stay here with friendly spirit.
   Guard us, the food for men that we have gotten, and all pro-
    sperity that comes of cattle.
 [1904904]With eager haste hath Night assumed the vigour of leopard,.
    tiger, or of tawny lion,
   The horse's neighing and the wild-man's bellow, Thou takest
    many a form when thou appearest.
 [1904905]Kind through the Night be absence of the sunshine: Mother of
   Frost, may she be swift to hear us.
   Take notice of the hymn, thou highly favoured, wherewith I
    worship thee in all the regions.
 [1904906]Even as a King, O splendid Night, thou takest pleasure in our
    hymn.
   May we through Mornings as they flush have all our good men,
    round us, and become possessors of all wealth.
 [1904907]Yes, Ramya is the name thou hast assumed. The men who fain.
    would spoil.
   My wealth do thou annoy, O Night, that not one robber may
    appear, none may a second time appear.
 [1904908]Thou like a well-wrought cup, O Night, art lovely: thou, a.
    young maid, art formed in perfect beauty.
   Thou lovingly, for me with eyes to se: them, hast bound on thee
    heaven's stars as thine adornment. [p. 252]
 [1904909]Whatever robber comes to-day, mischievous mortal enemy.
   Let Night go forth, encounter him, and smite away his neck and
    head;
 [1904910]His feet that he may walk no more, his hands that he may do
    no harm.
   The robber who comes hitherward goes crushed and mutilated
    hence,
   Goes hence, goes far away from us, goes hence and bears no
    spoil away.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN L

  

A hymn to Night for protection and prosperity

[1905001]Blind him and make him headless, Night! the serpent with the
    pungent breath.
   Strike from his head the wolf's two eyes, and dash the thief
    against a post.
 [1905002]Those oxen that are thine, O Night, with sharpened horns and
    rapid pace,
   With those transport us safe to-day o'er difficulties everywhere.
 [1905003]Uninjured in our bodies may we pass through each succeeding
    night,
   And let malignities fail to pass, as men without a boat the depth.
 [1905004]As millet hurried through the air before us is beheld no more.
   So cause the man to vanish, Night, who plans to do us injury.
 [1905005]The thief hast thou kept far away, the robber driver of our kine.
   Even him who having covered up the horse's head would lead
    him off.
 [1905006]If dealing treasure thou hast come to-day, O highly favoured
   Night.
   Cause thou us to enjoy it all so that this may not pass away. [p. 253]
 [1905007]Do thou entrust us to the Dawn, all of us free from sin, O
   Night.
   May Dawn deliver us to Day, and Day to thee, O glorious One.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LI

  

A sacrificial formula

[1905101]Undisturbed am I, undisturbed is my soul, undisturbed mine
    eye, undisturbed mine ear, undisturbed is mine in-breathing,
    undisturbed mine out-breathing, undisturbed my diffusive-
    breath, undisturbed the whole of me.
 [1905102]Under the impulse of the God Savitar, sent forth from the arms-
    of the Asvins and both hands of Pushan I have taken thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LII

  

A hymn to Kama or Desire

[1905201]Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire the primal seed
    and germ of Spirit.
   O Kama dwelling with the lofty Kama, give growth of riches to
    the sacrificer.
 [1905202]Thou, Kama, art victorious, famous, potent, splendid, a friend.
    to him who seeks thy friendship.
   Mighty and overpowering in battle, give strength and vigour to
    the sacrificer.
 [1905203]They heard his prayers, and they begot, by Kama, heavenly-
     light for him.
   Who from a distance longed for it, a dealer ready to exchange.
 [1905204]O Kama, with whatever wish we make this offering to thee,
   May it be all fulfilled to us. Then taste this sacrifice, All hail!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

HYMN LIII

  

A hymn to Kama or Time

[1905301]Prolific, thousand-eyed, and undecaying, a horse with seven
    reins Time bears us onward.
   Sages inspired with holy knowledge mount him: his chariot
    wheels are all the worlds of creatures.
 [1905302]This Time hath seven rolling wheels and seven naves immorality
    is the chariot's axle.
   This Time brings hitherward all worlds about us: as primal
   Deity is he entreated.
 [1905303]On Time is laid an overflowing beaker: this we behold in many
    a place appearing.
   He carries from us all these worlds of creatures. They call him
   Kala in the loftiest heaven.
 [1905304]He only made the worlds of life, he only gathered the worlds
    of living things together.
   Their son did he become who was their Father: no other higher
    power than he existeth.
 [1905305]Kala created yonder heaven, and Kala made these realms of
    earth.
   By Kala, stirred to motion, both what is and what shall be
    expand.
 [1905306]Kala created land; the Sun in Kala hath his light and heat.
   In Kala rest all things that be: in Kala doth the eye discern.
 [1905307]In Kala mind, in Kala breath, in Kala name are fixt and joined.
   These living creatures, one and all, rejoice when Kala hath
    approached.
 [1905308]Kala embraces Holy Fire, the Highest, Brahma in himself.
   Yea, Kala, who was father of Prajapati, is Lord of All.
 [1905309]He made, he stirred this universe to motion, and on him it rests.
   He, Kala, having now become Brahma, holds Parameshthin up. [p. 255]
 [1905210]Kala created living things and, first of all, Prajapati.
   From Kala self-made Kasyapa, from Kala Holy Fire was born.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIV

  

A hymn to Kala; a continuation of the preceding hymn

[1905401]From Kala sprang the Waters, sprang the regions, Brahma,
   Holy Fire.
   The Sun ascends by Kala, and in Kala sinks again to rest.
 [1905402]By Kala freshly blows the wind, mighty through Kala is the
   Earth: on Kala rests the mighty Sky.
 [1905403]In Kala erst the text produced what is and what is yet to be.
   From Kala sprang the Richas, and from Kala was the Yajus
    born. [p. 256]
 [1905404]They formed in Kala sacrifice, eternal portion for the Gods.
   In Kala the Gandharvas and Apsarasas and worlds abide.
 [1905405]Atharvan and this Angiras in Kala are supreme o'er heaven.
   Both this world and the world that is most lofty, the pure
    worlds and pure intermediate spaces,--
 [1905406]Yea, having conquered all the worlds by Brahma, Kala as God
   Supreme is supplicated.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LV

  

A hymn to Agni for protection and prosperity

[1905501]Bringing, as 'twere, with care unceasing fodder night after night
    to feed this stabled Courser,
   Joying in food and in the growth of riches, may we thy neigh-
    bours, Agni, ne'er be injured.
 [1905502]Here is thine own desire for wealth: through this be gracious
    unto us.
   Joying in food and in the growth of riches, may we thy neigh-
    bours, Agni, ne'er be injured.
 [1905503]Each eve that comes our household's Lord is Agni, showing his.
    loving-kindness every morning.
   Bestow upon us treasure after treasure: enkindling thee may we
    increase thy body.
 [1905504]Each morn that comes our household's Lord is Agni, showing.
    his loving-kindness every evening.
   Vouchsafe us treasure after treasure: kindling thee may we
    prosper through a hundred winters.
 [1905505]Never may I come short of food to feed me.
   Glory to Agni, Rudra, the consumer and the Lord of food!
 [1905506]Protect my company, protect its courteous members, courteous.
   God! [p. 257]
   Only through thee, O much-invoked, may I be ever rich in kine.
 [1905507]Only to thee bringing our tribute, Agni, each day as fodder to a
    stabled courser,
   Joying in food and in the growth of riches, may we the neigh-
    bours, Agni ne'er be injured.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LVI

  

A hymn to Sleep

[1905601]Thou art come hither from the world of Yama: thou, resolute,
    affectest men with rapture.
   Thou, Sleep, created in the Asura's dwelling, goest, well-know-
    ing, with the solitary.
 [1905602]At first the all-containing, depth beheld thee, ere Night was
    born, when only Day existed.
   Thence hast thou come, thence, Sleep, hast thou come hither,
    concealing, deep within, all form and figure.
 [1905603]Come from the Asuras in lofty, glory, he hath approached the
   Gods in search of greatness.
   Winners of heavenly light, the Three-and-Thirty endowed this
   Sleep with his supreme dominion.
 [1905604]Of him nor Fathers nor the Gods have knowledge, the Gods
    whose gentle talk is still about him.
   Urged by command of Varuna the Adityas, Heroes, transported
   Sleep to Trita Aptya.
 [1905605]Thou whose severity hath reached ill-doers, and whose reward
    the good have gained in slumber,
   Delightest heaven with thy most lofty kinship, born from his
    spirit who was worn and weary.
 [1905606]Of old we know all places whence thou comest. O Sleep, we
    know him who is here thy ruler.
   Protect us here illustrious with glory. Go, from afar, with
    poisons, into distance.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 258]

  

HYMN LVII

  

A charm against evil dreams

[1905701]As men discharge the utmost debt, collect the eighth and
    sixteenth part,
   So to the foeman we transfer together all the evil dream.
 [1905702]Princes came together, debts came together, Kushthas came to-
    gether,
   Sixteenths came together. The whole evil dream that hath visited
    us we send away as a bad dream to the man who hates us.
 [1905703]Child of Gods' Consorts, minister of Yama is the good Dream:
    that which is my trouble we drive away to the enemy.
 [1905704]Thou whose name is Rough art the mouth of the Black Bird.
   As such we know thee, Dream, as such we know thee well. Like
    a horse art thou, O Dream. As they bind girth and surcingle
    on a horse, so bind the alien mischief-maker, the scorner of
    the Gods.
 [1905705]The evil dream that threatens us, threatens our cattle or our
    home.
   That let the scorner of the Gods, the alien mischief-maker bind
    as a gold jewel round his neck.
 [1905706]Having measured off nine cubits' distance from us we give away
    the whole of the evil dream to the man who hates us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 259]

  

HYMN LVIII

  

A prayer for prosperity, accompanying a sacrifice

[1905801]Still equal be the flow of butter ever causing the Year to prosper
    with oblation.
   Still be our hearing, sight, and breath uninjured: let us lose
    nothing of our life and vigour.
 [1905802]Let lively breath invite us: we call vital breath to visit us.
   Earth and air's middle realm have gathered, Soma, Brihaspati
    and Dhartar gathered vigour.
 [1905803]The earth and heaven have come to be two gatherers up of vigo-
    rous might.
   So let us gather vigour up and closely follow after Earth.
   With glory come the cows and stand beside the master of the
    herd. Let us when we have gathered fame and glory closely
    follow Earth.
 [1905804]Prepare the cow-stall, for there drink your heroes: stitch ye the
    coats of armour wide and many.
   Make iron forts defying all assailants: let not your pitcher leak;
    stay it securely.
 [1905805]The eye of sacrifice, source and beginning with voice, car, spirit
    unto him I offer.
   To this our sacrifice, wrought by Visvakarman, may the Gods
    come gracious and kindly-hearted.
 [1905806]Let the Gods' Priests and those who merit worship, to whom
    oblation as their share is offered,
   Come to this holy service with their Consorts, and all Gods
    revel in the food we bring them.

[p. 260]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIX

  

An expiatory hymn accompanying sacrifice

[1905901]God among mortals, Agni, thou art guard of holy Law, thou art
   To be adored in sacred rites.
 [1905902]When, ignorant, we violate the statutes of you, O Deities, with
    whom is knowledge,
   Wise Agni shall correct our faults and failings, and Soma who
    hath entered into Brahmans.
 [1905903]To the Gods' pathway have we come desiring to execute what
    work we may accomplish.
   Let Agni--for he knows--complete the worship. He is the
   Priest: let him fix rites and seasons.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LX

  

A prayer for perfect bodily and mental health and vigour

[1906001]May I have voice in my mouth, breath in my nostrils, sight in
    mine eyes, hearing in mine ears, hair that hath not turned
    gray, teeth free from yellowness, and much strength in mine
    arms.
 [1906002]May I have power in my thighs, swiftness in my legs, stedfast-
    ness in my feet. May all my members be uninjured and my
    soul unimpaired.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 261]

  

HYMN LXI

  

A prayer for long life prosperity and final happiness in heaven

[1906101]May my self remain in my body: may I enjoy the full time of
    life,
   Rest thee pleasantly: pour forth abundance, purifying thyself in
   Svarga.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXII

  

A prayer for the love of Gods and men

[1906201]Make me beloved among the Gods, beloved among the Princes,
    make
   Me dear to everyone who sees, to Sudra and to Aryan man.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIII

  

A prayer, with sacrifice, for long life and prosperity

[1906301]Rise up, O Brahmanaspati; awake the Gods with sacrifice.
   Strengthen the Sacrificer: aid life, breath, and off-spring, cattle,
    fame.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIV

  

A prayer to Agni for children, long life, and various blessings

[1906401]For lofty Jatavedas I have brought the fuel hither first.
   May he who knoweth all bestow faith and intelligence on me.
 [1906402]With fuel and with flaming wood we, Jatavedas, strengthen
    thee;
   So do thou strengthen us in turn with children and with store of
    wealth.
 [1906403]Whatever even be the logs which, Agni, we lay down for thee,
    propitious be it all to me: accept it, O most youthful God.
 [1906404]Agni, these logs are thine: with these be, fain to burn! a
    flaming brand.
   Vouchsafe us length of life and give us hope of immortality.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 262]

  

HYMN LXV

  

A hymn to Agni identified with the Sun

[1906501]A Golden Eagle thou hast soared with light to heaven. Those
    who would harm thee as thou fliest skyward.
   Beat down, O Jatavedas, with thy fury. The strong hath feared:
    to heaven mount up with light, O Surya.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVI

  

A hymn to Agni as the Sun

[1906601]The Asuras with iron nets, magicians, who roam about with
    hooks and bonds of iron,
   With wrath I make thy thralls, O Jatavedas. Come as a bolt foe-
    quelling, thousand pointed.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVII

  

A prayer for long life

[1906701]A hundred autumns may we see.
 [1906702]A hundred autumns may we live.
 [1906703]A hundred autumns may we know.
 [1906704]A hundred autumns may we grow.
 [1906705]A hundred autumns may we thrive.
 [1906706]A hundred autumns may we be.
 [1906707]A hundred autumns may we bide.
 [1906708]A hundred, yea, and even more.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVIII

  

A preliminary sacrificial formula

[1906801]Both of broad and narrow I with magic power unclose the
    mouth. [p. 263]
   With these when we have raised the bunch of grass we pay the
    holy rites.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIX

  

A prayer or charm for long life

[1906901]Ye are alive. I fain would live. I fain would live my complete
    term of life.
 [1906902]Ye live dependent. I fain would live dependent. I fain would
    live my complete term of life.
 [1906903]Ye remain alive. I fain would remain alive. I fain would live
    my complete term of life.
 [1906904]Ye are life-givers. I fain would live. I fain would live my com-
    plete term of life.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXX

  

A charm for long life

[1907001]Live, Indra. Live Surya. Live, ye Gods. I fain would live. Fain
    would I live my complete term of life.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXI

  

A hymn, accompanying libations, for wealth and prosperity

[1907101]Let my libations, giving boons, adoring, further the Twice-born's
    song that honours Soma.
   Go ye to Brahma's world having enriched me with life and
    breath, with children and with cattle, with fame and wealth,
    and with a Brahman's lustre.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 264]

  

HYMN LXXII

  

A sacrificial formula

[1907201]Within the chest whence we before extracted the bunch of grass,
    this do we now deposit.
   Wrought is the sacrifice by power of Brahma. Through this
    assist me here, ye God, with Fervour.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 265]

  

BOOK XX

  

HYMN I

[2000101]Thee, Indra, we invoke, the Bull, what time the Soma hath been
    pressed.
   Drink of the sweetly-flavoured juice.
 [2000102]The best of guardian hath the man within whose dwelling-place
    ye drink,
   O Maruts, giants of the sky.
 [2000103]Let us serve Agni with our hyms, Sage who consumeth ox and
    cow,
   Who beareth Soma on his back.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN II

[2000201]Let the Maruts drink Trishtups from the Potar's cup, according
    to the season Soma from heaven.
 [2000202]Let Agni from the Kindler's cup drink Trishtups, according to
    the season Soma from heaven.
 [2000203]Let Indra the Brahman from the Brahman's cup drink Trishtups,
    according to the season Soma from heaven.
 [2000204]Let the God, Granter of Wealth, from the Potar's cup drink
   Trishtups, according to the season Soma from heaven.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266]

  

HYMN III

[2000301]Come, we have pressed the juice for thee: O Indra, drink this
   Soma here.
   Seat thee on this my sacred grass.
 [2000302]Let both thy bay steeds, yoked by prayer long-maned, O Indra,
    bring thee nigh.
 [2000303]We Soma-bearing Brahmans call thee Soma-drinker with thy
    friend,
   We, Indra, who have pressed the juice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IV

[2000401]Come unto us who poured the juice, come hither to our eulogies.
   Drink of the juice, O fair of face.
 [2000402]I pour it down within thee, so through all thy members let it
    run.
   Take with thy tongue the pleasant drink.
 [2000403]Sweet to thy body let it be, delicious be the savoury juice.
   Sweet be the Soma to thy heart.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN V

[2000501]Like women, let this Soma juice invested with its raiment, glide..
   Most active Indra, close to thee.
 [2000502]Mighty in bulk, strong-necked, stout-armed in the wild rapture.
    of the juice [p. 267]
   Doth Indra smite the foemen dead.
 [2000503]Indra, advance, go forward thou who by thy might art Lord of
    all.
   Slay, Vritra-slayer slay thy foes.
 [2000504]Long be thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest treasure unto-
    him
   Who pours the juice and worships thee.
 [2000505]Here, Indra, is thy Soma draught, made pure upon the sacred.
    grass.
   Run hither, come and drink thereof.
 [2000506]Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well! this juice is shed for
    thy delight:
   Thou art invoked, Akhandala!
 [2000507]To Kundapayya, grandson's son, grandson of Sringavrish, to
    thee,
   To him have I addressed my thought.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VI

[2000601]Thee, Indra, we invoke, the Bull, what time the Soma is ex-
    pressed.
   So drink thou of the savoury juice. [p. 268]
 [2000602]Indra, whom many laud, accept the strength-confering Soma
    juice.
   Quaff, pour down drink that satisfies.
 [2000603]Indra, with all the Gods promote our wealth-bestowing sacrifice,
   Thou highly-lauded Lord of men.
 [2000604]Lord of the brave, to thee proceed these drops of Soma juice
    expressed,
   The bright drops to thy dwelling-place.
 [2000605]Within thy belly, Indra take Soma the juice most excellent:
   The heavenly drops belong to thee.
 [2000606]Drink our libation, Lord of hymns: with streams of meath thou
    art bedewed:
   Our glory, Indra, is thy gift.
 [2000607]To Indra go the treasures of the worshipper which never fail:
   He drinks the Soma and is strong.
 [2000608]From far away, from near at hand, O Vritra-slayer, come to us:
   Accept the songs we sing to thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN VII

[2000701]Surya, thou mountest up to meet the Hero famous for his
    wealth,
   Who hurls the bolt and works for man:
 [2000702]Him who with might of both his arms brake nine-and ninety
    castles down,
   Slew Vritra and smote Ahi dead.
 [2000703]This Indra is our gracious Friend. He sends us in a full broad
    stream
   Riches in horses, kine, and corn.
 [2000704]Indra, whom many laud, accept the strength-conferring Soma
    juice.
   Quaff, pour down drink that satisfies.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 269]

  

HYMN VIII

[2000801]Drink as of old, and let the draught delight thee: hear thou my
    prayer and let our songs exalt thee.
   Make the Sun visible, make food abundant: slaughter the foes,.
    pierce through and free the cattle.
 [2000802]Come to us; they have called thee Soma-lover. Here is the
    pressed juice: drink thereof for rapture.
   Widely-capacious, pour it down within thee, and invocated hear
    us like a father.
 [2000803]Full is his chalice. Blessing! Like a pourer I have filled up the
    vessel for his drinking.
   Presented on the right, dear Soma juices have brought us Indra,.
    to rejoice him, hither.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN IX

[2000901]As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our songs we
    glorify
   This Indra, even your wondrous God who checks attack, who
    joys in the delicious juice.
 [2000902]Celestial, bounteous Giver, girt about with might, rich, moun-
    tain-like, in precious things
   Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, brought
    hundredfold and thousandfold.
 [2000903]I crave of thee that hero strength, that thou mayst first regard
    this prayer,
   Wherewith thou helpest Bhrigu and the Yatis and Praskanva
    when the prize was staked.
 [2000904]Wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea, that, Indra, is.
    thy hero strength.
   For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom the worlds.
    have called aloud.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 270]

  

HYMN X

[2001001]These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of praise as-
    cend to thee,
   Like ever-conquering chariots that display their strength, gain
    wealth and give unfailing aid.
 [2001002]The Bhrigus are like suns, like Kanvas, and have gained all that
    their thoughts were bent to win.
   The living men of Priyamedha's race have sung exalting Indra
    with their lauds.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XI

[2001101]Fort-render, Lord of Wealth, dispelling foemen, Indra with
    lightnings hath o'ercome the Dasa.
   Impelled by prayer and waxen great in body, he hath filled
    earth and heaven, the bounteous Giver.
 [2001102]I stimulate this zeal, the Strong, the Hero, decking my song of
    praise for thee Immortal.
   O Indra, thou art equally the leader of heavenly hosts and
    human generations.
 [2001103]Leading his band Indra encompassed Vritra; weak grew the wily
    leader enchanters.
   He who burns fierce in forests slaughtered Vyansa, and made
    the milch-kine of nights apparent.
 [2001104]Indra, light-winner, days' creator, conquered, as guardian, hostile
    bands with those who loved him.
   For man the days' bright ensign he illumined, and found the
    light for his great joy and gladness. [p. 271]
 [2001105]Forward to fiercely falling blows pressed Indra, hero-like doing
    many hero exploits.
   Those holy songs he taught the bard who praised him, and
    widely spread these Dawns' resplendent colour.
 [2001106]They laud the mighty acts of him the mighty, the many glorious
    deeds performed by Indra.
   He in his strength, with all-surpassing prowess, through wond-
    rous arts crushed the malignant Dasyus.
 [2001107]Lord of the brave, Indra who rules the people gave freedom to
    the Gods by might and battle.
   Wise singers glorify with chanted praises these his achievements
    in Vivasvan's dwelling.
 [2001108]Excellent, conqueror, the victory-giver, the winner of the light
    and godlike waters,
   He who hath won this broad earth and this heaven,--in Indra
    they rejoice who love devotions.
 [2001109]He gained possession of the Sun and horses; Indra obtained
    the cow who feedeth many.
   Treasure of gold he won; he smote the Dasyus and gave protec-
    tion to the race of Aryas.
 [2001110]He took the plants and days for his possession; he gained the
    forest trees and air's mid-region.
   Vala he cleft, and chased away opponents: thus was he tamer
    of the overweening.
 [2001111]Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight
    where spoil is gathered,
   The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays the
   Vritras, wins and gathers treasures.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 272]

  

HYMN XII

[2001201]Prayers have been offered up through love of glory: Vasishtha,
    honour Indra in the battle.
   He who with might extends through all existence hears words
    which I, his faithful servant, utter.
 [2001202]A cry was raised which reached the Gods, O Indra, a cry to
    them to send us strength in combat.
   None among men knows his own life's duration: bear us in
    safety over these our troubles.
 [2001203]The Bays, the booty-seeking car I harness: my prayers have
    reached him who accepts them gladly.
   Indra, when he had slain resistless Vritras, forced with his might
    the two world-halves asunder.
 [2001204]Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters: the singers
    sought thy holy rite, O Indra.
   Come unto us as with his team comes Vayu: thou, through our
    solemn hymns, bestowest booty.
 [2001205]So may these gladdening draughts rejoice thee, Indra, the Mighty,
    very bounteous to the singer.
   Alone among the Gods thou pitiest mortals: O Hero, make thee
    glad at this libation.
 [2001206]Thus the Vasishthas glorify with praises Indra, the Mighty One,
    whose arm wields thunder.
   Praised, may he guard our wealth in kine and heroes. Ye Gods,.
    preserve us evermore with blessings.
 [2001207]Impetuous, Thunderer, strong, quelling the mighty, King, potent,
   Vritra-slayer, Soma-drinker,
   May he come hither with his yoked bay horses. May Indra glad-
    den him at noon libation.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 273]

  

HYMN XIII

[2001301]Lords of great wealth, Brihaspati and Indra, rejoicing at this
    sacrifice drink Soma.
   Let the abundant drops sink deep within you: vouchsafe us
    riches with full store of heroes.
 [2001302]Let your swift-gliding coursers bear you hitherward with their
    fleet pinions. Come ye forward with your arms.
   Sit on the grass; a wide seat hath been made for you: delight
    yourselves, O Maruts, in the pleasant food.
 [2001303]For Jatavedas, worthy of our praise, will we frame with our
    mind this eulogy as 'twere a car.
   For good in his assembly is this care of ours. Let us not in thy
    friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
 [2001304]With these, borne on one car, Agni, approach us; or borne on
    many, for thy steeds are able.
   Bring, with their Dames, the Gods, the Three-and-Thirty, after
    thy Godlike nature, and he joyful.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XIV

[2001401]We call on thee, O peerless One. We, seeking help, possessing
    nothing firm ourselves,
   Call on thee wonderful in fight.
 [2001402]On thee for aid in sacrifice. This youth of ours, the bold, the
    mighty, hath gone forth.
   We, therefore, we thy friends, Indra, have chosen thee, free-
    giver, as our guardian God.
 [2001403]Him who of old hath brought to us this and that blessing, him
   I magnify for you,
   Even Indra, O my friends, for help:
 [2001404]Borne by bay steeds, the Lord of heroes, ruling men, for it is he
    who takes delight. [p. 274]
   The Bounteous Lord bestows on us his worshippers hundreds of
    cattle and of steeds.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XV

[2001501]To him most liberal, lofty Lord of lofty wealth, verily powerful
    and strong, I bring my hymn,
   Whose checkless bounty, as of waters down a slope, is spread
    abroad for all that live, to give them strength.
 [2001502]Now all this world, for worship, shall come after thee--the
    offerer's libations like descending floods,
   When the well-loved one seems to rest upon the hill, the thun-
    derbolt of Indra, shatterer wrought of gold.
 [2001503]To him the terrible, most worthy of high praise, like radiant
   Dawn, bring gifts with reverence in this rite,
   Whose being, for renown, yea, Indra-power and light, have been
    created, like bay steeds, to move with speed.
 [2001504]Thine, Indra, praised by many excellently rich! are we who
    trusting in thy help draw near to thee.
   Lover of praise, none else but thou receives our laud: as Earth
    loves all her creatures, love thou this our hymn.
 [2001505]Great is thy power, O Indra, we are thine. Fulfil, O Maghavan,
    the wish of this thy worshipper.
   After thee lofty heaven hath measured out its strength to thee
    and to thy power this earth hath bowed itself.
 [2001506]Thou, who hast thunder for thy weapon, with thy bolt hast
    shattered into pieces this broad massive cloud.
   Thou hast sent down obstructed floods that they may flow: thou
    hast, thine own for ever, all victorious might.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 275]

  

HYMN XVI

[2001601]Like birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, like the loud
    voices of the thundering rain-cloud,
   Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain thus to
   Brihaspati our hymns have sounded.
 [2001602]The son of Angiras, meeting the cattle, as Bhaga, brought in
   Aryaman among us.
   As Friend of men he decks the wife and husband. As for the
    race, Brihaspati, nerve our coursers.
 [2001603]Brihaspati, having won them from the mountains, strewed down,
    like barley out of winnowing-baskets,
   The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, desired of all,
    of blameless form, well-coloured.
 [2001604]As the Sun dews with meath the seat of Order, and casts a flam-
    ing meteor down from heaven,
   So from the rock Brihaspati forced the cattle, and cleft the
    earth's skin as it were with water.
 [2001605]Forth from mid-air with light he draye the darkness, as the gale
    blows a lily from the river.
   Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala, Brihaspati gathered
    to himself the cattle.
 [2001606]Brihaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft through the
    weapon of reviling Vala,
   Consumed him as tongues eat what teeth have compassed: he
    threw the prisons of the red cows open.
 [2001607]That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave
   Brihaspati discovered,
   And draye, himself, the bright kine from the mountain, like a
    bird's young after the eggs' disclosure.
 [2001608]He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who
    eyes a fish in scanty water.
   Brihaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, brought it
    forth like a bowl from out the timber. [p. 276]
 [2001609]He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning: with lucid
    rays he forced apart the darkness.
   As from a joint, Brihaspati took the marrow of Vala as he
    gloried in his cattle.
 [2001610]As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned for the
    cows Brihaspati had taken.
   He did a deed ne'er done, ne'er to be equalled, whereby the sun
    and moon ascend alternate.
 [2001611]Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers have decorat-
    ed heaven with constellations.
   They set the light in day, in night the darkness, Brihaspati cleft
    the rock and found the cattle.
 [2001612]This homage have we offered to the Cloud-God who thunders
    out to many in succession.
   May this Brihaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kine and
    horses, men, and heroes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 277]

  

HYMN XVII

  I. In perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find the light
    of heaven have sung forth Indra's praise.
   As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, so they
    compass Maghavan about that he may help.
 [2001702]Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have set my
    hopes on thee, O much-invoked!
   Sit, wonderful! as King upon the sacred grass, and let thy
    drinking-place be by the Soma juice.
 [2001703]From indigence and hunger Indra turns away: Maghavan hath
    dominion over precious wealth.
   These the Seven Rivers flowing on their downward path increase
    the vital vigour of the Mighty Steer.
 [2001704]As on the fair-leafed tree rest birds, to Indra flow the gladden-
    ing Soma juices that the bowls contain.
   Their face that glows with splendour through their mighty
    power hath found the shine of heaven for man, the Aryas'
    light.
 [2001705]As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so Maghavan,
    sweeping all together, gained the Sun.
   This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, none,
   Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time.
 [2001706]Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men: the Steer
    took notice of the people's songs of praise.
   The man in whose libations Sakra hath delight by means of
    potent Somas vanquisheth his foes.
 [2001707]As waters flow together to the river, thus Somas to Indra flow,
    as rivulets to the lake.
   In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the rain swells the
    corn by moisture sent from heaven.
 [2001708]He rushes through the region like a furious bull, he who hath
    made these floods the dames of worthy lords.
   This Maghavan hath found light for the man who brings
    oblation, sheds the juice, and promptly pours his gifts.
 [2001709]Let the keen axe come forth together with the light: here be,
    as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice.
   Let the Red God shine pure with his refulgent ray, and let the
   Lord of heroes glow like heaven's clear sheen. [p. 278]
 [2001710]O much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with
    store of grain and cattle.
   May we allied, as first in rank, with princes, obtain possessions
    by our own exertion.
 [2001711]Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and
    from below, from sinners.
   May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as friend to
    friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.
 [2001712]Ye twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, O
   Brihaspati, and thou, O Indra.
   Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you. Preserve
    us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XVIII

[2001801]This, even this, O Indra, we implore: as thy devoted friends,
   The Kanvas praise thee with their hymns.
 [2001802]Naught else, O Thunderer, have I praised in the skilled singer's
    eulogy:
   On thy laud only have I thought.
 [2001803]The Gods seek him who presses out the Soma; they desire not
    sleep:
   Incessantly they punish sloth.
 [2001804]Faithful to thee we loudly sing, heroic Indra, songs to thee.
   Mark, gracious Lord, this act of ours.
 [2001805]Give us not up to man's reproach, to foeman's hateful calumny:
   In thee alone is all my strength.
 [2001806]Thou art mine ample coat of mail, my champion, Vritra-slayes,
    thou.
   With thee for Friend I brave the foe.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 279]

  

HYMN XIX

[2001901]O Indra, for the strength that slays the foe and conquers in the
    fight
   We turn thee hitherward to us.
 [2001902]O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers, may those who praise thee
    hitherward.
   Direct thy spirit and thine eye.
 [2001903]O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers, with all our songs we
    invocate.
   Thy names for triumph over foes.
 [2001904]We strive for glory through the powers immense of him whom
    many praise,
   Of Indra who supports mankind.
 [2001905]For the foe's slaughter I address Indra whom many invocate,
   To win us booty in the wars.
 [2001906]In battles be victorious. We seek thee, Lord of Hundred Powers,
   O Indra, that the foe may fall.
 [2001907]In splendid combats of the hosts, in glories where the fight is
    won,
   Indra, be victor over foes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XX

[2002001]Drink thou the Soma for our help, bright, vigilant, exceeding
    strong,
   O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers.
 [2002002]O Satakratu, powers which thou mid the Five Races hast dis-
    played
   These, Indra, do I claim of thee.
 [2002003]Indra, great glory hast thou gained. Win splendid fame which
    none may mar:
   We make thy might perpetual.
 [2002004]Come to us either from anear, or, Sakra, come from far away. [p. 280]
   Indra, wherever be thy home, come to us thence, O Thunder-
    armed.
 [2002005]Verily Indra, conquering all, driveth even mighty fear away;
   For firm is he and swift to act.
 [2002006]Indra be gracious unto us: sin shall not reach us afterward .
   And good shall be before us still,
 [2002007]From all the regions of the world let Indra send security.
   The foe-subduer, swift to act.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXI

[2002101]We will present fair praise unto the Mighty One, our hymns to
   Indra in Vivasvan's dwelling-place;
   For he hath ne'er found wealth in those who seem to sleep;
    those who give wealth to men accept no paltry praise.
 [2002102]Giver of horses, Indra, giver, thou, of kine, giver of barley,
    thou art Lord and guard of wealth:
   Man's helper from of old, not disappointing hope, Friend of
    our friends, to thee as such we sing this praise.
 [2002103]Indra, most splendid, powerful, rich in mighty deeds, this
    treasure spread around is known to be thine own.
   Gather therefrom. O Conqueror, and bring to us: fail not the
    hope of him who loves and sings to thee.
 [2002104]Well-pleased with these bright flames and with these Soma
    drops, take thou away our poverty with steeds and kine.
   With Indra scattering the Dasyu through these drops, freed
    from their hate may we obtain abundant food.
 [2002105]Let us obtain, O Indra, plenteous wealth and food, with strength
    exceeding glorious, shining to the sky.
   May we obtain the Goddess Providence, the strength of heroes,
    special source of cattle, rich in steeds.
 [2002106]These our libations, strength inspiring Soma draughts, gladdened
    thee in the fight with Vritra, Hero-Lord, [p. 281]
   What time thou slewest for the singer with trimmed grass ten
    thousand Vritras, thou resistless in thy might.
 [2002107]Thou goest on from fight to fight intrepidly, destroying castle
    after castle here with strength;
   Thou Indra, with thy friend who makes the foe bow down,
    slewest from far away the guileful Namuchi.
 [2002108]Thou hast stuck down in death Karanja, Parnaya, in Atithigva's
    very glorious going forth:
   Unyielding, when Rijisvan compassed them with siege, thou hast
    destroyed the hundred towns of Vangrida.
 [2002109]With all-outstripping chariot wheel, O Indra, thou far-famed,
    hast overthrown the twice ten kings of men,
   With sixty thousand nine-and-ninety followers, who came in
    arms to fight with friendless Susravas.
 [2002110]Thou hast protected Susravas with succour, and Turvayana with
    thine aid, O Indra:
   Thou madest Kutsa, Atithigva, Ayu subject unto this king, the
    young, the mighty.
 [2002111]May we protected by the Gods hereafter remain thy very pro-
    sperous friends, O Indra.
   Thee we extol, enjoying through thy favour life-long and joyful
    and with store of heroes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 282]

  

HYMN XXII

 [2002201]Hero, the Soma being pressed I pour the juice for thee to drink
   Sate thee and finish thy carouse.
 [2002202]Let not the fools, or those who mock, beguile thee when they
    seek thine aid:
   Love not the enemies of prayer.
 [2002203]Here let them with rich milky draught cheer thee to great
    munificence:
   Drink as the wild bull drinks the lake.
 [2002204]Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra, the guardian of
    the kine,
   The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave.
 [2002205]Hither his bay steeds have been sent, red steeds are on the
    sacred grass.
   Where we in concert sing our songs.
 [2002206]For Indra, Thunder-armed, the kine have yielded mingled milk
    and meath,
   What time he found them in the vault.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIII

[2002301]Invoked to drink the Soma juice come with thy bay steeds,
   Thunder-armed!
   Come, Indra, hitherward, to me.
 [2002302]Our priest is seated true to time; the grass is regularly strewn;
   The pressing-stones were set at morn.
 [2002303]These prayers, O thou who bearest prayer, are offered. Seat
    thee on the grass.
   Hero, enjoy the offered cake.
 [2002304]O Vritra-slayer, be thou pleased with these libations, with these
    hymns,
   Song-loving Indra, with our lauds.
 [2002305]Our hymns caress the Lord of Strength, vast, drinker of the
   Soma's juice, [p. 283]
   Indra, as mother-cows their calf.
 [2002306]Delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own great
    munificence:
   Yield not thy singer to reproach.
 [2002307]We, Indra, dearly loving thee, bearing oblation, sing thee
    hymns:
   Thou, Vasu, nearly lovest us.
 [2002308]O thou to whom thy Bays are dear, loose not thy horses far
    from us:
   Here glad thee, Indra, Lord Divine.
 [2002309]May long-maned courses, dropping oil, bring thee on swift car
    hitherward.
   Indra, to seat thee on the grass.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIV

[2002401]Come to the juice that we have pressed, to Soma, Indra! blent
    with milk:
   Come, favouring us, thy bay-drawn car!
 [2002402]Come, Indra, to this gladdening drink, placed on the grass,
    pressed out with stones:
   Wilt thou not drink thy fill thereof?
 [2002403]To Indra have my songs of praise gone forth, thus rapidly sent
    hence,
   To turn him to the Soma-draught.
 [2002404]Hither with songs of praise we call Indra to drink the Soma.
    juice:
   Will he not come to us by lauds?
 [2002405]Indra, these Somas are expressed, Take them within thy belly,
   Lord Of Hundred Powers, thou Prince of wealth.
 [2002406]We know thee winner of the spoil and resolute in battles, Sage!
   Therefore thy blessing we implore.
 [2002407]Borne hither by thy stallions, drink, Indra, this juice which we
    have pressed,
   Mingled with barley and with milk.
 [2002408]Indra, for thee in thine own place I urge the Soma for thy
    draught: [p. 284]
   Deep in thy heart let it remain.
 [2002409]We call on thee, the Ancient One, Indra, to drink the Soma
    juice,
   We Kusikas who seek thine aid.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXV

[2002501]Indra, the mortal man well guarded by thine aid goes foremost
    in the wealth of horses and of kine.
   With amplest wealth thou fillest him, as round about the waters
    clearly seen afar fill Sindhu full.
 [2002502]The heavenly waters come not nigh the priestly bowl: they but
    look down and see how far mid-air is spread:
   The Deities conduct the pious man to them: like suitors they
    delight in him who loveth prayer.
 [2002503]Praiseworthy blessing hast thou laid upon the pair who with
    uplifted ladle serve thee, man and wife.
   Unchecked he dwells and prospers in thy law: thy power brings
    blessing to the sacrificer pouring gifts.
 [2002504]First the Angirases won themselves vital power, whose fires were
    kindled through good deeds and sacrifice.
   The men together found the Pani's hoarded wealth, the cattle,
    and the wealth in horses and in kine,
 [2002505]Atharvan first by sacrifices laid the path; then, guardian of the
   Law, sprang up the loving Sun.
   Usana Kavya drove the kine hither with him: let us with offer-
    ings honour Yama's deathless birth.
 [2002506]When sacred grass is trimmed to aid the auspicious work, or
    the hymn makes its voice of praise sound to the sky,
   Where the stone rings as 'twere a singer skilled in laud,--Indra
    in truth delights when these come near to him.
 [2002507]To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to thee the
   Bull, O thou whom bay steeds carry.
   Here take delight. O Indra, in our voices while thou art hymned
    with power and all our spirit.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 285]

  

HYMN XXVI

[2002601]In every need, in every fray we call, as friends, to succour us
   Indra the mightiest of all.
 [2002602]If he will hear us let him come with succour of a thousand
    kinds,
   And all that strengthens, to our call.
 [2002603]I call him, mighty to resist, the Hero of our ancient home,
   Thee whom my sire invoked of old.
 [2002604]They who stand round him as he moves harness the bright, the
    ruddy steed:
   The lights are shining in the sky.
 [2002605]On both sides of the car they yoke the two bay coursers dear to
    him,
   Bold, tawny, bearers of the thief.
 [2002606]Thou, making light where no light was, and form, O Men!
    where form was not,
   Wast born together with the Dawns.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 286]

  

HYMN XXVII

[2002701]If I, O Indra, were, like thee, the single sovran of all wealth.
   My worshipper should be rich in kine.
 [2002702]I should be fain, O Lord of Might, to strengthen and enrich the
    sage,
   Were I the lord of herds of kine,
 [2002703]To worshippers who press the juice thy goodness, Indra, is a
    cow.
   Yielding in plenty kine and steeds.
 [2002704]None is there, Indra, God or man, to hinder thy munificence,
   The wealth which, lauded, thou wilt give.
 [2002705]The sacrifice made Indra strong when he unrolled the earth and
    made
   Himself a diaden in heaven.
 [2002706]Thine aid we claim, O Indra, thine who after thou hast waxen
    great.
   Hast won all treasures for thine own.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXVIII

[2002801]In Soma's ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and realms of
    light.
   When he cleft Vala limb from limb.
 [2002802]Showing the hidden he draye forth the cows for the Angirases,
   And Vala he cast headlong down.
 [2002803]By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven established and
    secured.
   Firm and immovable in their place.
 [2002804]Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of water-floods.
   Bright shine the drops that gladden thee.

[p. 287]

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXIX

  I. For thou, O Indra, art the God whom hymns and praises
    magnify:
   Thou blessest those who worship thee.
 [2002902]Bay horses with their long manes bring Indra to drink the
   Soma juice,
   The Bountiful to our sacrifice.
 [2002903]With waters' foam thou torest off, Indra, the head of Namuchi,
   Subduing all contending hosts.
 [2002904]The Dasyus, when they fain would climb by magic arts and
    mount to heaven,
   Thou, Indra, castest down to earth.
 [2002905]As Soma-drinker conquering all, thou scatteredst to every side
   Their band who poured no gifts to thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXX

[2003001]In the great synod will I laud thy two bay steeds: I prize the
    sweet strong drink of thee the Warrior-God,
   His who pours lovely oil as'twere with yellow drops. Let my
    songs enter thee whose form hath golden tints.
 [2003002]Ye who--in concert sing unto the gold-hued place, like bay steeds
    driving onward to the heavenly seat,
   For Indra laud ye strength allied with tawny steeds, laud him
    whom cows content as'twere with yellow drops.
 [2003003]His is that thunderbolt, of iron, golden-hued, gold-coloured,
    very dear, and yellow in his arms;
   Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage. In
   Indra are set fast all forms of golden hue.
 [2003004]As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden thunder-
    bolt spread out as in a race.
   That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A thousand
    flames had he who bore the tawny-hued. [p. 288]
 [2003005]Thou, thou, when praised by men who sacrificed of old, hadst
    pleasure in their lauds, O Indra golden-haired.
   All that befits thy song of praise thou welcomest, the perfect:
    pleasant gift, O golden-hued from birth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXI

[2003101]These two dear Bays bring hither Indra on his car, thunder-
    armed, joyous, meet for laud, to drink his fill.
   Many libations flow for him who loveth them: to Indra have:
    the gold-hued Soma juices run.
 [2003102]The gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish: the yellow.
    drops have urged the swift Bays to the Strong.
   He who speeds on with bay steeds even as he lists hath satisfied
    his longing for the golden drops.
 [2003103]At the swift draught the Soma-drinker waxed in might, the iron.
   One with yellow beard and golden hair,
   He, Lord of tawny coursers. Lord of fleet-foot mares, will bear
    his bay steeds safely over all distress.
 [2003104]His yellow-coloured jaws, like ladles, move apart, what time,.
    for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted stir,
   When. while the bowl stands there, he grooms his tawny steeds,
    when he hath drunk strong drink, the sweet juice that he:
    loves.
 [2003105]Yea, to the dear one's seat in homes of heaven and earth the-
    bay steeds' Lord hath whinnied like a horse for food.
   Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, and the
    beloved One hath gained high power of life.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 289]

  

HYMN XXXII

[2003201]Thou, comprehending with thy might the earth and heaven,
    acceptest the dear hymn for ever new and new.
   O Asura, disclose thou and make visible the Cow's beloved
    home to the bright golden Sun.
 [2003202]O Indra, let the eager wishes of the folk bring thee the golden-
    jawed, delightful, on thy car.
   That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, thou mayest
    at the feast drink of our offered mead.
 [2003203]Juices aforetime, Lord of Bays, thou drankest, and thine, and
    only thine, is this libation.
   Gladden thee, Indra, with the mead-rich Soma: pour it down
    ever, Mighty One, within thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIII

[2003301]Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters and fill the-
    full, O Lord of tawny horses.
   O Indra, hearer of the laud, with Soma which stones have mix-
    ed for thee enhance thy rapture.
 [2003302]To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to thee the
   Bull, O thou whom bay steeds carry.
   Here take delight, O Indra, in our voices while thou art hymned
    with power and all our spirit. [p. 290]
 [2003303]O mighty Indra, through thine aid, thy prowess, obtaining life,
    zealous, and skilled in worship.
   Men in the house who share the sacred banquet stand singing
    praise that brings them store of children.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXIV

[2003401]He who just born, chief God of lofty spirit, by power and might
    became the God's protector,
   Before whose breath, through greatness of his valour, the two
    worlds trembled, He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003402]He who fixed fast and firm the earth that staggered, and set at
    rest the agitated mountains,
   Who measured out air's wider middle region and gave the
    heaven support, He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003403]Who slew the Dragon, freed the Seven Rivers, and draye the
    kine forth from the cave of Vala,
   Begat the fire between both stones, the spoiler in warrior's
    battle, He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003404]By whom this universe was made to tremble, who chased away
    the humbled brood of demon,
   Who, like a gambler gathering his winnings, seized the foe's
    riches, He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003405]Of whom, the terrible, they ask, Where is He? or verily they
    say of him, He is not.
   He wastes the foeman's wealth like stakes of gamblers. Have
    faith in him for He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003406]Stirrer to action of the poor and lowly, of priest, of suppliant
    who sings his praises
   Who, fair-faced, favours him who presseth Soma with stones
    adjusted, He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003407]He under whose supreme control are horses, all chariots, and
    the hamlets, and the cattle:
   He who begat the Sun, begat the Morning, leader of waters.
   He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003408]To whom both armies cry in close encounter, foe against foe, the
    stronger and the weaker; [p. 291]
   Whom two invoke upon one chariot mounted, each for himself,
   He, O ye men, is Indra.
 [2003409]He, without whom men conquer not in battle, whom, warring,
    they invoke for help and succour;
   He, all this universe's type and image, who shakes what never
    shook, He, men, is Indra.
 [2003410]He who hath smitten, ere they know their danger, with his hurl-
    ed weapon many grievous sinners:
   Who pardons not his boldness who provokes him, who slays the
   Dasyu, He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003411]He who discovered in the fortieth autumn Sambara dwelling in
    the midst of mountains:
   Who slew the Dragon putting forth his vigour, the demon lying
    there, He, men, is Indra.
 [2003412]Who drank the juice poured at the seas of Order, subduing
   Sambara by superior prowess,
   Who hoarded food within the mountain's hollow wherein he
    grew in strength, He, men, is Indra.
 [2003413]Who, with seven guiding reins, the Bull, the mighty, set the
   Seven Rivers free to flow at pleasure;
   Who, thunder-armed, rent Rauhina in pieces when scaling
    heaven, He, O ye men, is Indra.
 [2003414]Heaven, even, and the earth bow down before him, before his
    very breath the mountains tremble.
   Known as the Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, the wielder
    of the bolt, He, men, is Indra.
 [2003415]Who aids with favour him who pours the Soma, and him who
    brews it, sacrificer, singer;
   Whose strength our prayer and offered Soma heighten, and this
    our gift, He, O ye men, is Indra.
 [2003416]Born, manifested in his Parents' bosom, He knoweth as a son
    the Highest Father.
   He who with vigorous energy assisted the companies of Gods,
   He, men, is Indra
 [2003417]Lord of Bay steeds, who loves the flowing Soma, He before
    whom all living creatures tremble.
   He who smote Sambara and slaughtered Sushna, He the Sole
   Hero, He, O men, is Indra.
 [2003418]Thou verily art true strong God who sendest wealth to the man
    who brews and pours libation. [p. 292]
   So may we evermore, thy friends, O Indra, address the synod
    with brave sons about us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXV

[2003501]To him, to him swift, strong, and high-exalted, I bring my song
    of praise as dainty viands;
   My thought to him resistless, meet for praises, prayers offered
    most devotedly to Indra. [p. 293]
 [2003502]To him I offer praise as choice refreshment, bring forth my song,
    with seemly laud besiege him.
   For Indra, Lord of olden time, the singers shall deck their hymns
    with heart and mind and spirit.
 [2003503]To him then with my lips my song of praises, excellent, winning
    heavenly light, I offer,
   To magnify with hymns of invocation and eulogies the Lord,
    most bounteous Giver.
 [2003504]Even for him I frame a laud--so fashions the wright a chariot
    for the man who needs it
   Songs for wise Indra hymned with invocation, a song composed
    with care and all-impelling.
 [2003505]So with my tongue I deck, to please that Indra, my hymn as't-
    were a horse, through love of glory,
   To reverence the Hero, bounteous Giver, famed far and wide,
    destroyer of the castles.
 [2003506]Even for him hath Tvashtar forged the thunder, most deftly
    wrought, celestial, for the battle.
   Wherewith he reached the vital parts of Vritra, striking--the
    vast, the mighty--with the striker,
 [2003507]As soon as, at libations of his mother, great Vishnu had drunk
    up the draught, he plundered.
   The dainty cates, the cooked mess; but One stronger transfixed
    the wild boar, shooting through the mountain.
 [2003508]To him, to Indra when he slew the Dragon, the Dames too,
   Consorts of the Gods, wove praises.
   The mighty heaven and earth hath he encompassed: thy great-
    ness heaven and earth, combined, exceed not.
 [2003509]Yea, of a truth, his magnitude surpasseth the magnitude of
    earth, mid-air and heaven.
   Indra whom all men praise, the Sovran Ruler, waxed in his
    home loud-voiced and strong for battle.
 [2003510]Through his own strength with bolt of thunder Indra smote
    piece-meal Vritra, drier up of waters.
   He let the floods go free, like cows imprisoned, for glory, with
    a heart inclined to bounty.
 [2003511]Through his resplendent power still stood the rivers when with
    his bolt on every side he stayed them. [p. 294]
   With lordly might favouring him who worshipped, he made a
    ford, victorious, for Turviti.
 [2003512]Vast, with thine ample power, with eager movement against this
   Vritra cast thy bolt of thunder.
   Rend thou his joints, as of an ox dissevered, with bolt oblique
    that floods of rain may follow.
 [2003513]Sing with new lauds his exploits wrought aforetime, the deeds
    of him, yea, him who moveth swiftly,
   When, hurling forth his weapons in the battle, he with impetuous
    wrath lays low the foemen.
 [2003514]When he, yea, he is born the firm-set mountains and the whole
    heaven and earth tremble in terror.
   May Nodhas ever lauding the protection of this dear Friend win
    straightway strength heroic.
 [2003515]Now unto him of these things hath been given what he, who
    rules alone o'er much, electeth.
   Indra helped Etasa, the Soma presser, contending in the chariot-
    race with Surya.
 [2003516]Thus to thee, Indra, yoker of bay coursers, the Gotamas have
    brought their prayers and praises.
   Bestow upon them thought, decked with all beauty. May he,
    enriched with prayer, come soon and early.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 295]

  

HYMN XXXVI

[2003601]With these my hymns I glorify that Indra who is alone to be
    invoked by mortals. [p. 296]
   The Lord, the Mighty One, of manly vigour, victorious, Hero,
    true, and full of wisdom.
 [2003602]Our ancient sires, Navagvas, sages seven, while urging him to
    show his might, extolled him,
   Dweller on heights, swift smiting down opponents, guileless in
    word, and in his thoughts most mighty.
 [2003603]We seek that Indra to obtain his riches that yield much food,
    and men, and store of heroes.
   O Lord of Bay Steeds, bring to make us joyful, celestial wealth
    abundant, undecaying.
 [2003604]Declare to us--if at thy hand aforetime the earlier singers have
    obtained good fortune
   What is thy share and portion, strong Subduer, Asura-slayer,
    rich, invoked of many?
 [2003605]He who for car-borne, thunder-wielding Indra, hath a hymn,
    craving deeply-piercing, fluent,
   Who sends a song effectual, firmly-grasping, and strength-
    bestowing, he comes near the mighty.
 [2003606]Strong of thyself! thou with this art hast shattered with thought-
    swift Parvata, him who waxed against thee;
   And, Mightiest! rager! boldly rent in pieces things that were
    firmly fixed and never shaken..
 [2003607]Him will we fit for you with new devotion, the strongest,
   Ancient One, in ancient manner.
   So way that Indra, boundless, faithful leader, conduct us o'er all
    places hard to traverse.
 [2003608]Thou for the people who oppress hast kindled the earthly firma-
    ment and that of heaven.
   With heat, O Bull, on every side consume them heat earth and
    flood for him who hates devotion:
 [2003609]Of all the heavenly folk, of earthly creatures, thou art the King,
   O God of splendid aspect.
   In thy right hand, O Indra, grasp the thunder: Eternal! thou
    destroyest all enchantments.
 [2003610]Give us confirmed prosperity, O Indra, vast and exhaustless for
    the foes' subduing.
   Strengthen therewith the Arya's hate and Dasa's; and let the
    arms of Nahushas be mighty.
 [2003611]Come with thy teams which bring all blessings, hither, disposer,
    much-invoked, exceeding holy! [p. 297]
   Come to me swiftly with these teams of coursers, these which
    no fiend, no God may stay or hinder.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XXXVII

[2003701]He, like a bull with sharpened horns, terrific, singly excites and
    agitates all the people.
   Then givest him who largely pours libation his wealth who pours
    not, for his own possession.
 [2003702]Thou verily, Indra, gavest help to Kutsa, willingly lending ear
    to him in battle.
   When, aiding Arjunneya, thou subduedst to him both Kuyava and
    the Dasa Sushna.
 [2003703]O Bold One, thou with all thine aids hast boldly helped Sudas
    whose offerings were accepted,
   Puru in winning land and slaying foemen, and Trasadasyu son
    of Purukutsa.
 [2003704]At the Gods' banquet, Hero-souled! with heroes, Lord of Bay
   Steeds, thou slewest many Vritras.
   Thou sentest in swift death to sleep the Dasyu, both Chumuri
    and Dhuni, for Dabhiti,
 [2003705]These were thy mighty powers that, Thunder-wielder! then
    swiftly crushedst nine-and ninety castles. [p. 298]
   Thou capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaught; thou slewest
   Namuchi, thou slewest Vritra.
 [2003706]Old are the blessings, Indra, which thou gavest Sudas the wor-
    shipperwho brought oblations.
   For thee, the strong I yoke thy strong bay horses: let them,
    approach our prayers and wealth, Most Mighty!
 [2003707]Give us not up, Lord of Bay Horses, victor, in this our time of-
    trouble, to the wicked.
   Deliver us with true and faithful succour: dear may we be to
    thee among the princes.
 [2003708]May we men, Bounteous Lord, the friends thou lovest, near i
    thee be joyful under thy protection.
   Fain to fulfil the wish of Atithigva, bow Turvasa, bow down,.
    the son of Yadu.
 [2003709]Swiftly, in truth, O Bounteous Lord, about thee men skilled im
    hymning sing their songs and praises.
   Elect us shares of their love and friendship who by their calls on,
    thee despoiled the niggards.
 [2003710]Thine are these Lauds, O manliest of heroes, Lauds which revert
    to us and give us riches.
   Favour these, Indra, when they strike the foemen, as Friend and
   Hero and the heroes' helper.
 [2003711]Now, lauded for thine aid, heroic Indra, sped by our prayer,,
    wax mighty in thy body.
   To us apportion wealth and habitations. Ye Gods, protect us-
    evermore with blessings.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 299.]

  

HYMN XXXVIII

[2003801]Come, we have pressed the juice for thee. O Indra, drink the
   Soma here.
   Sit thou on this my sacred grass.
 [2003802]O Indra, let thy long-maned Bays, yoked by prayer, bring thee
    hitherward.
   Give ear and listen to our prayers.
 [2003803]We, Soma-bearing Brahmans, call thee, Soma-drinker, with thy
    friend,
   We, Indra, bringing juice expressed.
 [2003804]Indra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their
    lauds,
   Indra the choirs have glorified.
 [2003805]Indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and word-yoked:
    car,
   Indra, the golden, Thunder-armed.
 [2003806]Indra hath raised the Sun aloft in heaven that he may see afar.
   He burst the mountain for the kine.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 300]

  

HYMN XXXIX

[2003901]For you, from every side, we call Indra away from other men:
   Ours, and none others,' let him be.
 [2003902]In Soma's ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and realms of
    light.
   When he cleft Vala limb from limb.
 [2003903]Showing the hidden cows he draye them forth for the Angirases,
   And Vala he cast headlong down.
 [2003904]By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven established and
    secured,
   Firm and immovable from their place.
 [2003900]5. Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of waters:
    bright.
   Have shone the drops that gladden thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XL

[2004001]Mayest thou verily be seen coming by fearless Indra's side:
   Both joyous: equal in your sheen.
 [2004002]With Indra's well-beloved hosts, the blameless, hastening to
    heaven,
   The sacrificer cries aloud.
 [2004003]Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state of babes
    unborn,
   Assuming sacrificial name.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 301]

  

HYMN XLI

[2004101]With bones of Dadhyach for his arms, Indra, resistless in attack,
   Struck nine-and-ninety Vritras dead,
 [2004102]He, searching for the horse's head, removed among the moun-
    tains, found
   At Saryanavan what he sought.
 [2004103]Then verily they recognized the essential form of Tvashtar's Bull.
   Here in the mansion of the Moon.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLII

[2004201]From Indra have I measured an eight-footed and nine-cornered.
    song, [p. 302]
   Delicate, faithful to the Law.
 [2004202]Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy fearful
    roar,
   What time thou smotest Dasyus dead.
 [2004203]Arising in thy might thy jaws thou shookest, Indra, having
    quaffed
   The Soma poured into the bowls.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIII

[2004301]Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes who press
    around,
   And bring the wealth for which we long;
 [2004302]O Indra, that which is concealed in firm strong place
    precipitous:
   Bring us the wealth for which we long:
 [2004303]Great riches which the world of men shall recognize as sent by
    thee:
   Bring us the wealth for which we long,

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLIV

[2004401]Praise Indra whom our songs must laud, great Sovran of man-
    kind, the Chief
   Most liberal who controlleth men.
 [2004402]In whom the hymns of praise delight, and all the glory-giving
    songs,
   Like the flood's longing for the sea. [p. 303]
 [2004403]Him I invite with eulogy, best King, effective in the fight,
   Strong for the gain of mighty spoil.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLV

[2004501]This is thine own. Thou drawest near, as the dove turneth to his
    mate.
   Thou carest too for this our prayer.
 [2004502]O Hero, Lord of Bounties, praised in hymns, may power and
    pleasantness
   Be his who signs the laud to thee.
 [2004503]Lord of a Hundred Powers, stand up to lend us succour in this
    fight:
   In others too let us agree.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVI

[2004601]Him who advances men to wealth, sends light to lead them in
    their wars,
   And quells their foemen in the fray:
 [2004602]May he, the saviour much-invoked, may Indra bear us in a ship
   Safely beyond all enemies.
 [2004603]As such, O Indra, honour us with wealth and treasure: further
    us,
   And lead us to felicity.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XLVII

[2004701]We make this Indra show his strength, to strike the mighty
   Vritra dead:
   A vigorous Hero shall he be.
 [2004702]Indra was made for giving, most powerful, friendly in carouse,
   Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song. [p. 304]
 [2004703]By song, as 'twere, the mighty bolt, which none may parry, was
    prepared:
   Lofty, invincible he grew.
 [2004710]They who stand round him as he moves harness the bright, the
    ruddy Steed:
   The lights are shining in the sky.
 [2004711]They yoke on both sides to the car the two bay coursers dear to
    him,
   Bold, tawny, bearers of the Chief.
 [2004712]Thou, making light where no light was, and form, O Men r
    where no form was,
   Wast born together with the Dawns,
 [2004713]His bright rays bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all that=
    is,
   Surya, that every one may see.
 [2004714]The constellations pass away, like thieves, together with their-
    beams,
   Before the all-beholding Sun.
 [2004715]His herald rays are seen afar refulgent o'er the world of men,
   Like fiery flames that burn and blaze.
 [2004716]Swift and all-beautiful art thou, O Surya, maker of the light.
   Illuming all the radiant realm.
 [2004717]Thou guest to the troops of Gods, thou comest hither to man-
    kind,
   Hither, all light for us to see.
 [2004718]Thou with that eye of thine wherewith thou seest, brilliant.
   Varuna,
   The active one throughout mankind.
 [2004719]Pervadest heaven and wide mid-air, melting the days out with.
    thy beams,
   Sun, seeing all things that have birth.
 [2004720]Seven bay steeds, harnessed to thy car, bear thee, O.thou far-
    seeing One,
   God, Surya, thee with radiant hair.
 [2004721]Surya hath yoked the seven bright mares, the daughters of the
    car: With these,
   His own dear team, he travelleth.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 305]

  

HYMN XLVIII

[2004801]The swiftly-moving songs of praise pour on thee streams of vital
    strength
   As mother cows refresh the calf.
 [2004802]Swift move the bright ones while they blend the Milk with vital
    vigour, as
   A dame her infant with her heart.
 [2004803]Fair hymns bring glory to the Strong, and Indra-vigour; unto,
    me
   Fatness and milk and length of days.
 [2004804]This brindled Bull hath come and sat before the Mother in the
    east,
   Advancing to the Father Heaven.
 [2004805]As expiration from breath she moves along the lucid spheres:
   The Bull shines forth through all the sky.
 [2004806]Song is bestowed upon the Bird. It reigns supreme throughout
    thirty realms
   Throughout the days at break of morn.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 306]

  

HYMN XLIX

[2004901]When voices, fain to win mid-air, ascended to the Mighty One,
   The vigorous God was filled with joy.
 [2004902]Praise with the voice the Mighty, praise the awful with the voice:
    in heaven
   He, the most bounteous, hath been glad.
 [2004903]Praise with the voice the Mighty: he rules in each realm. In
    transport he
   Hath set upon the sacred grass.
 [2004904]As cows low to their calf in stalls, so with our songs we glorify
   This Indra, even your wondrous God who checks attack, who
    joys in the delightful juice.
 [2004905]Celestial, bounteous Giver, God, with power and might, rich,
    mountain-like, in precious things.
   Him soon we see for foodful booty rich in kine, brought
    hundredfold and thousandfold.
 [2004906]I crave of thee that hero strength--that thou mayst first regard
    this prayer
   Wherewith thou helpest Bhrigu and the Yatis and Praskanva
    when the prize was staked.
 [2004907]Wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea--Indra, that
    manly strength of thine.
   For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom the worlds
    have cried aloud.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 307]

  

HYMN L

[2005001]What newest of imploring hymns shall, then, the zealous mortal
    sing?
   For have not they who laud his might and Indra-power won for
    themselves the light of heaven?
 [2005002]When shall they keep the Law and praise thee mid the Gods?
   Who counts as Rishi and as sage?
   When wilt thou ever, Indra, Bounteous Lord, come nigh to
    presser's or to praiser's call?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LI

[2005101]For you will I sing Indra's praise who gives good gifts as well we
    know;
   Praise of the Bounteous Lord who, rich in treasure, aids his
    singers with wealth thousandfold.
 [2005102]As with a hundred hosts he rushes boldly on, and for the offerer
    slays his foes.
   As from a mountain flow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts
    who feedeth many a one.
 [2005103]Sakra I praise, for victory, far-famed, exceeding bountiful.
   Who gives, as 'twere in thousands, precious wealth to him who
    sheds the juice and worships him.
 [2005104]Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this Indra's
    mighty arms in war.
   He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with springs, when
    juices poured have gladdened him.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 308]

  

HYMN LII

[2005201]We compass thee like waters, we whose grass is trimmed and
   Soma pressed.
   Here where the filter pours its stream thy worshipper round
    thee, O Vritra-slayer, sit.
 [2005202]Men, Vasu! by the Soma, with lauds call thee to the foremost
    place.
   When comest thou athirst unto the juice as home, O Indra, like
    a bellowing bull?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIII

[2005301]Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking beside the
    flowing juice?
   This is the fair-cheeked God who, joying in the draught, breaks
    down the castles in his strength.
 [2005302]As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that way, mad with
    heat.
   None may restrain thee; yet come hither to the draught: thou
    movest mighty in thy power.
 [2005303]When he, the mighty, ne'er o'erthrown, stedfast, made ready for
    the fight.
   When Indra, Bounteous Lord, lists to his praiser's call, he will
    not stand aloof, but come.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIV

[2005401]Of one accord they made and formed for kingship Indra, the
   Hero who in all encounters overcometh,
   Most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, fierce and
    exceeding strong, stalwart and full of vigour.
 [2005402]Bards joined in song to Indra so that he might drink the Soma
    juice, [p. 309]
   The Lord of Light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid with
    power and with help he gives.
 [2005403]The holy sages form a ring, looking and singing to the Ram.
   Your very bright inciters, void of all deceit, are with the chan-
    ters nigh to hear.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LV

[2005501]Oft, oft I call that Indra, Maghavan the mighty, who evermore
    possesses power, ever resistless.
   Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, thunder
    armed, make all our pathways pleasant for us.
 [2005502]Indra, what joys as Lord of Light thou broughtest from the
   Asuras,
   Prosper therewith, O Maghavan, him who lauds that deed, and
    those whose grass is trimmed for thee.
 [2005503]The wasteless share of steeds and kine which, Indra, thou hast
    fast secured.
   Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and gives guerdon,
    not unto the churl.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LVI

[2005601]Indra, foe-slayer, hath been raised to joy and power by the men.
   Him, verily, we invocate in battles whether great or small: be
    he our aid in fights for spoil.
 [2005602]For, Hero, thou art like a host, art giver of abundant prey.
   Strengthening even the feeble, thou aidest the sacrificer, thou
    givest the worshipper ample wealth.
 [2005603]When war and battles are on foot, booty is laid before the bold. [p. 310]
   Yoke thou thy wildly rushing Bays. Whom wilt thou slay and
    whom enrich? Do thou, O Indra, make us rich,
 [2005604]He, righteous-hearted, at each time of rapture gives us herds of
    kine.
   Gather in both thy hands for us treasures of many hundred
    sorts. Sharpen thou us, and bring us wealth.
 [2005605]Refresh thee, Hero, with the juice outpoured for bounty and
    for strength.
   We know thee Lord of ample store, to thee have sent our heart's
    desires: be therefore our protector thou.
 [2005606]These people, Indra, keep for thee all that is worthy of thy
    choice.
   Discover thou, as Lord, the wealth of men who offer up no
    gifts: bring thou to us this wealth of theirs.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LVII

[2005701]As a good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of fair deeds.
   To our assistance day by day.
 [2005702]Come thou to our libations, drink of Soma, Soma-drinker thou!
   The rich One's rapture giveth kine.
 [2005703]So may we be acquainted with thine innermost benevolence:
   Neglect us not, come hitherward.
 [2005704]Drink for our help the Soma bright, vigilant, and exceeding
    strong,
   O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers.
 [2005705]O Satakratu, powers which thou mid the Five Races hast dis-
    played,
   These, Indra, do I claim of thee.
 [2005706]Indra, great glory hast thou gained. Win splendid fame which
    none may mar.
   We make thy might perpetual.
 [2005707]Come to us either from anear, or, Sakra, come from far away.
   Indra, wherever be thy home, come thence, O Caster of the
   Stone. [p. 311]
 [2005708]Verily Indra, conquering all, driveth even mighty fear away.
   For firm is he and swift to act.
 [2005709]Indra be gracious unto us: sin shall not reach us afterward,
   And good shall be before us still.
 [2005710]From all the regions of the world let Indra send security.
   The foe-subduer, swift to act.
 [2005714]We compass thee like waters, we whose grass in trimmed and
   Soma pressed.
   Here where the filter pours its stream thy worshippers round
    thee, O Vritra-slayer, sit.
 [2005715]Men, Vasu, by the Soma with lauds call thee to the foremost
    place.
   When comest thou athirst unto the juice as home, O Indra, like
    a bellowing bull?
 [2005716]Boldly, bold Hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the Kanvas'
    sake.
   O active Maghavan, with eager prayer we crave the yellow-hued
    with store of kine.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LVIII

[2005801]Turning, as 'twere, to meet the Sun, enjoy from Indra all good
    things.
   When he who will be born is born with power we look to
    treasures as our heritage.
 [2005802]Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties injure none.
   Good are the gifts which Indra gives.
   He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish: he turns his
    mind to granting boons. [p. 312]
 [2005803]Verily, Surya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou art great.
   As thou art great indeed thy greatness is admired: yea, verily,
    great art thou, O God.
 [2005804]Yea, Surya, thou art great in fame: thou evermore, O God,
    art great.
   By greatness thou art President of Gods, divine, far-spread,
    inviolable light.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LIX

[2005903]His portion is exceeding great, like a victorious soldier's spoil.
   Him who is Indra, Lord of Bays, no foes subdue. He gives the
   Soma-pourer strength.
 [2005904]Make for the holy Gods a hymn that is not mean, but well
    arranged and fair in form.
   Full many snares and bonds subdue not him who dwells with
   Indra through his sacrifice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LX

[2006001]For so thou art the hero's Friend, a Warrior too art thou, and
    strong:
   So may thy heart be won to us.
 [2006002]So hath the offering; wealthiest Lord, been paid by all the
    worshippers:
   So dwell thou, Indra, even with me.
 [2006003]Be not thou, like a slothful priest, O Lord of wealth and spoil:
    rejoice.
   In the pressed Soma blent with milk.
 [2006004]So also is his excellence, great copious, rich in cattle, like
   A ripe branch to the worshipper. [p. 313]
 [2006005]For verily thy mighty powers, Indra, are saving helps at once
   Unto a worshipper like me.
 [2006006]So are his lovely gifts: let laud be said and praise to Indra sung.
   That he may drink the Soma juice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXI

[2006101]We sing this strong and wild delight of thine which conquers in
    the fray,
   Which, Caster of the Stone, gives room and shine like gold.
 [2006102]Wherewith thou also foundest lights for Ayu and for Manu's
    sake:
   Now joying in!!this sacred grass thou beamest forth.
 [2006103]This day to singers of the hymn praise, as of old, this, might of
    thine.
   Win thou the waters, day by day, thralls of the strong.
 [2006104]Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him whom many
    laud:
   Invite the potent Indra with your songs of praise;
 [2006105]Whose lofty might--for doubly strong is he--supports the
    heaven and earth.
   And hills and plains and floods and light with manly power.
 [2006106]Such, praised by many! thou art King: alone thou smitest foe-
    men dead,
   To gain, O Indra, spoils of war and high renown.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXII

[2006205]To Indra sing a Saman, sing to the high Sage a lofty song,
   To him who keeps the Law, inspired and fain for praise.
 [2006206]Thou, Indra, art preeminent: thou gavest splendour to the Sun.
   Maker of all things, thou art mighty and All-God. [p. 314]
 [2006207]Radiant with light thou wentest to the sky, the luminous realms:
    of heaven.
   The Gods, O Indra, strove to win thee for their friend.
 [2006208]Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him whom many
    laud:
   Invite the potent Indra with your songs of praise;
 [2006209]Whose lofty might--for doubly strong is he--supports the
    heaven and earth,
   And hills and plains and floods and light with manly power.
 [2006210]Such, praised by many! thou art King. Alone thou smitest foe-
    men dead,
   To gain, O Indra, spoils of war and high renown.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIII

[2006301]We will, with Indra, and all Gods to aid us, bring these existing.
    worlds into subjection.
   Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring, let Indra form to-
    gether with the Adityas.
 [2006302]With the Adityas with the band of Maruts, may Indra be pro-
    tector of our bodies;
   As when the Gods came, after they had slaughtered the Asuras,.
    keeping safe their godlike nature,
 [2006303]Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, and looked!
    about them on their vigorous God-head.
   With this may we obtain strength God-appointed, and brave
    sons gladden us through a hundred winters.
 [2006304]He who alone bestoweth might on mortal man who offereth
    gifts,
   The ruler of resistless power, is Indra, sure.
 [2006305]When will he trample like a weed the man who hath no gift for
    him?
   When verily will Indra hear our songs of praise?
 [2006306]He who with Soma juice prepared among the many harbours.
    thee,
   Verily Indra gains thereby tremendous might. [p. 315]
 [2006307]Joy, mightiest Indra, known and marked, sprung most from
   Soma draughts, wherewith
   Thou smitest down the greedy fiend, for that we pray.
 [2006308]Wherewith thou helpest Adhrigu, the great Dasagva, and the
   God
   Who stirs the sunlight, and Sea, for that we pray.
 [2006309]Wherewith thou dravest forth like cars Sindhu and all the
    mighty floods.
   To go the way ordained by Law, for that we pray.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXIV

[2006401]Come unto us, O Indra, dear, still conquering, unconcealable,
   Vast as a mountain spread on all sides, Lord of heaven.
 [2006402]O truthful Soma-drinker, thou art mightier than both the
    worlds.
   Thou strengthenest him who pours libation, Lord of heaven.
 [2006403]For thou art, he, O Indra, who stormest all castles of the foe,
   Slayer of Dasyus, man's supporter, Lord of heaven.
 [2006404]O ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice what gladdens
    most.
   So is the Hero praised who ever prospers us.
 [2006405]Indra whom tawny coursers bear, praise such a thine,.
    preeminent
   None by his power or by his goodness hath attained
 [2006406]We seeking glory, have invoked this Master of all power and'
    might.
   Who must be glorified by constant sacrifice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXV

[2006501]Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends! the Hero who deserves
    the laud,
   Him who with none to aid o'ercomes all tribes of men. [p. 316]
 [2006502]To him who wins the kine, who keeps no cattle back, celestial
   God,
   Speak wondrous speech more sweet than butter and than mead.
 [2006503]Whose hero powers are measureless, whose bounty ne'er may be
    surpassed,
   Whose liberality, like light, is over all.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVI

[2006601]As Vyasva did, praise Indra, praise the strong unfluctuating
    guide.
   Who gives the foe's possessions to the worshipper.
 [2006602]Now, son of Vyasva, praise thou him who to the tenth time still
    is new.
   The very wise, whom living men must glorify.
 [2006603]Thou knowest, Indra, thunder-armed, how to avoid destructive
   Powers,
   As one secure from pitfalls each succeeding day.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXVII

[2006701]The pourer of oblations gains the home of wealth pouring his
    gift conciliates hostilities, yea, the hostilities of Gods.
   Pouring he strives, unchecked and strong, to win him riches
    thousandfold.
   Indra gives lasting wealth to him who pours forth gifts; yea,
    wealth he gives that long shall last.
 [2006702]Ne'er may those manly deeds of yours for us grow old, never
    may your bright glories fall into decay, never before your
    time decay. [p. 317]
   What deed of yours, new every age, wondrous, surpassing man,.
    rings forth,
   Whatever, Maruts may be difficult to gain grant us whate'er is
    hard to win.
 [2006703]I think on Agni, Hotar, the munificent, the gracious Son of
    strength, who knoweth all that live, as holy Sage who knoweth
    all.
   Lord of fair rites, a God with form erected turning to the Gods.
   He, when the flame hath sprung forth from the holy oil, the
    offered fatness, longeth for it with his glow.
 [2006704]Busied with sacrifice, with spotted deer and spears, gleaming.
    upon your way with ornaments, yea, our friends,
   Sitting on sacred grass, ye sons of Bharata, drink Soma from
    the Potar's bowl, O Men of heaven.
 [2006705]Bring the Gods hither, Sage, and offer sacrifice. At the three
    altars seat thee willingly .O Priest.
   Accept for thy delight the proffered Soma mead: drink from
    the Kindler's bowl and sate thee with thy share.
 [2006706]This is the strengthener of thy body's manly might: strength,.
    victory for all time are laid within thine arms.
   Pressed for thee, Maghavan, it is offered unto thee: drink from
    the chalice of this Brahman, drink thy fill.
 [2006707]Him whom of old I called on, him I call on now. He is to be
    invoked: his name is He who Gives.
   Here brought by priests in Soma mead. Granter of Wealth,
    drink Soma with the Seasons from the Hotar's Cup.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 318]

  

HYMN LXVIII

[2006804]Go to the wise unconquered One, ask thou of Indra, skilled in
    song,
   Him who is better than thy friends.
 [2006805]Whether the men who mock us say, Depart unto another place,
   Ye who serve Indra and none else;
 [2006806]Or whether, God of wondrous deeds, all our true people call us
    blest,
   Still may we dwell in Indra's care.
 [2006807]Unto the swift One bring the swift, man-cheering, grace of
    sacrifice.
   That to the Friend gives wings and joy.
 [2006808]Thou, Satakratu, drankest this and wast the Vritras' slayer;
    thou.
   Helpest the warrior in the fray.
 [2006809]We strengthen, Satakratu, thee, yea, thee the powerfull in fight,
   That, Indra, we may win us wealth.
 [2006810]To him the mighty stream of wealth, prompt Friend of him who
    pours the juice,
   Yea, to this Indra sing your song.
 [2006841]O come ye hither, sit ye down: to Indra sing ye forth your
    song,
   Companions, bringing hymns of praise.
 [2006812]To him the richest of the rich, the Lord of treasures excellent,
   Indra, with Soma juice outpoured.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 319]

  

HYMN LXIX

[2006901]May he stand by us in our need and in abundance for our
    wealth:
   With riches may he come to us;
 [2006902]Whose pair of tawny horses yoked in battles foemen challenge
    not:
   To him, to Indra, sing your song.
 [2006903]Nigh to the Soma-drinker come, for his enjoyment, these bright
    drops,
   The Somas mingled with the curd.
 [2006904]Thou, grown at once to perfect strength, wast born to drink the
   Soma juice, strong Indra, for preeminence.
 [2006905]O Indra, lover of the song, may these quick Somas enter thee:
   May they bring bliss to thee the Sage.
 [2006900]6. O Lord of Hundred Powers, our chants of praise and lauds have
    strengthened thee:
   So strengthen thee the songs we sing!
 [2006907]Indra, whose succour never fails, accept this treasure thousand-
    fold,
   Wherein all manly powers abide.
 [2006908]O Indra, thou who lovest song, let no man hurt our bodies,
    keep.
   Slaughter far from us, for thou canst.
 [2006912]Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state of babes
    urborn,
   Taking their sacrificial name.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 320]

  

HYMN LXX

[2007001]Thou, Indra, with the Tempest-Gods, the breakers down of
    what is firm,
   Foundest the kine even in the cave.
 [2007002]Worshipping even as they list, singers laud him who findeth
    wealth,
   The far-renowned, the mighty One.
 [2007003]Then, faring on by Indra's side, the fearless, let thyself be seen,.
   Both gracious and in splendour peers.
 [2007004]With Indra's well-beloved hosts, the blameless, tending heaven-
    ward,
   The sacrificer cries aloud.
 [2007005]Come from this place, O wanderer, or downward from the light
    of heaven!
   Our songs of praise all yearn for this.
 [2007006]Or Indra we implore for help from here, from heaven above the
    earth,
   Or from the spacious firmament.
 [2007007]Indra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their
    lauds,
   Indra the choirs have glorified.
 [2007008]Indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and word-yoked
    car,
   Indra the golden, Thunder-armed.
 [2007009]Indra hath raisedjthe Sun on high in heaven, that he may see
    afar:
   He burst the mountain for the kine.
 [2007010]Help us, O Indra, in the frays, yea, frays where thousand spoils
    are gained,
   With awful aids, O awful One.
 [2007011]In mighty battle we invoke, Indra, Indra in lesser fight,
   The friend who bends his bolt at fiends.
 [2007012]Unclose, our manly Hero, thou for ever bounteous, yonder
    cloud,
   For us, thou irresistible.
 [2007013]Still higher, at each strain of mine, thunder-armed Indra's,
    praises rise:
   I find no laud worthy of him. [p. 321]
 [2007014]Even as the bull drives on the herds, he drives the people with
    his might,
   The ruler irresistible:
 [2007015]Indra who rules with single sway men, riches, and the fivefold
    race.
   Of those who dwell upon the earth.
 [2007016]For your sake from each side we call Indra away from other
    men:
   Ours, and none others', may he be.
 [2007017]Indra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor's ever-conquer-
    ing wealth,
   Most excellent, to be our aid;
 [2007018]By means of which we may repel our foes in battle hand to
    hand.
   By thee assisted with the car.
 [2007019]Aided by thee, the Thunder-armed, Indra; may we lit up the
    bolt,
   And conquer all our foes in fight.
 [2007020]With thee, O Indra, for ally, with missile-darting heroes may
   We conquer our embattled foes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 322]

  

HYMN LXXI

[2007101]Mighty is Indra, yea, supreme; greatness becomes the
   Thunderer!
   Wide as the heaven extends his power;
 [2007102]Which aideth those to win them sons who come as heroes to the
    fight,
   Or singers loving holy thoughts.
 [2007103]His belly drinking deepest draughts of Soma like an ocean
    swells,
   Like wide streams from the cope of heaven.
 [2007107]Come, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all the Soma
    feasts,
   Protector, mighty in thy strength.
 [2007108]To Indra pour ye forth the juice, the active gladdening juice, to
    him
   The gladdening omnific God.
 [2007109]O Lord of all men, fair of cheek, rejoice thee in the gladdening
    buds,
   Present at these drink-offerings.
 [2007110]Songs have outpoured themselves to thee, Indra, the strong, the
    guardian Lord.
   And raised themselves unsatisfied.
 [2007111]Send to us bounty manifold, O Indra, worthy of our wish,
   For power supreme is only thine.
 [2007112]O Indra, stimulate thereto us emulously fain for wealth.
   And glorious, O most splendid One.
 [2007113]Give, Indra, wide and lofty fame, wealthy in cattle and in
    strength,
   Lasting our life-time, failing not.
 [2007114]Grant us high fame, O Indra, grant riches bestowing thousands,
    those
   Fair fruits of earth borne home in wains.
 [2007115]Praising with songs the praise-worthy who cometh to our aid,
    we call
   Indra, the Treasure-Lord of wealth.
 [2007116]To lofty Indra, dweller by each libation, the pious man Sings
    forth aloud a strengthening hymn.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 323]

  

HYMN LXXII

[2007201]In all libations men with hero spirit urge thee, Universal, One,
    each seeking several light, each fain to win the light apart.
   Thee, furthering like a ship, will we set to the chariot pole of
    strength,
   As men who win with sacrifices Indra's thought, men who win
   Indra with their lauds.
 [2007202]Couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, pouring their
    presents forth to win a stall of kine, pouring gifts, Indra,
    seeking thee.
   When two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest face to
    face in war,
   Thou showest Indra, then the bolt thy constant friend, the bull
    that ever waits on thee,
 [2007203]Also this morn may he be well inclined to us, mark at our call
    our offerings and our song of praise, our call that we may win
    the light.
   As thou, O Indra Thunder-armed, wilt, as the Strong One,
    slay the foe,
   Listen, thou to the prayer of me a later sage, hear thou a later
    sage's prayer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXIII

[2007301]All these libations are for thee, O Hero: to thee I offer these
    my prayers that strengthen.
   Ever, in every place, must men invoke thee. [p. 324]
 [2007302]Never do men attain, O Wonder-worker, thy greatness, Mighty
   One who must be lauded,
   Nor, Indra, thine heroic power and bounty.
 [2007303]Bring to the Wise, the Great who waxeth mighty your offerings
    and make ready your devotion:
   To many clans he goeth, man's Controller.
 [2007304]When, with the Princes, Maghavan, famed of old, comes nigh
    the thunderbolt of gold and the Controller's car
   Which his two tawny coursers draw, then Indra is the Sovran
   Lord of power whose fame spreads far and wide.
 [2007305]With him too is this rain of his that comes like herds: Indra
    throws drops of moisture on his yellow beard.
   When the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant place, and
    stirs the worshipper as the wind disturbs the wood.
 [2007306]We laud and praise his several deeds of valour who, fatherlike,.
    with power hath made us stronger;
   Who with his voice slew many thousand wicked ones who spake
    in varied manner with contemptuous cries.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXIV

[2007401]O Soma-drinker, ever true, utterly hopeless though we be,
   Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
   In thousands, O most wealthy One.
 [2007402]O Lord of strength, whose jaws are strong, great deeds are thine,
    the powerful:
   Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
   In thousands, O most wealthy One.
 [2007403]Lull thou asleep, to wake no more, the pair who on each other
    look:
   Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
   In thousands, O most wealthy One. [p. 325]
 [2007404]Hero, let hostile spirits sleep, and every gentler Genius wake:
   Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
   In thousands, O most wealthy One.
 [2007405]Destroy this ass, O Indra, who in tones discordant brays to
    thee:
   Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
   In thousands, O most wealthy One.
 [2007406]Far distant on the forest fall the tempest in a circling course;
   Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses and of kine,
   In thousands, O most wealthy One.
 [2007407]Slay each reviler and destroy him who in secret injures us:
   Do thou, O Indra, give us thope of beauteous horses and of
    kine,
   In thousands, O most wealthy One.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXV

[2007501]Couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, pouring their
    presents forth to win a stall of king pouring gifts, Indra,
    seeking thee.
   When two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest face to
    face in war,
   Thou showest, Indra, then the bolt, thy constant friend, the bull
    that ever waits on thee.
 [2007502]This thine heroic power full well the people knew, wherewith
    thou brakest down, Indra, autumnal forts, brakest them down
    with conquering might. [p. 326]
   Thou hast chastised. O Indra, Lord of strength, the man who
    worships not,
   And made thine own this great earth and these water-floods,
    with joyous heart these water-floods.
 [2007503]And they have bruited far this hero might, when thou, O Strong
   One, in thy joy helpest thy suppliants who sought to win thee
    for their Friend.
   Their battle-cry thou madest sound victorious in the shocks of
    war.
   One stream after another have they gained from thee, eager for
    glory have they gained.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXVI

[2007601]As sits the young bird on the tree rejoicing, ye, swift pair, have
    been roused by clear laudation,
   Whose Hoter-priest through many days is Indra, earth's
    guardian, friend of men, the best of heroes.
 [2007602]May we, when this Dawn and the next dance hither, be thy best
    servants, most heroic Hero!
   Let the victorious car with triple splendour bring hitherward the
    hundred chiefs with Kutsa.
 [2007603]What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, Indra?
   Speed to our doors, our songs, for thou art mighty.
   Why comest thou to me, what gift attracts thee?
   Fain would I bring thee food most meet to offer.
 [2007604]Indra, what fame hath one like thee mid heroes? With what
    plan wilt thou act? Why hast thou sought us?
   As a true friend, Wide-Strider! to sustain us, since food absorbs
    the thought of each among us.
 [2007605]Speed happily those, as Surya ends his journey, who meet his
    wish as bridegrooms meet their spouses;
   Men who support, O Indra strong by nature, with food the
    many songs that tell thy praises. [p. 327]
 [2007606]Thine are two measures, Indra, wide, well-meted, heaven for thy
    majesty, earth for thy wisdom.
   Here for thy choice are Somas mixed with butter: may the
    sweet meath be pleasant for thy drinking.
 [2007607]They have poured out a bowl to him, to Indra, full of sweet
    juice, for faithful is his bounty.
   O'er earth's expanse hath he grown great by wisdom, the friend
    of man, and by heroic exploits.
 [2007608]Indra hath conquered in his wars the mighty: men strive in
    multitudes to win his friendship.
   Ascend thy chariot as it were in battle, which thou shalt drive
    to us with gracious favour,

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXVII

[2007701]Impetuous, true, let Maghavan come hither, and let his tawny
    coursers speed to reach us.
   For him have we pressed juice exceeding potent: here, praised
    with song, let him effect his visit.
 [2007702]Unyoke, as at thy journey's end, O Hero, to gladden thee to-day
    at this libation.
   Like Usana, the priest a laud shall utter, a hymn to thee, the
   Lord Divine, who markest. [p. 328]
 [2007703]When the Bull quaffing praises our libation, as a sage paying
    holy rites in secret,
   Seven singers here from heaven hath he begotten, who e'en by
    day have wrought their works while singing.
 [2007704]When heaven's fair light by hymns was made apparent. (they
    made great splendour shine at break of morning),
   He with his succour, best of heroes, scattered the blinding dark-
    ness so that men saw clearly.
 [2007705]Indra, impetuous One, hath waxed immensely: he with his
    vastness hath filled earth and heaven.
   E'en beyond this his majesty extendeth who hath exceeded all
    the worlds in greatness,
 [2007706]Sakra who knoweth well all human actions hath with his eager
    friends let loose the waters.
   They with their songs cleft e'en the mountain open, and willingly
    disclosed the stall of cattle.
 [2007707]He smote away the flood's obstructer Vritra: Earth conscious
    lent her aid to speed thy thunder.
   Thou sentest forth the waters of the ocean as Lord through
    power and might, O daring Hero.
 [2007708]When, Much-invoked! the waters' rock thou deftest, Sarama
    showed herself and went before thee.
   Hymned by Angirases, bursting the cowstalls, thou foundest
    ample strength for us as leader.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 329]

  

HYMN LXXVIII

[2007801]Sing this, what time the juice is pressed, to him your Hero
    much-invoked,
   To please him as a mighty, Bull.
 [2007802]He, excellent, withholdeth not his gift of power and wealth in
    kine,
   When he hath listened to our songs.
 [2007803]May he with might disclose for us the cows' stall, whosesoe'er
    it be,
   To which the Dasyu-slayer goes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXIX

[2007901]O Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons.
   Guide us, O Much-invoked, on this our foray: may we, living,
    still enjoy the light.
 [2007902]Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent, unhallowed,
    tread us to the ground.
   With thine assistance, Hero! may we pass through all the waters
    that are rushing down.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXX

[2008001]Bring us, O Indra, name and fame, enriching, mightiest,
    excellent,
   Wherewith, O wondrous God, fair-cheeked and thunder-armed,
    thou hast filled full this earth and heaven.
 [2008002]We call on thee, O King, mighty among the Gods, ruler of men,
    to succour us,
   All that is weak in us, excellent God, make firm: make our foes
    easy to subdue.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 330]

  

HYMN LXXXI

[2008101]O Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were:
    thine
   No, not a hundred suns could match thee at thy birth, not, both,
    the worlds, O Thunderer.
 [2008102]Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero needs with might, yea, all+
    with strength, O Strongest One.
   Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, O Thunderer, with)
    wondrous aids.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXII

[2008201]If I, O Indra, were the lord of riches ample as thine own,
   I should support the singer, God who scatterest wealth! and!
    not abandon him to woe.
 [2008202]Each day would I enrich the man who sang my praise, in what-
    soever place he were.
   No kinship is there better, Maghavan, than thine: a father even)
    is no more.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXIII

[2008301]O Indra, grant a happy home, a triple refuge, triply strong.
   Bestow a dwelling-place on the rich lords and me, and keep thy
    dart afar from these.
 [2008302]They who with minds intent on spoil subdue the foe, boldly
    attack and smite him down.
   From these, O Indra, Bounteous Lord who lovest song, be
    closest guardian of our lives.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 331]

  

HYMN LXXXIV

[2008401]O Indra marvellously bright, come, these libations long for thee,
   Thus by fine fingers purified.
 [2008402]Urged by the holy singer, sped by song, come, Indra, to the
    prayers.
   Of the libation-pouring priest.
 [2008403]Approach, O Indra, hasting thee, Lord of Bay Horses, to the
    prayers:
   Take pleasure in the juice we pour.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXV

[2008501]Glorify naught besides, O friends; so shall no sorrow trouble
    you.
   Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your
    lauds repeatedly:
 [2008502]Even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men's con-
    queror, bounteous like a cow;
   Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to both sides
    most munificent.
 [2008503]Although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to obtain thine
    aid.
   Be this our prayer, addressed, O Indra, unto thee, thine exalta-
    tion every day.
 [2008504]Those skilled in song, O Maghavan, among these men o'ercome
    with might the foeman's songs,
   Come hither, bring us strength in many a varied form most near
    that it may succour us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXVI

[2008601]Those who are yoked by prayer with prayer I harness, the two.
    fleet friendly Bays who joy together. [p. 332]
   Mounting thy firm and easy car, O Indra, wise and all-knowing
    come thou to the Soma.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN LXXXVII

[2008701]Priests, offer to the Lord of all the people the milked-out stalk
    of Soma, radiant-coloured.
   No wild bull knows his drinking-place like Indra who ever seeks
    him who hath pressed the Soma.
 [2008702]Thou dost desire to drink, each day that passes, the pleasant
    food which thou hast had aforetime.
   O Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the Soma set
    before thee.
 [2008703]Thou, newly-born, for strength didst drink the Soma; thy
    mother told thee of thy future greatness.
   O Indra, thou hast filled mid-air's wide region, and given the
   Gods by battle room and freedom.
 [2008704]When thou hast urged the arrogant to combat, proud in their
    strength of arm, we will subdue them.
   Or, Indra, when thou fightest girt by heroes, we in the glorious
    fray with thee will conquer.
 [2008705]I will declare the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent acts which
   Maghavan hath accomplished.
   When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, Soma became
    his own entire possession.
 [2008706]Thine is this world of flocks and herds around thee, which with
    the eye of Surya thou beholdest.
   Thou, Indra, art alone the Lord of cattle: may we enjoy the
    treasure which thou givest.
 [2008707]Ye twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, O
   Brihaspati, and thou, O Indra .
   Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you. Preserve
    us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 333]

  

HYMN LXXXVIII

[2008801]Him who with might hath propped earth's ends, who sitteth in
    threefold seat, Brihaspati, with thunder,
   Him of the pleasant tongue have ancient sages, deep thinking,.
    holy singers, set before them.
 [2008802]Wild in their course, in well-marked wise rejoicing were they,.
   Brihaspati, who pressed around us
   Preserve, Brihaspati, the stall uninjured,r,this company's raining.
    ever-moving birth-place.
 [2008803]Brihaspati, from thy remotest distance have they sat down who
    love the law eternal.
   For thee were dug wells springing from the mountain, which
    murmuring round about pour streams of sweetness.
 [2008804]Brihaspati, when first he had his being from mighty splendour in
    supremest heaven.
   Strong, with his sevenfold mouth, with noise of thunder, with
    his seven rays blew and dispersed the darkness.
 [2008805]With the loud-shouting band who sang his praises, with thunder,
    he destroyed malignant Vala.
   Brihaspati thundering drave forth the cattle, the lowing cows
    who make oblations ready.
 [2008806]Serve we with sacrifices, gifts, and homage even thus the Steer
    of all the Gods, the Father.
   Brihaspati, may we be lords of riches, with noble progeny and,
    store of heroes.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 334]

  

HYMN LXXXIX

[2008901]Even as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the laud to him
    with meet adornment.
   Quell with your voice the wicked's voice, O sages, Singer, make
   Indra rest beside the Soma.
 [2008902]Draw thy Friend to thee like a cow at milking: O singer, wake
    up Indra as a lover.
   Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel
    filled brimful with treasure.
 [2008903]Why, Maghavan, do they call thee bounteous Giver? Quicken
    me: thou, I hear, art he who quickens.
   Sakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us luck that finds
    great wealth, O Indra.
 [2008904]Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people, Indra,
    in the fray invoke thee.
   Him who brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade: with him
    who pours no juice he seeks not friendship.
 [2008905]Whoso with plenteous juice for him expresses strong Somas as
    much quickly-coming treasure,
   For him he everthrows in early morning his swift well-weapon-
    ed foes and slays the tyrant.
 [2008906]He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, who hath
    joined to ours his wishes
   Before him even afar the foe must tremble: low before him must
    bow all human glories.
 [2008907]With thy fierce bolt, O God invoked of many, drive to a distance
    from afar the foeman.
   O Indra, give us wealth in corn and cattle, and make the singer's
    prayer gain strength and riches.
 [2008908]Indra the swallower of strong libations with their thick residue,
    the potent Somas,
   He, Maghavan, will not restrict his bounty: he brings much
    wealth unto the Soma-presser.
 [2008909]Yea, by superior play he wins advantage when he, a gambler,
    piles his gains in season. [p. 335]
   Celestial-natured, he o'erwhelms with riches the devotee who
    keeps not back his money.
 [2008910]O much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with
    store of grain and cattle.
   May we allied, as first in rank, with princes,:obtain possessions
    by our own exertion
 [2008911]Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above and
    from below, from sinners.
   May Indra from the front and from the centre, as friend to
    friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XC

[2009001]Served with oblations, first-born, mountain-render, Angiras' Son,
   Brihaspati the holy.
   With twice-firm path, dwelling in light, our Father, roars loudly,
    as a bull, to earth and heaven.
 [2009002]Brihaspati who made for such a people wide room and verge
    when Gods were invocated--
   Slaying his foe he breaketh down their cattles, quelling his
    enemies and those who hate him.
 [2009003]Brihaspati in war hath won rich treasures, hath won, this God,
    the great stalls filled with cattle.
   Striving to win waters and light, resistless, Brihaspati with light-
    ning smites the foeman.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 336]

  

HYMN XCI

[2009101]This holy hymn sublime and seven-headed, sprung from eternal
   Law, our sire discovered.
   Ayasya, friend of all men, hath engendered the fourth hymn as
    he sang his laud to Indra.
 [2009102]Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyaus the
   Asura, those heroes,
   Angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice's
    holy statute.
 [2009103]Girt by his friends who cried with swanlike voices, bursting the
    stoney barriers of the prison,
   Brihaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, and uttered praise and.
    song when he had found them.
 [2009104]Apart from one, away from two above him, he draye the kine
    that stood in bonds of falsehood.
   Brihaspati, seeking light amid the darkness, draye forth the
    bright cows: three he made apparent.
 [2009105]When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, he cut off three
    from him who held the waters.
   Brihaspati discovered, while he thundered like Dyaus, the dawn,.
    the sun, the cow, the lightning.
 [2009106]As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft Vala through,.
    the guardian of the cattle.
   Seeking the milk-draught with sweat-shining comrades he stole:
    the Pani's kine and left him weeping.
 [2009107]He with bright faithful friends, winners of booty, hath rent the
    milker of the cows asunder.
   Brihaspati with wild boars strong and mighty sweating with heat
    hath gained a rich possession.
 [2009108]They, longing for the kine, with faithful spirit incited with their
    hymns the Lord of cattle.
   Brihaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades self-yoked,.
    averting shame from one another.
 [2009109]In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him who roareth.
    like a lion.
   May we in every fight where heroes conquer rejoice in strong.
   Brihaspati the victor.
 [2009110]When he had won him strength of every nature and gone to
    heaven and its most lofty mansions, [p. 337]
   Men praised Brihaspati the mighty, bringing the light within
    their mouths from sundry places.
 [2009111]Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigor: aid in your wonted
    manner e'en the humble.
   Let all our foes be turned and driven backward. Hear this, O
   Heaven and Earth, ye all-producers.
 [2009112]Indra with mighty strength hath cleft asunder the head of Arbuda
    the watery monster,
   Slain Ahi, and set free the Seven Rivers. O Heaven and Earth,
    with all the Gods, protect us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCII

[2009201]Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of the
    kine,
   The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave.
 [2009202]Hither his bay steeds have been sent, red steeds are on the sacred
    grass.
   Where we in concert sing our songs. [p. 338]
 [2009203]For Indra thunder-armed the kine have yielded mingled milk
    and meath.
   What time he found them in the vault.
 [2009204]When I and Indra amount on high up to the bright One's place
    and home,
   We, having drunk of meath, will reach his seat whose Friends
    are three-times-seven.
 [2009205]Sing, sing ye forth your songs of praise, ye Priyamedhas, sing
    your songs:
   Yea, let young children sing their lauds: as a strong castle praise
    ye him.
 [2009206]Now loudly let the viol sound, the lute send out its voice with
    might,
   Shrill be the music of the string. To Indra is the hymn upraised.
 [2009207]When hither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, easy to be
    milked,
   Seize quickly, as it bursts away, the Soma juice for Indra's
    drink.
 [2009208]Indra hath drunk; Agni hath drunk all Deities have drunk their
    fill.
   Here Varuna shall have his home, to whom the floods have sung
    aloud as mother-kine unto their calves.
 [2009209]Thou, Varuna, to whom belong the Seven Streams, art a glorious
   God.
   The waters flow into thy throat as'twere a pipe with ample
    mouth.
 [2009210]He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well-harnessed, to the
    worshipper,
   He, the swift guide, is that fair form thot loosed the horses near
    at hand.
 [2009211]Indra, the very mighty, holds his enemies in utter scorn.
   He, far away, and yet a child, cleft the cloud smitten by his
    voice.
 [2009212]He, yet a boy exceeding small, mounted his newly-fashioned car.
   He for his Mother and his Sire cooked the wild mighty buffalo.
 [2009213]Lord of the Home, with beauteous cheeks, ascend thy chariot
    wrought of gold.
   We will attend the heavenly One; the thousand-footed, red of
    hue, matchless, who blesses where he goes.
 [2009214]With reverence they come hitherward to him as to a sovran lord, [p. 339]
   That they may bring him near for this man's good success, to
    prosper and bestow his gifts.
 [2009215]The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the men of old,
   Of ancient custom, while they strewed the sacred grass and
    spread their sacrificial food.
 [2009216]He who as sovran Lord of men moves with his chariots
    unrestrained,
   The Vritra-slayer, queller of all fighting hosts, preeminent, is
    praised in song.
 [2009217]Honour that Indra, Puruhanman! for his aid, in whose sustain-
    ing hand of old.
   The splendid bolt of thunder was deposited, as the great Sun
    was set in heaven.
 [2009218]No one by deed attains to him who works and strengthens
    evermore:
   No, not by sacrifice, to Indra praised of all, resistless, daring,
    bold in might;
 [2009219]The potent Conqueror, invincible in war, him at whose birth
    the mighty ones,
   The kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, heavens,
    earths sent their loud voices out.
 [2009220]O Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were
    thine
   No, not a thousand suns could match thee at thy birth, not
    both the worlds, O Thunderer.
 [2009221]Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with might, yea, all
    with strength, O Strongest One.
   Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, O Thunderer, with
    wondrous aids.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 340]

  

HYMN XCIII

[2009301]May our hymns give thee great delight. Display thy bounty,
   Thunderer.
   Drive off the enemies of prayer.
 [2009302]Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no gifts.
   Might art thou:
   There is not one to equal thee.
 [2009303]Thou art the Lord of Soma pressed, Soma unpressed is also
    thine,
   Thou art the Sovran of the folk.
 [2009304]Swaying about the active Ones came nigh to Indra at his birth,
   And shared his great heroic might.
 [2009305]Based upon strength and victory and power, O Indra is thy
    birth.
   Thou, Mighty One, art strong indeed.
 [2009306]Thou art the Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread the
    firmament:
   Thou hast with might upheld the heavens.
 [2009307]Thou, Indra, bearest in thine arms the lightning that accords
    with thee,
   Whetting thy thunderbolt with might.
 [2009308]Thou, Indra, art pre-eminent over all creatures in thy strength:
   Thou hast pervaded every place.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 341]

  

HYMN XCIV

[2009401]May Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by holy Law is
    strong and active.
   The overcomer of all conquering forces with his great bull-like
    power that hath no limit.
 [2009402]Firm-seated is thy car, thy steeds are docile: thy hand, O King,
    holds, firmly grasped, the thunder.
   On thy fair path, O Lord of men, come quickly: we will increase
    thy power when thou hast drunken.
 [2009403]Let strong and mighty steeds who bear this mighty Indra, the
   Lord of men, whose arm wields thunder,
   Bring unto us, as shares of our banquet, the Bull of conquering
    might, of real vigour.
 [2009404]So like a bull thou rushest to the Lord who loves the trough,
    the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat.
   Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself: be for our profit
    as the Master of the wise.
 [2009405]May precious treasures come to us,-- so will I pray. Come to the
    votary's gift offered with beauteous laud.
   Thou art the Lord, as such sit on this holy grass: thy vessels
    are inviolate as Law commands.
 [2009406]Far went our earliest invocations of the Gods, and won us
    glories that can never be surpassed.
   They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice sink down in
    desolation, trembling with alarm.
 [2009407]So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose horses difficult to
    harness have been yoked.
   Here in advance man stand anear to offer gifts, by whom full
    many a work that brings reward is done.
 [2009408]He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they shook. Dyaus
    thundered forth and made the air's mid-region quake.
   He stays apart the two confronting bowls; he sings lauds in the
    potent Soma's joy when he hath drunk.
 [2009409]I bear this deftly-fashioned goad of thine wherewith thou,
   Maghavan, shalt break the strikers with the hoof. [p. 342]
   At the libation mayst thou be well satisfied. Partake the juice,
    partake the banquet, Bounteous Lord.
 [2009410]O Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with
    store of grain and cattle.
   May we allied, as first in rank, with princes, obtain possessions
    by our own exertions.
 [2009411]Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and
    from below, from sinners!
   May Indra from the front and from the centre, as friend to
    friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCV

[2009501]From the three jars the Great and Strong hath drunk drink blent
    with meal. With Vishnu hath he quaffed the flowing Soma
    juice, all that he would.
   That hath so heightened him the Great, the Vast, to do his
    mighty work.
   So may the God attend the God, true Indu Indra who is true.
 [2009502]Sing strength to Indra that shall set his chariot in the foremost
    place. [p. 343]
   Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war, be
    thou our great encourager. Let the weak bowstrings break
    upon the bows of feeble enemies.
 [2009503]Thou didst destroy the Dragon: thou sentest the rivers down to
    earth.
   Foeless, O Indra, wast thou born. Thou tendest well each
    choicest thing. Therefore we draw us close to thee. Let the
    weak bowstrings break upon the bows of feeble enemies.
 [2009504]Destroyed be all malignities and all our enemy's designs.
   Thy bolt thou castest at the foe, O Indra, who would smite us
    dead: thy liberal bounty gives us wealth. Let the weak bow-
    strings break upon the bows of feeble enemies.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCVI

[2009601]Taste this strong draught that gives thee vital vigour: with all
    thy chariot here unyoke thy coursers.
   Let not those other sacrificers stay thee, Indra: these juices shed
    for thee are ready.
 [2009602]Thine is the juice effused, thine are the juices yet to be pressed:
    our resonant songs invite thee.
   O Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, thou who
    knowest all, and drink the Soma.
 [2009603]Whoso, devoted to the God, effuses Soma for him with yearning
    heart and spirit,
   Never doth Indra give away his cattle: for him he makes the
    lovely Soma famous.
 [2009604]He looks with loving favour on the mortal who, like a rich man,
    pours for him the Soma.
   Maghavan in his bended arm supports him: he slays, unasked,
    the men who hate devotion.
 [2009605]We call on thee to come to us, desirous of booty, and of cattle,
    and of horses. [p. 344]
   For thy new love and favour are we present: let us invoke thee,
   Indra, as our welfare.
 [2009606]For life I set thee free by this oblation from the unknown
    decline and from consumption;
   Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from
    her, O Indra, thou and Agni.
 [2009607]Be his days ended, be he how departed, be he brought very near
    to death already,
   Out of Destruction's lap again I bring him, save him for life to
    last a hundred autumns.
 [2009608]With thousand-eyed oblation, hundred-autumned, bringing a
    hundred lives, have 1 restored him.
   That Indra for a hundred years may lead him safe to the farther
    shore of all misfortune.
 [2009609]Live waxing in thy strength a hundred autumns, live through a
    hundred springs, a hundred winters.
   Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Brihaspati, Savitar
    yield him for a hundred!
 [2009610]So have I found and rescued thee: thou hast returned with
    youth renewed.
   Whole in thy members! I have found whole sight and all thy
    life for thee.
 [2009611]May Agni yielding to our prayer, the Rakshas-killer, drive away.
   The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labouring womb.
 [2009612]Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of thy flesh,
   The malady of evil name that hath attacked thy babe and
    womb.
 [2009613]That which destroys the sinking germ, the settled, moving
    embryo,
   That which would kill the babe at birth, even this will we drive
    far away.
 [2009614]That which divides thy legs that it may lie between the married
    pair,
   That penetrates and licks thy side, even this will we exterminate.
 [2009615]What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, lover, or of
    lord,
   And would destroyed the progeny,--even this will we exter-
    minate.
 [2009616]That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived thee and
    lies down by thee, [p. 345]
   And will destroy thy progeny,--even this will we exterminate.
 [2009617]From both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both thine ears
    and from thy chin,
   Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive thy malady
    away.
 [2009618]From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast-bones
    and from the spine,
   From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy malady away.
 [2009619]From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, from the
    heart,
   From kidneys, liver and from spleen, I drive thy malady away.
 [2009620]From thighs, from knee-caps, and from heels, and from the
    forepart of the feet,
   From hips, from stomach, and from groin, I drive thy malady
    away.
 [2009621]From what is voided from within, and from thy hair, and from
    thy nails,
   From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.
 [2009622]From every member, every hair, disease that comes in every
    joint,
   From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.
 [2009623]Avaunt, thou Master of the Mind, I Depart and vanish far away.
   Look on Destruction far from us. The live man's mind is
    manifold.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 346]

  

HYMN XCVII

[2009701]Here verily yesterday we let the Thunder-wielder drink his fill.
   So in like manner, offer him the juice to day. Now range you.
    by the Glorious One.
 [2009702]Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, follows the
    path of his decrees.
   So, India, graciously accepting this our praise, with wondrous.
    thought come forth to us.
 [2009703]What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra hath not
    done?
   Who hath not heard his glorious title and his fame, the Vritra-
    slayer from his birth?

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCVIII

[2009801]That we may win us wealth and spoil we poets verily call on
    thee.
   In war men call on thee, Indra, the hero's Lord, in the steed's,
    race-course call on thee.
 [2009802]As such, O Wonderful whose hand holds thunder, praised as
    mighty, Caster of the Stone.
   Pour on us boldly, Indra, kie and chariot-steeds, ever to be the
    conqueror's strength.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN XCIX

[2009901]Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink the Soma
    first.
   The Ribhus in accord have lifted up their voice and Rudras.
    sung thee as the First.
 [2009902]Indra increased his manly strength at sacrifice, in the wild
    rapture of this juice;
   And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth their praises to
    his majesty.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 347]

  

HYMN C

[2010001]Now have we, Indra, Friend of Song, sent our great wishes
    forth to thee.
   Coming like floods that follow floods.
 [2010002]As rivers swell the ocean, so, Hero, our prayers increase thy
    might,
   Though of thyself, O Thunderer, waxing day by day.
 [2010003]With holy song they bind to the broad wide-yoked car the bay
    steeds of the rapid God,
   Bearers of India, yoked by prayer.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CI

[2010101]Agni we choose, the messenger, the herald, master of all wealth,.
   Well skilled in this our sacrifice.
 [2010102]With calls they ever invocate Agni, Agni, Lord of the House,
   Oblation-bearer, much-beloved.
 [2010103]Bring the Gods hither, Agni, born for him who strews the
    sacred grass.
   Thou art our herald, meet for praise.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CII

[2010201]Meet to be lauded and adored, showing in beauty through the=
    dark, [p. 348]
   Agni the Bull is kindled well,
 [2010202]Agni is kindled as a Bull, like a horse bearer of the Gods;
   Men with oblations worship him.
 [2010203]Thee will we kindle as a Bull, we who are bulls ourselves, O
   Bull,
   Thee, Agni, shining mightily.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CIII

[2010301]Solicit with your hymns, for aid, Agni the God with piercing
    flame,
   For riches famous Agni, Purmilha 'and ye men, Agni to light
    our dwelling well.
 [2010302]Agni, come hither with thy fires: we choose thee as our Hotai-
    priest.
   Let the extended ladle full of oil balm thee, best priest, to sit on
    sacred grass.
 [2010303]For unto thee, O Angiras, O Son of Strength, move ladles in the
    sacrifice,
   To Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, we seek, fore-
    most in sacrificial rites.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CIV

[2010401]May these my songs of praise exalt thee, Lord who hast abun-
    dant wealth.
   Men skilled in holy hymns, bright with the hues of fire, have
    sung them with their lauds to thee.
 [2010402]He with his might enhanced by Rishis thousand-fold, hath like
    an ocean spread himself. [p. 349]
   His majesty is praised as true at solemn rites, his power where
    holy singers rule
 [2010403]May Indra, who in every fight must be invoked, be near to us.
   May the most mighty Vritra-slayer, meet for praise, come to
    libations and to hymns.
 [2010404]Thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gifts, true art thou,.
    lordly in thine act.
   We claim alliance with the very Glorious One, yea, with the-
    mighty Son of Strength.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CV

[2010501]Thou in the battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands.
   Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the curse, thou victor
    of the vanquisher.
 [2010502]The earth, and heaven cling close to thy victorious might, as sire
    and mother to their child.
   When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands shrink and
    faint, Indra at thy wrath.
 [2010503]Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and none may
    shoot at him,
   Inciter, swift, victorious, best of charioteers, Tugrya's unvan-
    quished strengthener;

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CVI

[2010601]That lofty energy of thine, thy strength and thine intelligence,
   Thy thunderbolt for which we long, our wish makes keen.
 [2010602]O Indra, heaven and earth augment thy manly power and thy
    renown,
   The waters and the mountains stir and urge thee on. [p. 350]
 [2010603]Vishnu, the lofty Ruling Power, Varuna, Mitra sing thy praise:
   In thee the Maruts' company hath great delight.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CVII

[2010701]Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men bow
    down,
   As rivers bend them to the sea.
 [2010702]This power of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought to-
    gether like
   A skin the worlds of earth and heaven.
 [2010703]The fiercely-moving Vritra's head he severed with his thunder-
    bolt,
   His hundred-knotted thunderbolt.
 [2010704]In all the worlds That was the best and highest whence sprang
    the mighty God, of splendid valour.
   As soon as born he overcomes his foemen, he in whom all who
    lend him aid are joyful.
 [2010705]Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, he as a foe
    strikes fear into the Dasa,
   Eager to win the breathing and the breathless. All sang thy
    praise at banquet and oblation.
 [2010706]All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what time these,
    twice or thrice, are thine assistants.
   Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness: win quickly
    with our meath that meath in battle.
 [2010707]Therefore in thee too, thou who winnest riches, at every banquet
    are the sages joyful
   With mighter power, bold God, extend thy firmness: let not
    malignant Yatudhanas harm thee.
 [2010708]Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold great
    wealth the prize of combat.
   I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and sharpen with
    my prayer thy vital vigour.
 [2010709]Worthy of praises many-shaped, most skilful, most energetic,
   Aptya of the Aptyas: [p. 351]
   He with his might destroys the seven Danus, subduing many
    who were deemed his equals.
 [2010710]Thou in that house which thy protection guardedh bestowest-
    wealth, the higher and the lower.
   Thou stablishest the two much-wandering Mothers, and bringest
    many deeds to their completion.
 [2010711]Brihaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeasts these holy
    prayers, this strength to Indra.
   He rules the great self-luminous fold of cattle, and all the doors
    of light hath he thrown open.
 [2010712]Thou hath Brihaddiva the great Atharvan, spoken to Indra as
    himself in person.
   The Matarisvaris, the spotless sisters, with power exalt him and
    impel him onward.
 [2010713]Bright, Presence of the Gods, the luminous herald, Siirya hath
    mounted the celestial regions.
   Day's maker, he hath shone away the darkness, and radiant
    passed o'er places hard to traverse.
 [2010714]The brilliant Presence of the Gods hath risen, the eye of Mitra,
   Varuna, and Agni.
   The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, Surya hath filled the
    earth and air and heaven.
 [2010715]Even as a lover followeth a maiden, so doth the Sun the Dawn,
    refulgent Goddess:
   Where pious men extend their generations before the Gracious
   One for happy fortune.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 352]

  

HYMN CVIII

[2010801]O Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, Satakratu, thou
    most active, bring.
   A hero conquering in war.
 [2010802]For, gracious Satakratu, thou hast ever been a mother and a
    sire to us,
   So now for bliss we pray to thee.
 [2010803]To thee, Strong, Much-invoked who showest forth thy strength,
   O Satakratu, do I speak:
   So grant thou us heroic might.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CIX

[2010901]The juice of Soma thus diffused, sweet to the taste, the bright
   Cows drink
   Who for the sake of splendour close to mighty Indra's side
    rejoice, good in their own supremacy.
 [2010902]Craving his touch the dappled Kine mingle the Soma with their
    milk. [p. 353]
   The milch-kine dear to Indra send forth his death-dealing thun-
    derbolt, good in their own supremacy.
 [2010903]With veneration, passing wise, honouring his victorious might,
   They follow close his many laws to win them due preeminence,
    good in their own supremacy.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CX

[2011001]For Indra, lover of carouse, loud be our songs about the juice:
   Let poets sing the hymn of praise.
 [2011002]We summon Indra to the draught, in whom all glories rest, in
    whom
   The seven communities rejoice.
 [2011003]By the three Soma jars the Gods span sacrifice that stirs the
    mind:
   Let our songs aid and prosper it.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXI

[2011101]If, Indra, thou drink Soma by Vishnu's or Trita Aptya's side,
   Or with the Maruts take delight in flowing drops;
 [2011102]Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of air,
   Rejoice thee in this juice of ours, in flowing drops.
 [2011103]Or, Lord of Heroes, if thou aid the worshipper who sheds the
    juice,
   Or him whose laud delights thee, and his flowing drops.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 354]

  

HYMN CXII

[2011201]Whatever, Vritra-slayer! thou Surya, hast risen upon to-day,
   That, Indra, all is in thy power.
 [2011202]When, Mighty One, Lord of the Brave, thou thinkest, I shall
    never die,
   That thought of thine is true indeed.
 [2011203]Thou, Indra, goest unto all Soma libations shed for thee,
   Both far away and near at hand.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXIII

[2011301]Both boons--may Indra hitherward turned, listen to this, prayer
    of ours,
   And, mightiest Maghavan with thought inclined to us come nigh
    to drink the Soma juice.
 [2011302]For him, strong independent Ruler, Heaven and Earth have
    fashioned forth for power and might.
   Thou seatest thee as first among thy peers in place, for thy soul
    longs for Soma juice.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXIV

[2011401]O Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and companionless
    art thou:
   In war thou seekest comradeship.
 [2011402]Thou findest not the wealthy man to be thy friend: those scorn
    thee who are flown with wine.
   What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, even as a
    father, art invoked.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 355]

  

HYMN CXV

[2011501]I from my Father have received deep knowledge of the holy
   Law:
   I was born like unto the Sun.
 [2011502]After the lore of ancient time I make, like Kanva, beauteous
    songs,
   And Indra's self gains strength thereby.
 [2011503]Whatever Rishis have not praised thee, Indra, or have lauded
    thee,
   By me exalted wax thou strong.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXVI

[2011601]Never may we be cast aside and strangers, as it were to thee.
   We, Thunder-wielding Indra, count ourselves as trees rejected
    and unfit to burn.
 [2011602]O Vritra slayer, we were thought slow and unready for the fray:
   Yet once in thy great bounty may we have delight, O Hero,
    after praising thee.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXVII

[2011701]Drink Soma, Lord of Bays, and let it cheer thee: Indra, the
    stone, like a well-guided courser,
   Directed by the presser's arms hath pressed it.
 [2011702]So let the draught of joy, thy dear companion, by which, O Lord
    of Bays, thou slayest foemen,
   Delight thee, Indra, Lord of princely treasures.
 [2011703]Mark closely, Maghavan; the words I utter, this eulogy recited
    by Vasishtha:
   Accept the prayers I offer at thy banquet.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 356]

  

HYMN CXVIII

[2011801]Indra with all thy saving helps give us assistance, Lord of Power
   For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, Hero,
    finder-out of wealth.
 [2011802]Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well, O
   God, art thou;
   For no one may impair the gifts laid up in thee, Bring me what-
    ever thing I ask.
 [2011803]Indra for worship of the Gods, Indra while sacrifice proceeds,
   Indra as warriors in the battle-shock we call, Indra that we may
    win the spoil.
 [2011804]With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, with power
    hath Indra lighted up the Sun.
   In Indra are all creatures closely held; in him meet the distilling
   Soma drops.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXIX

[2011901]An ancient praise-song hath been sung: to Indra have ye said
    the prayer.
   They have sung many a Brihati of sacrifice, poured forth th,
    worshipper's many thoughts.
 [2011902]In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song distilling oil
    and rich in sweets.
   Riches have spread among us, and heroic strength; with us are
    flowing Soma drops.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXX

[2012101]Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and westward,
    north and south, [p. 357]
   Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave Champion!
    urged by men to come.
 [2011802]Or, Indra, when with Ruma, Rusama, Syavaka, and Kripa thou
    rejoicest thee,
   Still do the Kanvas bring praises, with their prayers, O Indra,
    draw thee hither: come.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXI

[2012101]Over the three great distances, past the Five Peoples go thy way,
   O Indra, noticing our voice.
 [2012102]Send forth thy ray like Surya: let my songs attract thee hither-
    ward.
   Like waters gathering to the vale.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXII

[2012201]With Indra splendid feasts be ours enriched with ample spoil,
    wherewith,
   Wealthy in food, we may rejoice.
 [2012202]Like thee, thyself, the singers' friend, thou movest as it were,
    besought,
   Bold One, the axle of the car.
 [2012203]That, Satakratu, thou to grace and please thy praisers, as it
    were,
   Stirrest the axle with thy strength.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 358]

  

HYMN CXXIII

[2012301]This is the Godhead, this the might of Surya: he hath with-
    drawn what spread o'er work unfinished.
   When he hath loosed his horses from their station, straight over
    all night spreadeth out her garment.
 [2012302]In the sky's lap the Sun this form assumeth for Mitra and for
   Varuna to look on.
   His bay steeds well maintain his power eternal, at one time
    bright and darksome at another.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXIV

[2012401]With what help will he come to us, wonderful, ever-waxing
   Friend,
   With what most mighty company?
 [2012402]What genuine and most liberal draught will spirit thee with
    juice to burst.
   Open e'en strongly-guarded wealth?
 [2012403]Do thou who art protector us thy friends who praise thee
   With hundred aids approach us.
 [2012404]We will, with Indra and all Gods to help us, bring these existing
    worlds into subjection.
   Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring shall Indra form
    together with the Adityas.
 [2012405]With the Adityas, with the band of Maruts, may Indra be pro-
    tector of our bodies.
   As when the Gods came after they had slaughtered the Asuras,
    keeping safe their Godlike nature,
 [2012406]Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, and looked
    about them on their vigorous Godhead. [p. 359]
   With this may we obtain strength God-appointed, and joy with
    brave sons through a hundred winters.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXV

[2012501]Drive all our enemies away, O Indra, the western, mighty Con-
    queror, and the eastern,
   Hero, drive off our northern foes and southern, that we in thy
    wide shelter may be joyful.
 [2012502]What then? As men whose fields are full of barley reap the ripe
    corn removing it in order,
   So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who come not
    to prepare the grass for worship.
 [2012503]Men come not with one horse at sacred seasons; thus they
    obtain no honour in assemblies.
   Sages desiring herds of kine and horses strengthen the mighty
   Indra for his friendship.
 [2012504]Ye, Asvins, Lords of Splendour, drank full draughts of grateful
   Soma juice,
   And aided Indra in his work with Namuchi of Asura birth.
 [2012505]As parents aid a son, both Asvins, Indra, aided thee with their
    wondrous powers and wisdom
   When thou, with might, hadst drunk the draught that glad-
    dens, Sarasvati, O Maghavan refreshed thee.
 [2012506]Indra is strong to save, rich in assistance: may he, possessing
    all, be kind and gracious.
   May he disperse our foes and give us safety, and may we be the
    lords of hero vigour.
 [2012507]May we enjoy his favour, his the holy: may we enjoy his blessed
    loving-kindness.
   May this rich Indra, as our good protector, drive off and keep
    afar all those who hate us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 360]

  

HYMN CXXVI

[2012601]Men have abstained from pouring juice; nor counted Indra as a
   God.
   Where at the votary's store my friend Vrishakapi hath drunk his
    fill. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012602]Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrishakapi hath
    wrought;
   Yet nowhere else thou findest place wherein to drink the Soma
    juice. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012603]What hath he done to injure thee, this tawny beast Vrishakapi,
   With whom thou art so angry now? What is the votary's food-
    ful store? Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012604]Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him and bite him
    in the ear,
   O Indra, that Vrishakapi whom thou protectest as a friend.
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012605]Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly wrought, that
    were my joy.
   In pieces will I rend his head; the sinner's portion shall be woe.
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012606]No dame hath ampler charms than I, or greater wealth of love's
    delights.
   None with more ardour offers all her beauty to her lord's
    embrace. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012607]Mother whose love is quickly won,I say what verily will be,
   My breast, O mother, and my head and both my hips seem
    quivering Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012608]Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad hair-plaits
    and ample hips,
   Why, O thou hero's wife, art thou angry with our Vrishakapi?
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012609]This noxious creature looks on me as one bereft of hero's love. [p. 361]
   Yet heroes for my sons have I, the Maruts' friend and Indra's
   Queen Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012610]From olden time the matron goes to feast and general sacrifice.
   Mother of heroes, Indra's Queen, the rite's ordainer is extolled.
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012611]So have I heard Indrani called most fortunate among these
    dames,
   For never shall her Consort die in future time through length
    of days. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012612]Never, Indrani have I joyed without my friend Vrishakapi,
   Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth to
    the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012613]Wealthy Vrishakapayi, blest with sons and consorts of thy sons,
   Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that effecteth much.
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012614]Fifteen in number, then, for me a score of bullocks they
    prepare.
   And I devour the fat thereof: they fill my belly full with food.
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012615]Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing amid the herds,
   Sweet to thine heart, O Indra, is the brew which she who tends
    thee pours. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012616]Indrani speaks. Non ille fortis (ad Venerem) est cujus mentula
    laxe inter femora dependet; fortis vero estille cujus, quum
    sederit, membrum pilosum se extendit. Super omnia est
    Indra.
 [2012617]Indra speaks. Non fortis est ille cujus, quum sederit, membrum
    pilosum se extendit: fortis vero est ille cujus mentula laxe
    inter femora dependet. Super omnia est Indra.
 [2012618]O Indra, this Vrishakapi hath found a slain wild animal,
   Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon with a load
    of wood. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012619]Distinguishing the Dasa and the Arya, viewing all, I go.
   I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary's Soma juice.
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012620]The desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues in length
    they spread!
   Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, Vrishakapi.
   Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012621]Turn thee again Vrishakapi; we twain will bring thee happiness.
   Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path which leads
    to sleep. Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012622]When, Indra and Vrishakapi, ye travelled upward to your home,
   Where was that noisome beast, to whom went it, the beast that
    troubles man? Supreme is Indra over all.
 [2012623]Daughter of Manu, Parsu bare a score of children at a birth. [p. 362]
   Her portion verily was bliss although her burthen caused her
    grief.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 363]

  

HYMN CXXVII

  

A hymn in praise of the good Government of King Kaurama

[2012701]Listen to this, ye men, a laud of glorious bounty shall be sung.
   Thousands sixty, and ninety we, O Kaurama, among the
   Rusamas have received.
 [2012702]Camels twice-ten that draw the car, with females by their side,
    he gave.
   Fain would the chariot's top bow down escaping from the stroke
    of heaven.
 [2012703]A hundred chains of gold, ten wreaths, upon thee Rishi he
    bestowed,
   And thrice-a-hundred mettled steeds, ten-times-a-thousand cows
    he gave.
 [2012704]Glut thee, O Singer, glut thee like a bird on a ripe-fruited tree.
   Thy lips and tongue move swiftly like the sharp blades of a pair
    of shears.
 [2012705]Quickly and willingly like kine forth come the singers and their
    hymns:
   Their little maidens are at home, at home they wait upon the
    cows.
 [2012706]O Singer, bring thou forth the hymn that findeth cattle, findeth:
    wealth. [p. 364]
   Even as an archer aims his shaft address this prayer unto the
   Gods.
 [2012707]List to Parikshit's eulogy, the sovran whom all people love,
   The King who ruleth over all, excelling mortals as a God.
 [2012708]'Mounting his throne, Parikshit, best of all, hath given us peace
    and rest,'
   Saith a Kauravya to his wife as he is ordering his house.
 [2012709]'Which shall I set before thee, curds, gruel of milk, or barley-
    brew?'
   Thus the wife asks her husband in the realm which King
   Parikshit rules.
 [2012710]Up as it were to heavenly light springs the ripe corn above the
    cleft.
   Happily thrive the people in the land where King Parikshit
    reigns.
 [2012711]Indra hath waked the bard and said, Rise, wander singing here
    and there.
   Praise me, the strong: each pious man will give thee riches in
    return,
 [2012712]Here, cows! increase and multiply, here ye, O horses, here, O
    men.
   Here, with a thousand rich rewards, doth Pushan also seat him-
    self.
 [2012713]O Indra, let these cows be safe, their master free from injury.
   Let not the hostile-hearted or the robber have control of them.
 [2012714]Oft and again we glorify the hero with our hymn of praise, with
    prayer, with our auspicious prayer.
   Take pleasure in the songs we sing: let evil never fall on us.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 365]

  

HYMN CXXVIII

  

Sacrificial formulas

[2012801]The worshipper who pours the juice, for gathering and assembly
    fit,
   And yonder foe-destroying Sun,--these have the Gods designed
    of old.
 [2012802]He who defiles a sister, he who willingly would harm a friend,
   The fool who slights his elder, these, they say, must suffer down.
    below.
 [2012803]Whenever any good man's son becometh bold and spirited,
   Then hath the wise Gandharva said this pleasant upward-point-
    ing word.
 [2012804]The most unprofitable churl, the wealthy men who brings no.
    gift,
   These, verily, as we have heard, are cast away by all the wise.
 [2012805]But they who have adored the Gods, and they who have best-
    owed their gifts,
   Those liberal lords are filled with wealth like Surya risen up to
    heaven.
 [2012806]With unanointed eyes and limbs, wearing no gem or ring of
    gold.
   No priest, no Brahman's son is he: these things are ordered in
    the rules.
 [2012807]With well-anointed limbs and eyes, wearing fair gem and golden,
    ring,
   Good priest is he, the Brahman's son; these things are ordered
    in the rules.
 [2012808]Pools with no place for drinking, and the wealthy man who.
    giveth naught,
   The pretty girl you may not touch, these things are ordered in:
    the rules. [p. 366]
 [2012809]Pools with good drinking places, and the wealthy man who
    freely gives,
   The pretty girl who may be touched, these things are ordered in
    the rules.
 [2012810]The favourite wife neglected, and the man who safely shuns the
    fight,
   A sluggish horse whom none may guide, these things are order-
    ed in the rules.
 [2012811]The favourite wife most dearly loved, the man who safely goes
    to war,
   The fleet steed who obeys the rein, these things are ordered in
    the rules.
 [2012812]When, Indra, thou, as no man could, didst plunge into the Ten
   Kings' fight,
   That was a guard for every man: for he is formed to stay
    disease.
 [2012813]Easily conquering Maghavan, thou, Hero, bentest Raji down,
   Rentest asunder Rauhina, calvest in pieces Vritra's head.
 [2012814]Thou who didst separate the clouds and penetrate the water-
    floods,
   To thee, great slayer of the foe, be glory, Indra, yea, to thee!
 [2012815]They said to Auchchaihsravasa running as side-horse of the
   Bays,
   Safely to victory, O Steed, bear Indra with the beauteous wreath.
 [2012816]They yoke the white mares, on the Bay's right harness Auchchai-
    hsravasa.
   He joyeth as he carrieth Indra the foremost of the Gods.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 367]

  

HYMN CXXIX

[2012901]These mares come springing forward to Pratipa Pratisutvana.
 [2012903]4. One of them is Hariknika. Hariknika, what seekest thou?
 [2012905]6. The excellent, the golden son: where now hast thou aban-
    doned him?
 [2012907]8. There where around those distant trees, three Sisus that are
    standing there,
 [2012909]10. Three adders, breathing angrily, are blowing loud the
    threatening horn.
 [2012911]12. Hither hath come a stallion: he is known by droppings on
    his way,
 [2012913]14. As by their dung the course of kine. What wouldst thou in
    the home of men?
 [2012915]16. Barley and ripened rice I seek. On rice and barley hast thou
    fed,
 [2012917]18. As the big serpent feeds on sheep. Cow's hoof and horse's
    tail hast thou,
 [2012919]20. Winged with a falcon's pinion is that harmless swelling of
    thy tongue.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 368]

  

HYMN CXXX

[2013101]Who carried off these stores of milk? Who took the dark
    cow's milk away?
 [2013103]Who took away the white cow's milk t Who took the black
    cow's milk away?
 [2013105] Question this man, Where do I ask? Where, whom that
    knoweth do I ask?
 [2013107]Not to the belly comes the grain. The patient ones are
    angry now.
 [2013109]Undecked with gems, and decked with gems: deity rivalling
    the Sun.
 [2013111]Dapple, Harinika, and Bay ran forward to the liberal gifts.
 [2013113]When the horn's blast hath sounded forth let not our friend
    discover thee.
 [2013115]Hither to the cow's son they come. Libation hath rejoiced
    the God.
 [2013117]Then cried they. Here he is, and, Here; again the cry was,
   Here is he.
 [2013119]Then not defective be our steeds! A splinter so diminutive!

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXI

[2013101]He minishes, he splits in twain: crush it and let it be
    destroyed. [p. 369]
 [2013003]Varuna with the Vasus goes: the Wind-God hath a hundred
    reins.
 [2013005]A hundred golden steeds hath he, a hundred chariots
    wrought of gold.
 [2013007]A hundred bits of golden bronze, a hundred golden
    necklaces.
 [2013009]Lover of Kusa grass, Unploughed! Fat is not reckoned in
    the hoof.
 [2013011]The ladle doth not hold apart the entrails and the clotted
    blood.
 [2013013]This O Mandurika, is mine. Thy trees are standing in a
    clump.
 [2013015]The plain domestic sacrifice, the sacrifice with burning
    dung.
 [2013017]Asvattha, Dhava, Khadira, leaf taken from the Aratu.
 [2013019]The man pervaded thoroughly lies on the ground as he were
    slain.
 [2013021]The biestings only have they milked: one-and-a half of the
    wild ass,
 [2013023]And two hides of an elephant.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXII

[2013201]Then too the single bottle-gourd, the bottle-gourd dug
    from the earth,
 [2013203]The lute dug up from out the ground: this the wind stirs
    and agitates. [p. 370]
 [2013205]Let him prepare a nest, they say: he shall obtain it strong
    and stretched.
 [2013207]He shall not gain it unspread out. Who among these will
    touch the lute?
 [2013209]Who among these will beat the drum? How, if he beat it,
    will he beat?
 [2013211]Where beating will the Goddess beat again again about the
    house?
 [2013213]Three are the names the camel bears, Golden is one of them,
    he said.
 [2013215]Glory and power, these are two. He with black tufts of hair
    shall strike.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXIII

  

The Enigmatical Verses

[2013301]Two rays of light are lengthened out, and the man gently
    touches them with the two beatings on the drum.
   Maiden, it truly is not so as thou, O maiden, fanciest.
   Two are thy mother's rays of light: the skin is guarded from the
    man.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXIV

  

The Ajijnasenya Verses

[2013401]Here are we sitting east and west and north and south, with
    waters. Bottle-gourd vessels.
 [2013402]Here east and west and north and south sit the calves sprinkling
   Curds and oil. [p. 371]
 [2013403]Here east and west and north and south the offering of rice
    clings on. The leaf of the Asvattha tree.
 [2013404]Here east and west and north and south adheres when touched.
   That water-drop.
 [2013405]Here east and west and north and south in iron mayst thou not
    be caught. The cup.
 [2013406]Here east and west and north and south fain would it clasp what
    would not clasp. Emmet hole.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXV

  

Verses called Frustration, Abuse, the Gods' Offering, and Dazzling Power

[2013501]Bang! here he is. A dog,
 [2013502]Swish! it is gone. Falling of leaves.
 [2013503]Crunch! it is trodden on. A cow's hoof.
 [2013504]These Gods have gone astray. Do thou, Adhvaryu, quickly do
    thy work.
 [2013505]There is good resting for the cows. Take thy delight.
 [2013506]O singer, the Adityas brought rich guerdon to the Angirases.
   Singer, they went not near to it. Singer, they did not take the
    gift.
 [2013507]Singer, they went not near to that; but, singer, they accepted
    this:
   That days may not be indistinct, nor sacrifices leaderless. [p. 372]
 [2013508]And quickly Both he fly away, the White Horse swiftest on his
    feet,
   And swiftly fills his measure up.
 [2013509]Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, all pay worship unto thee. Accept this
    liberal gift, O Angiras,
   This bounty excellent and rich, this ample bounty spreading far.
 [2013510]The Gods shall give the precious boon: let it be pleasant to
    your hearts.
   Let it be with you every day: accept our offerings in return.
 [2013511]Vouchsafe us shelter, Indra, thou to be invoked from far away.
   Bring treasure hither to reward the far-famed bard who praises
    thee.
 [2013512]Thou, Indra, to the trembling dove whose pinions had been rent
    and torn.
   Gayest ripe grain and Pilu fruit, gavest him water when athirst.
 [2013513]The ready praiser loudly speaks though fastened triply with a
    strap.
   Yea, he commends the freshening draught, deprecates languor
    of disease.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXVI

  

Erotica

[2013601]Si quis in hujus tenui rima praeditae feminae augustias
    fascinum intromittit, vaccae ungularum et Sakula. rum pisci-
    um more pudenda ejus agitantur.
 [2013602]Quum magno pene parvula ejus pudenda vir percutit, huc et
    illuc ilia increscunt veluti duo asini in solo arenoso.
 [2013603]Quum parvum, admodum parvum, Ziziphi Jujubae quasi granum
    in eam incidit, ventris ejus partes interiores, velut verno
    tempore arundo, extentae videntur.
 [2013604]Si Dii mentulae intumescenti faverunt, cum femoribus suis se:
    ostentat femina tanquam vero testi.
 [2013605]Magnopere delectata est arnica: ut equns solutus adveniens
    vocem edidit: Vaginam juvenis! pene percute: medium.
    femur paratum est.
 [2013606]Arnica, pilam superans, dixit: Ut tua, Arbor, ! (verbera) pinsunt,
    sic etiam nunc (hic me permolit).
 [2013607]Arnica eum alloquitur: Tum etiam tu defecisti. Ut tua. Arbor!
    (verbera) Pinsunt, sic etiam nunc (me permole).
 [2013608]Arnica eum alloquitur: Tum etiam tu defceisti. Ut silvae ignis.
    inflammatur, sic ardent mea membra.
 [2013609]Arnica eum alloquitur: Fauste infixus est penis; arboris fructu
    celeriter fruamur.
 [2013610]Arnica cum fuste gallum circumcurrit. Nos nescimus quae
    bestia pudendum muliebre in capite gerat.
 [2013611]Arnica post currentem amatorem currit: Has ejus boves custodi
    tu. Me futue: coctam oryzam ede.
 [2013612]Fortunatus, Arnica, te opprimit. Bona est magni viri fututio,
    Macrum pinguis. femina obtineat. Futue me, etc.
 [2013613]Sine digito mulcta vacca vanankaram producit, Magna et
    bona est Aegle Marmelos. Futue me, etc.
 [2013614]Infelix, Amice, te opprimit. Bona est magni viri fututio. Flava
    puollula, opere suo perfecto, procurrit.
 [2013615]Magna certe et bona est Aegle Marmelos. Bona est magna
    Ficus Glomerata. Magnus vir ubique opprimit. Bona est
    magni viri fututio.
 [2013616]Quem macrum factum puella flava pinguisque capiat sicut
    pollicem ex olei cado fossorem ilium extrahat.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 373]

  

HYMN CXXXVII

  

A composite hymn in praise of Indra

[2013701]When, foul with secret spot and stain, ye hastened onward to
    the breast.
   All Indra's enemies were slain and passed away like froth and
    foam.
 [2013702]Indra is he, O men, who gives us happiness: sport, urge the
    giver of delight to win the spoil.
   Bring quickly down, O priests, hither to give us aid, to drink
    the Soma, Indra son of Nishtigri.
 [2013703]So have I glorified with praise strong Dadhikravan, conquering
    steed.
   Sweet may he make our mouths; may he prolong the days we
    have to live.
 [2013704]The Somas very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is destined,
    flow,
   Effused, the source of Indra's joy. May your strong juices reach
    the Gods.
 [2013705]Indu flows on for Indra's sake--thus have the deities declared.
   The Lord of Speech exerts himself, ruler of all, because of
    might.
 [2013706]Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams the ocean
    flows,
   Even Soma, Lord of Opulence, the friend of Indra, day by day.
 [2013707]The black drop sank in Ansumati's bosom, advancing with ten
    thousand round about it.
   Indra with might longed for it as it panted: the hero-hearted
    laid aside his weapons.
 [2013708]I saw the drop in the far distance moving, on the slope bank of
   Ansumati's river,
   Like a black cloud that sank into the water. Heroes. I send you
    forth. Go, fight in battle.
 [2013709]And then the drop in Ansumati's bosom, splendid with light,
    assumed its proper body;
   And Indra with Brihaspati to aid him, conquered the godless
    tribes that came against him.
 [2013710]Then, at thy birth, thou wast the foeman, Indra, of those the
    seven who ne'er had met a rival. [p. 374]
   The hidden pair, the heaven and earth, thou foundest, and to
    the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure.
 [2013711]So, Thunder-armed! thou with thy bolt of thunder didst boldly
    smite that power which none might equal;
   With weapons broughtest low the might of Sushna, and, Indra,
    foundest by thy strength the cattle.
 [2013712]We make this Indra very strong to strike the mighty Vritra
    dead:
   A vigorous Hero shall he be.
 [2013713]Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o'er the joyous
    draught,
   Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song.
 [2013714]By song, as 'twere, the powerful bolt which none may parry was
    prepared:
   Lofty, invincible he grew.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 375]

  

HYMN CXXXVIII

  

In praise of Indra

[2013801]Indra, great in his power and might and, like Parjanya, rich in
    rain,
   Is magnified by Vatsa's lauds,
 [2013802]When the priests, strengthening the Son of holy Law, present
    their gifts,
   Singers with Order's hymn of praise.
 [2013803]Since Kanvas with their lauds have made Indra complete the
    sacrifice,
   Words are their own appropriate arms.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXXXIX

  

A hymn to the Asvins

[2013901]To help and favour Vatsa now, O Asvins, come ye hitherward.
   Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, and keep malig-
    nites afar.
 [2013902]All manliness that is in heaven, with the Five Tribes, or in mid-
    air,
   Bestow, ye Asvins, upon us.
 [2013903]Remember Karnva first of all among the singers,, Asvins, who
   Have thought upon your wondrous deeds.
 [2013904]Asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation is effused,
   This your sweet Soma juice, ye Lords of wealth and spoil,
    through which ye think upon the foe.
 [2013905]Whatever ye have done in floods, in the tree, Wonder-workers,
    and in growing plants,
   Therewith, O Asvins, succour me.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 376]

  

HYMN CXL

  

Continuation of the preceding hymn to the Asvins

[2014001]What force, Nasatyas, ye exert, whatever, Gods, ye tend and
    heal,
   This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone: ye visit him
    who offers gifts.
 [2014002]Now hath the Rishi splendidly thought out the Asvins' hymn
    of praise.
   Let the Atharvan pour the warm oblation forth, and Soma very
    rich in sweets.
 [2014003]Ye Asvins, now ascend your car that lightly rolls upon its way.
   May these my praises make you speed hitherward like a cloud of
    heaven.
 [2014004]When, O Nasatyas, we this day make you speed hither N ith our
    hymns,
   Or, Asvins, with our songs of praise, remember Kanva specially.
 [2014005]As erst Kakshivan and the Rishi Vyasva, as erst Dirghatamas
    invoked your presence,
   Or, in the sacrificial chambers, Vainya Prithi, so be ye mindful
    of us here, O Asvins.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 377]

  

HYMN CXLI

  

Hymn to the Asvins

[2014101]Come as home-guardians, saving us from foemen, guarding our
    living creatures and our bodies,
   Come to the house to give us seed and offspring:
 [2014102]Whatever with Indra ye be faring, Asvins, or resting in one
    dwelling-place with Vayu,
   In concord with the Ribhus or Adityas, or standing still in
   Vishnu's striding-places.
 [2014103]When 1, O Asvins, call on you to-day that I may gather strength,
   Or as all-conquering might in war, be that the Asvins' noblest
    grace.
 [2014104]Now come, ye Asvins, hitherward: here are oblations set for
    you;
   These Soma draughts to aid Yadu and Turvasa, these offered
    you mid Kanva's sons.
 [2014105]Whatever healing balm is yours, Nasatyas near or far away,
   Therewith, great Sages, grant a home to Vatsa and to Vimada.

   

   Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXLII

  

Hymn to Dawn and the Asvins

[2014201]Together with the Goddess, with the Asvins' Speech have I
    awoke.
   Thou, Goddess, hast disclosed the hymn and holy gift from
    mortal men.
 [2014202]Awake the Asvins, Goddess Dawn! Up, mighty Lady of Sweet
   Strains!
   Rise straightway, priest of sacrifice! High glory to the glad-
    dening draught!
 [2014203]Thou, Dawn, approaching with thy light, shinest together with
    the Sun, [p. 378]
   And to this man-protecting home the chariot of the Asvins
    comes.
 [2014204]When yellow stalks give forth the juice as cows from udders
    pour their milk,
   And voices sound the song of praise, the Asvins' worshippers
    show first.
 [2014205]Forward for glory and for strength, protection that shall con-
    quer men,
   And power and skill, most sapient Ones!
 [2014206]When, Asvins worthy of our lauds, ye seat you in the father's
    house.
   With wisdom or the bliss ye bring.

   

  Hymns of the Atharva Veda, by Ralph T.H. Griffith, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

HYMN CXLIII

  

Hymn to the Asvins

[2014301]We invocate this day your car, far-spreading, O Asvins, even
    the gathering of the sunlight,
   Car praised in hymns, most ample, rich in treasure, fitted with
    seats, the car that beareth Surya.
 [2014302]Asvins, ye gained that glory by your Godhead, ye Sons of
   Heaven, by your own might and power.
   Food followeth close upon your bright appearing when stately
    horses in your chariot draw you.
 [2014303]Who bringeth you to-day for help with offered oblations, or with
    hymns to drink the juices?
   Who, for the sacrifice's ancient lover, turneth you hither, Asvins,
    offering homage?
 [2014304]Borne on your golden car, ye omnipresent! come to this sacrifice
    of ours, Nasatyas.
   Drink of the pleasant liquor of the Soma: give riches to the
    people who adore you.[p. 379]
 [2014305]Come hitherward to us from earth, from heaven, borne on your
    golden chariot rolling lightly.
   Suffer not other worshippers to stay you: here are ye bound by
    earlier bonds of friendship.
 [2014306]Now for us both, mete out, O Wonder-Workers, riches exceed-
    ing great with store of heroes,
   Because the men have sent you praise, O Asvins, and Ajamilhas
    come to the laudation.
 [2014307]Whene'er I gratified you here together, your grace was given us,
   O ye rich in booty.
   Protect, ye twain, the singer of your praises: to you, Nasatyas,
    is my wish directed.
 [2014308]Sweet be the plants for us, the heavens, the waters, and full of
    sweets for us be air's mid-region!
   May the Field's Lord for us be full of sweetness, and may we
    follow after him uninjured.
 [2014309]Asvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder, the Bull of
    firmament and earth and heaven;
   Yes, and your thousand promises in battle. Come near to all
    these men and drink beside us.

    


===== BOOK: aww.txt =====


    
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

          Auf des   Gluckes groszer Waage
   Steht die Zunge selten ein;
   Du muszt steigen oder sinken,
   Du muszt herrschen und gewinnen,
   Oder dienen und verlieren,
   Leiden oder triumphieren,
   Ambosz oder Hammer sein. [*1]
             GOETHE, Ein Kophtisches Lied.

When you are an anvil, hold you still,
   When you are a hammer, strike your fill.
             G. HERBERT, Jacula Prudentum.

     
     

THE ART

  

OF

  

WORLDLY WISDOM

  

BY

  

BALTHASAR GRACIAN

  

TRANSLATED FROM THE SPANISH BY

  

JOSEPH JACOBS

  

Corresponding Member of the Royal Academy of History, Madrid

  

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
 ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON

  

[1892]

Scanned, Proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, June 2005, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Cover

<page 1>

Footnotes

^iii:1 Translation of the Goethe epigram, above:

On the great scales of fortune,
 The balance rarely keeps still;
 You must rise or sink,
 You must rule and win
 Or serve and lose,
 Suffer or triumph,
 Be the anvil or the hammer.

--JBH.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

TO

MRS. G. H. LEWIS

Dear Mrs. Lewis,

This little book were not worthy of being associated with your name, did it not offer an ideal of life at once refined and practical, cultured yet wisely energetic. Gracian points to noble aims, and proposes, on the whole, no ignoble means of attaining to them. The Spanish Jesuit sees clear, but he looks upward.

There is, however, one side of life to which he is entirely blind, as was perhaps natural in an ecclesiastic writing before the Age of Salons. He nowhere makes mention in his pages of the gracious influence of Woman as Inspirer and Consoler in the Battle of Life. Permit me to repair this omission by placing your name in the forefront of this English version of his maxims. To those honoured with your friendship this will by itself suffice to recall all the ennobling associations connected with your sex.

Believe me, dear Mrs. Lewis,

    Yours most sincerely,

        JOSEPH JACOBS.

 

KILBURN, 26th October 1892.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE

My attention was first drawn to the Oraculo Manual by Mr. (now Sir Mountstuart) Grant Duff's admirable article on Balthasar Gracian in the Fortnightly Review of March 1877. I soon after obtained a copy of Schopenhauer's excellent version, and during a journey in Spain I procured with some difficulty a villainously printed edition of Gracian's works (Barcelona, 1734, "Por Joseph Giralt"), which contains the Oraculo Manual towards the end of the first volume (pp. 431-494).

I have translated from this last, referring in the many doubtful places of its text to the first Madrid edition of 1653, the earliest in the British Museum. I have  had Schopenhauer's version by my side, and have

[p. viii]

found it, as Sir Mountstuart Grant Duff says, "a most finished piece of work," though I have pointed out in the Notes a few cases where he has failed, in my opinion, to give Gracian's meaning completely or correctly. I have little doubt that I am a fellow-sinner in this regard: I know no prose style that offers such difficulty to a translator as Gracian's laconic and artificial epigrams. It is not without reason that he has been called the Intraducible. The two earlier English versions miss his points time after time, and I found it useless to refer to them. On the other hand, I have ventured to adopt some of Sir Mountstuart Grant Duff's often very happy renderings in the extracts contained in his Fortnightly article.

I have endeavoured to reproduce Gracian's Laconism and Cultismo in my version, and have even tried to retain his many paronomasias and jingles of similar sound. I may have here and there introduced others of my own to redress the balance for cases where I found it impossible to produce the same effect in English. In such cases I generally give the

[p. ix]

original in the Notes. Wherever possible I have replaced Spanish proverbs and proverbial phrases by English ones, and have throughout tried to preserve the characteristic rhythm and brevity of the Proverb. In short, if I may venture to say so, I have approached my task rather in the spirit of Fitzgerald than of Bohn.

The gem on the title, representing a votive offering to Hermes, the god of Worldly Wisdom, is from a fine paste in the British Museum of the best period of Greek glyptic art. I have to thank Mr. Cecil Smith of that Institution for kind advice in the selection.

Let me conclude these prefatory words with a piece of advice as oracular as my original: When reading this little book for the first time, read only fifty maxims and then stop for the day.

JOSEPH JACOBS.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

TESTIMONIA

IL est si concis si rompu et si estrangement coupe qu'il semble qu'il ait pris l'obscurite a tasche: aussi le Lecteur a besoin d'en deuiner le sens & souvent quand il l'a compris il trouve qu'il s'est estudie a faire une enigme d'une chose fort commune.

F. VAN AERSSENS, Voyage d'Espagne, 1667, p. 294.

Il a beaucoup d'elevation, de subtilite, de force et meme de bon sens: mais on ne sait le plus souvent ce qu'il veut dire, et il ne le sait pas peut-etre lui-meme. Quelques-uns de ses Ouvrages ne semblent etre fait, que pour n'etre point entendus.

BOUHOUR'S Entretiens d'Ariste et d'Eugene, 1671, p. 203.

Luisa de Padilla, a Lady of great Learning, and Countess of Aranda, was in like manner angry with the famous Gratian upon his publishing his Treatise of the Discreto, wherein she fancied that he had laid open those Maxims to common Readers, which ought only to be reserved for the knowledge of the Great. These Objections are thought by many of so much weight that they often defend

[p. x]

the above-mention'd Authors by affirming they have affected such an Obscurity in their Style and Manner of Writing, that tho' every one may read their Works there will be but very few who can comprehend their Meaning.

The Spectator, No. 379 (1712).

En cherchant toujours l'energie et le sublime il devient outre et se perd dans les mots. Gracian est aux bons moralistes ce que Don Quichotte est aux vrais heros. Its ont l'un et l'autre un faux air de grandeur qui en impose aux sots et qui fait rire les sages.

ABBE DESFONTAINES, 1745.

Que de elogios no se deben al autor del Criticon! En medio de las antitesis, paronomasias y toda la metralla culta es una de las obras mas recomendables de nuestra literatura por la felicidad de la invention, la inagotable riqueza de imagination y de sales, por la viveza de sus pinturas y por la gracia, soltura y naturalidad del estilo.

DON MANUEL SIEVELA, Biblioteca selecta de literatura espanola (1819).

Si hubiese Gracian procedido con mas sobriedad en el uso de estos juegos y conceptos ?qual es el escritor de su tiempo de tantos dotes y caudal nativo para ser el mas fecondo y elezante, sabiendo, como lo manifesto, en donde estaban las delicadezas y los donaires, esto es, lo amargo, lo dulce, lo picante, lo salado de la lengua castellana?

DON ANTONIO CAPMANY, Teatro de la elocuencia espanola, tomo v.

The Oraculo Manual has been more used than any other of the author's works. It is intended to be a collection of maxims of general utility, but it exhibits good and bad precepts, sound judgments, and refined sophisms, all confounded together. In this work Gracian has not forgotten

[p. xiii]

to inculcate his practical principles of Jesuitism to be all things to all men ("hacerse a todos"), nor to recommend his favourite maxim, "to be common in nothing" ("en nada vulgar"), which, in order to be valid, would require a totally different interpretation from that which he has given it.

BOUTERWEK.

The person, however, who settled the character of cultismo and in some respects gave it an air of philosophical pretension, was Baltazar Gracian, a Jesuit of Aragon, who lived between 1601 and 1658, exactly the period when the cultivated style took possession of Spanish prose and rose to its greatest consideration.

G. TICKNOR, History of Span. Lit. iii. 222.

Dabei ist es das Einzige seiner Art und nie ein anderes uber denselben Gegenstand geschrieben worden; denn nur ein Individuum aus der feinsten aller Nationen, der spanischen, konnte es versuchen. . . . Dasselbe lehrt die Kunst derer Allesich befliessigen und ist daher fur Jedermann. Besonders aber ist es geeignet das Handbuch aller derer zu werden, die in der grossen Welt leben, ganz vorzuglich aber junger Leute, die ihr Gluck darin zu machen bemuht sind und denen es mit Einem Mal und zum Voraus die Belehrung giebt die sie sonst erst durch lange Erfahrung erhalten.

A. SCHOPENHAUER, Litterarische Notiz we seiner Uebersetzung (1831, published 1861).

Avec beaucoup d'esprit, d'instruction & de facilite il n'a rien produit qui puisse aujourd'hui soutenir l'examen de la critique la plus impartiale.

PUIBUSQUE, Histoire comparee des litteratures espagnole et francaise, 1843, i. p. 559.

Gracian aurait pu etre un excellent ecrivain s'il n'avait pas voulu devenir un ecrivain extraordinaire. Doue d'une

[p. xiv]

vaste erudition, d'un esprit fin, d'un talent profond d'observation, il etait ne pour eclairer son siecle; mais la vanite de devenir novateur corrompit son gout, en le portant a introduire dans la prose ce langage precieux, ces expressions alambiquees que Gongora avait introduit dans les vers.

A. DE BACKER, Bibliotheque des ecrivains de la Compagnie de Jesus, 1869, s.v. Gracian.

Asi como las maximas de Antonio Perez fueron muy populares entre cortesanos o doctos o ilustrados, asi espanoles como extranjeros, por aquella delicadeza especial de estilo, las del Padre Baltasar Gracian alcanzaron la misma estima por ese atildamiento en el decir: atildamiento que tenia en si un inexplicable atractivo, y que aunque algo participaba del general culteranismo de la literatura espanola en aquel siglo, encerraba cierto buen gusto deslumbrador y lisonjero para el lector que on profundisimos conceptos preciaba con la fuerza de su ingenio aquellos.

DON ADOLFO DE CASTRO, Obras escogidas de Filosofia, 1873, p. cviii.

Taking the book as a guide, especially for those who intend to enter public life, I have never chanced to meet with anything which seemed to me even distantly to approach it . . . It would possibly be rather difficult to disprove the thesis that the Spanish nation has produced the best maxims of practical wisdom, the best proverb, the best epitaph, and the best motto in the world, If I had to sustain it, I would point with reference to the first head to the .

Sir M. E. GRANT DUFF on "Balthasar Gracian" in Fortnightly Review, March 1877.

[p. xv]

Some have found light in the sayings of Balthasar Gracian, a Spaniard who flourished at the end of the seventeenth century. . . . I do not myself find Gracian much of a companion, though some of his aphorisms give a neat turn to a commonplace.

J. MORLEY on "Aphorisms," Studies, 1891, p. 86.

 

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xvii]

  

INTRODUCTION

  

I. Of Balthasar Gracian and his Works

WE may certainly say of Gracian what Heine by an amiable fiction said of himself: he was one of the first men of his century. For he was born 8th January 1601 N.S. [*1] at Belmonte, a suburb of Calatayud, in the kingdom of Aragon. Calatayud, properly Kalat Ayoub, "Job's Town," is nearly on the site of the ancient Bilbilis, Martial's birthplace. As its name indicates, it was one of the Moorish settlements, and nearly one of the most northern. By Gracian's time it had again been Christian and Spanish for many generations, and Gracian himself was of noble birth. For a Spaniard of

[p. xviii]

noble birth only two careers were open, arms and the Church. In the seventeenth century arms had yielded to the cassock, and Balthasar and his three brothers all took orders. Felipe, his eldest, joined the order of St. Francis; the next brother, Pedro, became a Trinitarian during his short life; and the third, Raymundo, became a Carmelite [*1]. Balthasar himself tells us (Agudeza, c. xxv.) that he was brought up in the house of his uncle, the licentiate Antonio Gracian, at Toledo, from which we may gather that both his father and his mother, a Morales, died in his early youth. He joined the Company of Jesus in 1619, when in its most flourishing state, after the organising genius of Acquaviva had given solid form to the bold counter-stroke of Loyola to the Protestant Revolution. The  was just coming into full force, and Gracian was one of the earliest men in Europe to be educated on the system which has dominated the secondary education of Europe almost down to our own days. This point is of some importance, we shall see, in considering Gracian's chief work.

Once enrolled among the ranks of the Jesuits, the individual disappears, the Jesuit alone remains. There is scarcely anything to

[p. xix]

record of Gracian's life except that he was a Jesuit, and engaged in teaching what passes with the Order for philosophy and sacred literature, and became ultimately Rector of the Jesuit College at Tarragona. His great friend was Don Vincencio Juan de Lastanosa, a dilettante of the period, who lived at Huesca, and collected coins, medals, and other archaeological bric-a-brac. Gracian appears to have shared his tastes, for Lastanosa mentions him in his description, of his own cabinet. A long correspondence with him was once extant and seen by Latassa, who gives the dates and places where the letters were written. From these it would seem that Gracian moved about considerably from Madrid to Zarogoza, and thence to Tarragona. From another source we learn that Philip III. often had him to dinner to provide Attic salt to the royal table. He preached, and his sermons were popular. In short, a life of prudent prosperity came to an end when Balthasar Gracian, Rector of the Jesuit College at Tarragona, died there 6th December 1658, at the age of nearly fifty-eight years.

Of Gracian's works there is perhaps more to say even while leaving for separate consideration that one which is here presented to the English reader and forms his chief claim to

[p. xx]

attention. Spanish literature was passing into its period of swagger, a period that came to all literatures of modern Europe after the training in classics had given afresh the sense of style. The characteristic of this period in a literature is suitably enough the appearance of "conceits" or elaborate and far-fetched figures of speech. The process began with Antonia Guevara, author of El Libro Aureo, from which, according to some, the English form of the disease known as Euphuism was derived. But it received a  impetus from the success of the stilo culto of Gongora in poetry. [*1] Gongorism drove "conceit" to its farthest point: artificiality of diction could go no farther in verse: it was only left for Gracian to apply it to prose.

He did this for the first time in 1630 in his first work, El Heroe. This was published, like most of his other works, by his lifelong friend Lastanosa, and under the name of Lorenzo Gracian, a supposititious brother of Gracian's, who, so far as can be ascertained, never existed. The whole of El Heroe exists, in shortened

[p. xxi]

form, in the Oraculo Manual. [*1] The form, however, is so shortened that it would be difficult to recognise the original primores, as they are called, of El Heroe. Yet it is precisely in the curtness of the sentences that the peculiarity of the stilo culto consists. Generally elaborate metaphor and far-fetched allusions go with long and involved sentences of the periodic type. But with Gracian the aim is as much towards shortness as towards elaboration. The embroidery is rich but the jacket is short, as he himself might have said. As for the subject-matter, the extracts in the Oraculo will suffice to give some notion of the lofty ideal or character presented in El Heroe, the ideal indeed associated in the popular mind with the term hidalgo. [*2]

A later book, El Discreto, first published in 1647, gives the counterpoise to El Heroe by drawing an ideal of the prudent courtier as contrasted with the proud and spotless hidalgo. This too is fully represented in the book before us, but the curtailment is still more marked

[p. xxii]

than in the case of El Heroe. There is evidence that Gracian wrote a similar pair of contrasts, termed respectively El Galante and El Varon Atento, which were not published but were incorporated in the Oraculo Manual by Lastanosa. The consequences of this utilisation of contrasts will concern us later.

Reverting to Gracian's works somewhat more in their order, his eloge of Ferdinand, the Magus of Columbus' epoch, need not much detain us. It is stilted and conventional and does not betray much historical insight. Gracian's Agudeza y Arte de Ingenio is of more importance and interest as the formal exposition of the critical principles of Cultismo. It is concerned more with verse than prose and represents the Poetics of Gongorism. A curious collection of flowers of rhetoric in Spanish verse could be made from it. Of still more restricted interest is the Comulgador or sacred meditations for holy communion. I do not profess to be a judge of this class of literature, if literature it can be called, but the fact that the book was deemed worthy of an English translation as lately as 1876 seems to show that it still answers the devotional needs of Catholics. It has a personal interest for

[p. xxiii]

[paragraph continues] Gracian, as it was the only book of his that appeared under his own name.

There remains only to be considered, besides the Oraculo Manual, Gracian's El Criticon, a work of considerable value and at least historic interest which appeared in the three parts dealing with Youth, Maturity, and Old Age respectively during the years 1650-53. This is a kind of philosophic romance or allegory depicting the education of the human soul. A Spaniard named Critilo is wrecked on St: Helena, and there finds a sort of Man Friday, [*1] whom he calls Andrenio. Andrenio, after learning to communicate with Critilo, gives him a highly elaborate autobiography of his soul from the age of three days or so. They then travel to Spain, where they meet Truth, Valour, Falsehood, and other allegorical females and males, who are labelled by Critilo for Andrenio's benefit in the approved and frigid style of the allegorical teacher. Incidentally, however, the ideals and aspirations of the Spaniard of the seventeenth century are brought out, and from this point of view the book derives

[p. xxiv]

the parallel with the Pilgrim's Progress which Ticknor had made for it. [*1] It is certainly one of the most characteristic products of Spanish literature, both for style and subject-matter.

Nearly all these works of Gracian were translated into most of the cultured languages of Europe, English not excepted. [*2] Part of this ecumenical fame was doubtless due to the fact that Gracian was a Jesuit, and brethren of his Order translated the works of one of whom the Order was justly proud. But this explanation cannot altogether account for the wide spread of Gracian's works, and there remains a deposit of genuine ability and literary skill involved in most of the works I have briefly referred to--ability and skill of an entirely obsolete kind nowadays, but holding a rank of their own in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when didacticism was all the rage. It is noteworthy that the Testimonia I have collected for the most part pass over the Oraculo, the only work at which a modern would care to cast a second glance, and go into raptures over El Criticon and its fellows, or the reverse of raptures on

[p. xxv]

[paragraph continues] Gracian's style, which after all was the most striking thing about his works.

That style reaches its greatest perfection in the Oraculo Manual, to which we might at once turn but for a preliminary inquiry which it seems worth while to make. It is a book of maxims as distinguished from a book of aphorisms, and it is worth while for several reasons inquiring into maxims in general and maxim literature in particular before dealing with what is probably the most remarkable specimen of its class.

Before, however, doing this we may close this section of our introductory remarks by "putting in," as the lawyers say, the Latin inscription given by Latassa from the foot of the portrait of Gracian, which once stood in the Jesuit College at Calatayud, a portrait of which, alas! no trace can now be found. The lines sum up in sufficiently forcible Latin all that need be known of Balthasar Gracian and his works.

P. BALTHASAR GRACIAN VT IAM AB ORTV EMINERET
 IN BELLOMONTE NATVS EST PROPE BILBILIM
 CONFINIS MARTIALIS PATRIA PROXIMVS INGENIO,
 VT PROFVNDERET ADHVC CHRISTIANAS ARGVTIAS BILBILIS
 QVAe POeNE EXHAVSTA VIDEBATVR IN ETHNICIS.
 ERGO AVGENS NATALE INGENIVM INNATO ACVMINE SCRIPSIT [p. xxvi]
 ARTEM INGENII ET ARTE FACIT SCIBILE QVOD SCIBILES FACIT ARTES.
 SCRIPSIT ITEM ARTEM PRVDENTIAE ET A SE IPSO ARTEM DIDICIT.
 SCRIPSIT ORACVLVM ET VOCES SVAS PROTVLIT.
 SCRIPSIT DISERTVM VT SE IPSVM DESCRIBERET
 ET VT SCRIBERET HEROEM HEROICA PATRAVIT.
 HAeC ET ALIA EIVS SCRIPTA MOECENATES REGES HABVERVNT
 IVDICES ADMIRATIONEM LECTOREM MVNDVM
 TYPOGRAPHVM AeTERNITATEM. PHILIPPVS III. SAePE ILLIVS ARGVTIAS
 INTER PRANDIVM VERSABAT NE DEFICERENT SALES
 REGIIS DAPIBVS. SED QVI PLAVSVS EXCITAVERAT
 CALAMO DEDITVS MISSIONIBVS EXCITAVIT PLANCTVS VERBO
 EXCITATVRVS DESIDERIVM IN MORTE QVA RAPTVS FVIT
 VI. DECEMBRIS AN. MDCLVIII SED ALIQVANDO EXTINCTV3 AeTERNVM LVCEBIT.

 

Footnotes

^xvii:1 The ordinary authorities vary between 1594 and 1604. I follow Latassa y Ortin, Biblioteca nueva de los escritores Aragoneses, Pamplona, 1799, iii. 267 seq., practically the only original source for Gracian's life and works.

^xviii:1 Gracian mentions his brothers in his Agudeza.

^xx:1 On Gongora and his relation to Cultismo see Ticknor, Hist. Span. Lit. iii. 18 seq.; also Appendix G, "On the origin of Cultismo." Ticknor is, however, somewhat  against any form of Cultismo.

^xxi:1 See Notes to Maxims xxvi, xxxviii, xl, xlii, xliv, xl, lxiii, lxv, lxvii, xciv, xcviii, cvi, cxxvii.

^xxi:2 See Notes to Maxims ii, xx, xxii, xxv, xlix, li, liii, lv, lvi, lix, lxix, lxxi, lxxvi, lxxxvii, cxxii, cxxvii, cclxxvii, ccxcv.

^xxiii:1 It is not impossible that the English translation of The Critick by Rycaut, 1681, may have suggested the Friday incidents of Robinson Crusoe, which was intended to be a more didactic book than it looks.

^xxiv:1 Ticknor also suggests that the Criticon was derived from the Euphormion of Barclay, the author of Argenis.

^xxiv:2 See the details in the Bibliographical Appendix to this Introduction.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. Of Maxims

Many men have sought to give their views about man and about life in a pithy way; a few have tried to advise men in short sentences what to do in the various emergencies of life. The former have written aphorisms, the latter maxims. Where the aphorism states a fact of human nature, a maxim advises a certain course of action. The aphorism is written in the indicative, the maxim in an imperative mood. [*1] "Life is interesting if not happy,"

[p. xxvii]

is an aphorism, of Professor Seely's, I believe. "Ascend a step to choose a friend, descend a step to choose a wife," is a maxim of Rabbi Meir, one of the Doctors of the Talmud.

Now it is indeed curious how few maxims have ever been written. Wisdom has been extolled on the house-tops, but her practical advice seems to have been kept secret. Taking our own literature, there are extremely few books of practical maxims, and not a single one of any great merit. Sir Walter Raleigh's Cabinet Council, Penn's Maxims, and Chesterfield's Letters almost exhaust the list, and the last generally contains much more than mere maxims. Nor are they scattered with any profusion through books teeming with knowledge of life, the galaxy of English novels. During recent years extracts of their "beauties" have been published in some profusion--Wit and Wisdom of Beaconsfield; Wise, Witty, and Tender Sayings of George Eliot; Extracts from Thackeray, and the rest--but the crop of practical maxims to be found among them is extremely scanty. Aphorisms there are in plenty, especially in George Eliot, but he that is doubtful what course to pursue in any weighty crisis would wofully waste his time if he sought for advice from the novelists.

[p. xxviii]

Nor are the moralists more instructive in this regard. Bacon's Essays leave with one the impression of fulness of practical wisdom. Yet, closely examined, there is very little residue of practical advice left in his pregnant sayings. Even the source of most of this kind of writing, the Biblical book of Proverbs, fails to answer the particular kind of test I am at present applying. However shrewd some of them are, startling us with the consciousness how little human nature has changed, it is knowledge of human nature that they mainly supply. When we ask for instruction how to apply that knowledge we only get variations of the theme "Fear the Lord." Two thousand years of experience have indeed shown that the Fear or Love of the Lord forms a very good foundation for practical wisdom. But it has to be supplemented by some such corollary as "Keep your powder dry" before it becomes of direct service in the conduct of life.

It is indeed because of the unpractical nature of practical maxims that they have been so much neglected. You must act in the concrete, you can only maximise in general terms. Then, again, maxims can only appeal to the mind, to the intellect: the

[p. xxix]

motive force of action is the will, the temperament. As Disraeli put it: "The conduct of men depends on the temperament, not upon a bunch of musty maxims" (Henrietta Temple). It is only very distantly that a maxim can stir the vague desire that spurs an imitative will. True, at times we read of men whose whole life has been coloured by a single saying. But these have generally been more appeals to the imagination, like Newman's "Securus judicat orbis terrarum," or the "Heu! fuge crudeles terras, fuge litus avarum," which had so decisive an effort on Savonarola's life. It is rare indeed that a man's whole life is tinged by a single practical maxim like Sir Daniel Gooch, who was influenced by his father's advice, "Stick to one thing."

Perhaps one of the reasons that have led literary persons to neglect the Maxim as a literary form has been their own ignorance of Action and, still more, their exaggerated notions of its difficulties and complexities. Affairs are not conducted by aphorisms: war is waged by a different kind of Maxims from those we are considering. Yet after all there must be some general principles on which actions should be conducted, and one would think they could be determined. Probably

[p. xxx]

the successful men of action are not sufficiently self-observant to know exactly on what their success depends, and, if they did, they would in most cases try to "keep it in the family," like their wealth or their trade secrets.

And perhaps after all they are right who declare that action has little to do with intellect, and much with character. To say the truth, one is not impressed with the intellectual powers of the millionaires one meets. The shadiest of journalists could often explain their own doings with more point than they. Yet there are surely intellectual qualifications required for affairs: the Suez Canal must have required as great an amount of research, emendation, sense of order, and organisation as, say, the Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum. But there is no such punishment for slovenly scholarship in action as there is in letters. The Suez Canal can be dug only once: Lucretius or Latin inscriptions can be edited over and over again. Altogether we need not be surprised if the men of action cannot put the principles of action into pointed sentences or maxims.

And if men of action cannot, it is not surprising that men of letters do not. For they cannot have the interest in action and its

[p. xxxi]

rewards which is required for worldly success, or else they would not be able to concentrate their thoughts on things which they consider of higher import. To a man of letters the world is the devil, or ought to he if he is to have the touch of idealism which gives colour and weight to his words. How then is he to devote his attention to worldly wisdom and the maxims that are to teach it? It is characteristic in this connection that the weightiest writer of maxims in our language is Bacon, who attempted to combine a career of affairs and of thought, and spoilt both by so doing.

It is perhaps due to the subtle and all-embracing influence of Christianity on modern civilisation that this divorce between idealism and the world has come about. The strenuous opposition to the world among earnest Christians has led to their practical withdrawal from it. Just as the celibacy of the clergy meant that the next generation was to be deprived of the hereditary influence of some of the purest spirits of the time, so the opposition of Christianity to the world has brought it about that the world has been un-Christian. Only one serious attempt has been made to bridge the chasm. The idee mere of Jesuitism was

[p. xxxii]

to make the world Christian by Christians becoming worldly. It was doubtless due to the reaction against the over -spiritualisation of Christianity pressed by the Protestant Reformation, but its practical result has been to make the Jesuit a worldly Christian. The control of the higher education of Europe by the Jesuits has tended, on the other hand, to make society more Christian. If then we were to look for an adequate presentation of worldly wisdom touched with sufficient idealism to make it worthy of a man of letters, we should look for it from a Jesuit, or from one trained among the Jesuits.

After all this elaborate explanation why so few maxims have been composed it may seem contradictory to give as a further and final reason because so many exist--under another form. For what are the majority of proverbs but maxims under another name, or rather maxims without the name of their author? We say of proverbs, indeed, that they arise among the people, but it is one definite individual among the people that gives them the piquant form that makes them proverbial. It was, we may be sure, a definite English gaffer who first said, "Penny wise, pound foolish." If we knew his name, we should call it maxim; as

[p. xxxiii]

his name is unknown it ranks as a proverb. In this connection the Talmudic proverbs and maxims are of great interest. Owing to the worthy Rabbinic principle, "Say a thing in the name of the man who said it," we can in almost all cases trace Talmudic proverbs to their authors; or, in other words, Talmudic proverbs remain maxims. There is only one analogous case in English; a few of Benjamin Franklin's maxims, e.g. "Three removes are as good as a fire," [*1] have become proverbs.

The abundance of proverbs is extraordinary. There is a whole bibliography devoted to the literature of proverbs (Duplessis, Bibliographie Paremiologique, Paris, 1847), and this needs nowadays a supplement as large again as the original (partly supplied by the bibliographical Appendix of Haller, Altspanische Sprichworter, 1883). Indeed in the multitude of proverbs consists the greatest proof of their uselessness as guides to action, for by this means we get proverbs at cross purposes. Thus take the one I have just referred to, "Penny wise, pound foolish," which has a variant in the proverb, "Do not spoil the ship for a ha'porth of tar."

[p. xxxiv]

[paragraph continues] A man who was hesitating as to the amount or expense he would incur in any undertaking would be prompted by these sayings to be lavish. But then how about the proverb, "Take care of the pence and the pounds will take care of themselves"? Between the two proverbs he would come to the ground, and if he has the nous to decide between them, he does not need the proverbs at all.

Hence it is perhaps that the nation that is richest in proverbs is the one that has proved itself among European peoples the least wise in action. To the Spaniards has been well applied the witticism about Charles II.: "They never said a foolish thing and never did a wise one." Certainly if proverbs be a proof of wisdom the Spaniards have given proofs in abundance. Don Quixote is full of them and the Spanish collections are  rich. Now the nation that can produce good proverbs should be able to produce good maxims; hence we should expect the best book of maxims to emanate from a Spaniard.

One characteristic of both these forms of practical wisdom is their artificiality. One has to think twice before the point of a proverb or a maxim is perfectly clear. "The early bird catches the worm" seems at first sight as meaningless

[p. xxxv]

a proposition as "There are milestones on the Dover Road." Hence it is when a literature is passing through its artificial stage that maxims would naturally appear. So that it was clearly preordained that when the book of maxims should appear it would be by a Jesuit, so as to be worldly yet not too worldly; by a Spaniard, so that it should have the proverbial ring; and during the prevalence of cultismo, so that it should have the quaintness to attract attention.

Footnotes

^xxvi:1 Not to be misleading, I may mention that Gracian's are generally in the infinitive.

^xxxiii:1 Most persons have heard the cynical continuation of a modern: "Three fires are as good as a failure and three failures are as good as a fortune."

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

  

III Of the "Oraculo Manual"

Having thus proved a priori that the ideal book of maxims was destined to be the Oraculo Manual of Balthasar Gracian, let us proceed to prove our proof, as schoolboys do with their sums. That it is the best book of maxims is a foregone conclusion, because there is none other. Schopenhauer, who translated the book, observes that there is nothing like it in German, and there is certainly none approaching it in English, and if France or Italy can produce its superior, it is strange that its fame has remained so confined to its native country.

Not that there are not books teaching the art of self-advancement in almost all languages. The success of Dr. Smiles's volume on Self-Help is a

[p. xxxvi]

sufficient instance of this. [*1] Curiously enough, Dr. Smiles's book has had its greatest success in Italy, where it has given rise to quite a letteratura selfelpista, as the Italians themselves call it. Or rather not curiously, for if you wish to find the most unromantic set of ideals nowadays you must go search among the Romance nations.

Gracian does not, however, compete with Dr. Smiles. He does not deal with Brodweisheit; he assumes that the vulgar question of bread and butter has been settled in favour of his reader. He may be worldly, but he is thinking of the great world. He writes for men with a position and how to make the most of it. Nor is the aim he puts before such persons an entirely selfish one. "The sole advantage of power is that you can do more good" is the only rational defence of ambition, and Gracian employs it (Max. cclxxxvi).

Indeed the tone of the book is exceptionally high. It is impossible to accuse a man of any meanness who is the author of such maxims as--

"One cannot praise a man too much who speaks well of them who speak ill of him" (clxii).

[p. xxxvii]

"Friends are a second existence" (cxi).

"When to change the conversation? When they talk scandal" (ccl).

"In great crises there is no better companion than a bold heart" (clxvii).

"The secret of long life: lead a good life" (xc).

"Be able to boast that if gallantry, generosity, and fidelity were lost in the world men would be able to find them again in your own breast" (clxv).

"A man of honour should never forget what he is because he sees what others are" (cclxxx).

And there are whole sections dealing with such topics as Rectitude (xxix), Sympathy with great Minds (xliv), a genial Disposition (lxxix), and the like.

Not that he is without the more subtle devices of the worldly wise. One could not wish to have anything more cynical or stinging than the following:--

"Find out each man's thumbscrew" (xxvi).

"A shrewd man knows that others when they seek him do not seek him, but their advantage in him and by him" (cclii).

"The truth, but not the whole truth" (clxxxi).

[p. xxxviii]

"Keep to yourself the final touches of your art" (ccxii).

"Do not take payment in politeness" (cxci).

"Have a touch of the trader" (ccxxxii). 

"Think with the few and speak with the many" (xliii).

"Never have a companion who casts you in the shade" (clii).

"Never become paradoxical in order to avoid the trite" (cxliii). [*1]

"Do not show your wounded finger" (cxlv).

The characteristic of the book is this combination or rather contrast of high tone and shrewdness. Gracian is both wisely worldly and worldly wise. After all, there does not seem to be any inherent impossibility in the combination. There does not seem any radical necessity why a good man should be a fool. One always has a certain grudge against Thackeray for making his Colonel Newcome so silly at times, though perhaps the irony, the pathos, the tragedy of the book required it. As a matter of fact the holiest of men have been some of the shrewdest, for their friends at least, if not for themselves.

The explanation of the combination in

[p. xxxix]

[paragraph continues] Gracian is simple enough. He was a Jesuit, and the Jesuits have just that combination of high tone and worldly wisdom as their raison d'etre. And in the case of the Oraculo the mixture was easily effected by Gracian or his friend Lastanosa. For Gracian had written at least two series of works in which this contrast was represented by separate books. Two of these describing the qualities of the Hero and the Prudent Man (El Heroe and El Discreto) were published and are represented in the Oraculo. [*1] Two others dealing with the Gallant and the Cautious Man (El Galante and El Varon Atento) are referred to by Lastanosa in the preface to El Discreto, and are also doubtless represented in the book before us. One may guess that the section on Highmindedness (cxxviii) or on Nobility of Feeling (cxxxi) comes from El Galante, while "Better mad with the rest of the world than wise alone" (cxxxiii) smacks of El Varon Atento. At times we get the two tones curiously intermingled: "Choose an heroic ideal" (lxxv) seems at first sight a noble sentiment, but Gracian goes on to qualify it by adding, "but rather to emulate than to imitate."

The modernness of the tone is the thing

[p. xl]

that will strike most readers apart from these contrasts. Here and there one may be struck by an archaic note. "Never compete" would scarcely be the advice of a worldly teacher nowadays. But on the whole there is a tone of modern good society about the maxims which one would scarcely find in contemporary English works like Peacham's, or even in contemporary French authors like Charron. The reason is that modern society is permeated by influences which Gracian himself represented. The higher education of Europe for the last two and a half centuries has been in the hands of Jesuits or in schools formed on the Ratio Studiorum. And Society in the stricter sense traces from the Hotel Rambouillet, where one-half the influence was Spanish. Gracian thus directly represents the tone of the two Societies which have set the tone of our society of to-day, and it is no wonder therefore if he is modern.

Even in his style there is something of a modern epigrammatic ring. At times there is the euphuistic quaintness, e.g. "One must pass through the circumference of time before arriving at the centre of opportunity." But as a rule the terseness and point of the maxim approximate to the modern epigram. "El

[p. xli]

escusarse antes de ocasion es culparse "might be both the source and the model of Qui s'excuse s'accuse. The terseness is indeed excessive and carried to Tacitean extremes. "A poco saber camino real," "Ultima felicidad el filosofar," "Harto presto, si bien." Gracian jerks out four or five words where a popular preacher would preach a sermon. Yet I cannot agree with the writers who call him obscure. He is one of the writers that make you think before you grasp his meaning, but the meaning is there, and put plainly enough, only tersely and very often indirectly, after the manner of proverbs. There is indeed no doubt that he and his predecessors were influenced by the form of the Spanish proverb in drawing up aphorisms and maxims. I say predecessors, for aphorismic literature at any rate was no novelty in Spain. Among the long list of books on aphorisms possessed by the late Sir William Stirling-Maxwell, and still at Keir, there are fully a dozen Spanish ones who precede Gracian(Hernando Diaz, Lopez de Corelas, and Melchior de Santa Cruz are the most important, though the latter is more full of anecdotage). Among them is a book of Aforismos by Antonio Perez, whose Relaciones has been the chief means of blackening Philip II.'s

[p. xlii]

character. [*1] The former are undoubtedly of the same style as Gracian, and probably influenced him, though, as they are aphorisms and not maxims, I have not been able to quote parallels in the Notes. Thus "Una obra vale millares de gracias" (Perez, Afor. i. 198) has the same proverbial ring. It is curious to see Lytton's "The pen is mightier than the sword" anticipated by Perez' "La pluma corta mas que espadas afiladas" (ibid. 199), or Voltaire's "Speech was given us to conceal our thoughts" in Perez' "Las palabras, vestido de los conceptos" (ii. 130). This last example has all Gracian's terseness, while Perez' "Amigos deste Siglo, rostros humanos, coracones de fieras" [*2] (ii. 71) has both terseness and cynicism. Certainly the only other work in Spanish or any other literature preceding Gracian on anything like the same lines is this book of Aforismos by Antonio Perez.

It is somewhat of a question, to my mind, how far Gracian was the author of the final form of the maxims as we have them in the Oraculo. Those taken from El Heroe and

[p. xliii]

[paragraph continues] El Discreto differ from their originals with great advantage. They are terser, more to the point and less euphuistic. Now the Address to the Reader has all these qualities, and we may assume was written by its signatory, Don Vincencio de Lastanosa. It is just possible that we owe to him the extreme terseness and point of the majority of the maxims of the Oraculo Manual. It must not, however, be assumed that they are all as pointed and epigrammatic as those I have quoted. Gracian seems advisedly to have imbedded his jewels in a duller setting. At times he vies with the leaders of the great sect of the Platitudinarians, and he can be as banal as he is brilliant. Even as it is, his very brilliancy wearies, and after fifty maxims or so one longs for a more fruity wisdom, a more digressive discussion of life like those learned, wise, and witty essays of Mr. Stevenson, which may some day take higher rank as literature than even his novels.

Perhaps, after all, the weariness to which I refer may be due to the cautious tone of the book. To succeed one must be prudent; [*1] that is the great moral of the book, and if so, does it seem worth while to succeed? If life is to be

[p. xliv]

denuded of the aleatory element, is it worth living? Well, Gracian meets you when in that temper too. It is indeed remarkable how frequently he refers to luck; how you are to trust your luck, weigh your luck, follow your luck, know your unlucky days, and so forth. Is all this a confession that after all life is too complex a game for any rules to be of much use? Granted, but there is one thing certain about life, and that is put by Goethe in the lines which I, following Schopenhauer, [*1] have placed at the head of my translation. One must be either hammer or anvil in this world, and too great an excess of idealism only means that the unideal people shall rule the world. To guard against both extremes we have the paradoxical advice I have heard attributed to Mr. Ruskin, "Fit yourself for the best society, and then--never enter it."

Whether any ideal person will learn to rule the world by studying Gracian's or any one else's maxims is somewhat more doubtful, for reasons I have given above in discussing proverbs. The man who can act on maxims can act without them, and so does not need them. And there is the same amount of contradiction

[p. xlv]

in maxims as in proverbs. Thus, to quote an example from the book before us, from Max. cxxxii it would seem best to keep back an intended gift: "long expected is highest prized"; whereas from Max. ccxxxvi we learn that "the promptness of the gift obliges the more strongly." Which maxim are we to act upon? That depends on circumstances, and the judgment that can decide on the circumstances can do without the maxims. I cannot therefore promise success in the world to whomsoever may read this book; otherwise I should perhaps not have published it.

But whether Gracian's maxims are true or useful scarcely affects their value. To the student of literature as such, the flimsiest sentiment or the merest paradox aptly put is worth the sublimest truth ill expressed. And there can be little doubt that Gracian puts his points well and vigorously. I cannot hope to have reproduced adequately all the vigour and force of his style, the subtlety of his distinctions, or the shrewdness of his mother-wit. But enough, I hope, has emerged during the process of translation to convince the reader that Gracian's Oraculo Manual has much wisdom in small compass and well put.

Footnotes

^xxxvi:1 One of our public men, I have been told, is known among his friends by the sobriquet of "Self-help by smiles."

^xxxviii:1 Mr. Oscar Wilde's attention may be respectfully called to this maxim.

^xxxix:1 See supra, <page xxi>. and notes.

^xlii:1 On Perez see Mr. Froude's paper in his Spanish Story of the Armada. Perez was over in England and was of the Sidney set.

^xlii:2 "Friends nowadays, human faces, hearts of brutes."

^xliii:1 The second title of the book is Arte de Prudencia, which I have adopted as the main title of my version.

^xliv:1 Gracian was his favourite author; "Mein Gracian" he called him on one occasion (Memorabilien, p. 505).

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xlvii]

  

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX

THE best bibliographical account of Gracian's works is that of Backer, Bibliotheque des ecrivains de la Compagnie de Jesus, 1869, sub voce. I have shortened the descriptions of the translations, etc., of the other works of Gracian, adding a few items from the British Museum Catalogue and other sources. The Oraculo Manual I have treated separately and more fully.

  

A. GRACIAN'S WORKS.

1. El Heroe de Lorenco Gracian Infanzon. Dedicado al Rey N.S. En Huesca por Juan Nogues, 1637, 8vo.

[Published by Don Vincencio Juan de Lastanosa. According to Latassa the first edition was published in Madrid, 1630. Other editions in Madrid, 1639 Barcelona, 1640; Amsterdam, 1659 (por Juan Blaeu); also in the Biblioteca de autores espanoles, 1873, t. lxv.

French translation (1) by Gervais, medecin du roy, Paris, 1645; reprinted Amsterdam, 1659; (2) by P. de Courbeville, Paris, 1725.

English translation (1) by Sir J. Skeffington, Lond. 1652; (2) from Courbeville's by a "gentleman of Oxford," Lond. 1726.]

[p. xlviii]

2. El politico Don Ferdinando el catolico de Lorenzo Gracian. Al excelentisimo Senor Duque de Nochera. En Zaragoza, 1640, 12 degrees.

[Published by Lastanosa. Reprinted Zaragoza, 1641, 16 degrees; Huesca, 1646, 12 degrees, Amsterdam, 1659.

French translation (1) by M. de S. (Silhouette, Chancellor of the Duc d'Orleans), Paris, 1720; reprinted 1730, and Amsterdam, 1731; (2) by P. de Courbeville, 1732, 120.

German translation by D. G. von Lohenstein.]

3. Agudeza y Acte de Ingenio en que se explican todos los modos y diferencias de conceptos. Madrid, 1642, 8vo.

[Also published by Lastanosa. Other editions at Huesca, 1646 and 1648 (the latter with Salinas' translation of Martial).

Italian translation by a Genoese who passed it off as his own (Journ. des Savants, 1696, p. 333).]

4. El Discreto. Dedicado al serenisimo Senor Don Baltasar Carlos de Austria. En Huesca por Juan Nogues, 1645, 8vo.

[Published by Lastanosa. Republished Barcelona, 1647, 180; Brussels, 1665, 120; Amsterdam, 1665, 12 degrees; also in Biblioteca de autores espanoles, 1873, t. lxv.

French translation by De Courbeville; 2nd ed. Rotterdam, 1729.

English, "The Compleat Gentleman," by T. Salkeld 2nd ed. London, 1730; 3rd, Dublin, 1760.

German, Der Vollkommene Menach. Augsburg, 1729, 8vo, from the French.

Italian, L'Uomo Universale. Venice, 1725, from the French.

Polish by Brzostowski. Wilna, 1762, from the French.]

[p. xlix]

5. El Criticon. Primera Parte en la Primavera de la Ninez y en el Estio de la Juventad. En Madrid, 1650, 8vo--Segunda Parte Juyziosa y cortesana Filosofia en el Otono de la Varonil Edad. En Huesca, 1653, 8vo--Tercera Parte en el Invierno de la Vejez. En Huesca, 1653, 8vo.

[Reprinted Madrid, 1658, 8vo.

English, Pt. I., by P. Rycaut. Lond. 1681.

French translation by Maunony. Paris, 1696-1708, 12 degrees. Reprinted at La Hague, 1708, 1723, 1734; Rouen, 1709; Geneva, 1725.

Italian, by G. P. Cattaneo. Venice, 1685, 1698, 1709, 1720, 1745.

Dutch, by M. Smallegange. 'S Gravenhage, 1691, 120.

German, by C. Gottschling. Frankfurt, 1710; Halle, 1721.]

6. Oraculo Manual. See infra B.

7. El Comulgador: varias meditaciones para . . . la sacrada communion. Madrid, 1655, 12 degrees.

[Reprinted Zaragoza, 1655, 160; Amberes, 1725, 4to; Valencia, 1736, 12 degrees; Madrid, 1757, 8vo, 1788, 16 degrees, 1826, 8vo; Paris, 1840, 24 degrees, 1851, 18 degrees, 1854, 18 degrees, 1857, 18 degrees, 1860, 18 degrees.

English translation by M. Monteiro, 1876, 8vo.

French, by Amelot de la Houssaie. Paris, 1693, 8vo.

Italian, by Castro and Inviziati.

German, anon. Frankfort, 1734, 8vo; reprinted Vienna, 1738; and Nuremberg, 1751, with Appendix by W. Reithmeier, 1847.

Latin, anon. Munster, 1750-52, 120.]

8. Obras de Lorenzo Gracian. Amberes, 1652, 4to.

Reprinted Madrid, 1664, 4to; Barcelona, 1667. [p. l]

4to; Amberes, 1669, 4to; Madrid, 1674, 4to; Barcelona, 1700, 4to (with four idylls Selvas de ano); Amberes, 1702, 4to, 1723, 4to; Madrid, 1720, 4to; Barcelona, 1734, 4to, 1748, 4to, 1757, 4to; Madrid 1773, 4to all in two vols.

Latassa also mentions various poems and letters which are scattered about, some in MS. For El Varon Atento and El Galante see supra <page xxii>.

  

B. ORACULO MANUAL.

Early Spanish Bibliography is in a very bad state. One difficulty is that each of the smaller kingdoms of Spain seems to have had the right to reprint books published in any other division. We find this difficulty with the Editio Princeps of the Oraculo Manual. Latassa states that it was first published in Huesca, Aragon, in 1647, "Por Juan Nogues" (like most of Gracian's works). No copy of this edition is known to exist in any of the great libraries of Spain or other parts of Europe, and the earliest known is that contained in the British Museum with the following title:--

Oracvlo / Manval y Arte / de Prvdencia / Sacada de los a / forismos que de discurren en / las obras de Lorenzo Gracian. / Publicala D. Vi / cencio Juan de Lastanosa. Y la dedica / al Excelentissimo / Senor D. Luis Mendez / de Haro. Con licencia. En Madrid por Maria de Oinones ano de 1653. / [160 pp. in 240.]

But in the Censor's licence to this there is a distinct reference to a previous edition with which it is said to correspond ["coresponde con el antes impresso . . . que otras vezes ha sido impresso "]. This confirms Latassa's date of 1647 for the ED. PR. But this makes it difficult to understand Lastanosa's reference to the twelve books of Gracian's, of which the Oraculo was the quintessence.

[p. li]

Four only had been published by that time, and the two unpublished would make up only half a dozen. We must therefore leave the date of the ED. PR. a variable between 1647 and 1653, to be fixed by the future Spanish Lowndes or Hazlitt.

The Oraculo was reprinted at Amsterdam 1659, and henceforth it appeared in all the editions of the Obras. It is curious that it has never been reprinted separately in modern times in Spain, and can only be obtained in Biblioteca de autores espanoles, tomo lxv. It has, however, been a book more honoured abroad than in its own country, as the following list of Translations, taken mainly from Grisebach and the British Museum Catalogue, will show

  

I. ITALIAN.

1. Oracolo manuale, e Arte di Prudenza / Cavata dagl' Aforismi, che si discorrono nell' Opre di Lorenzo Gratiano / Mandalo in Luce D. Vincenzo Giovanni de Lastanosa. Diretto alla Nobilta Venetiana e dedicato all' Illustr. & Eccellentiss. Sig. Leonardo Pesaro . . . In Venetia MDCLXXIX.

[Republished Venice, 1708, 1718, 1790.]

2. Huomo di Corte nuovamente tradotto dall' Abbate Francesa Tosques. Roma, 1698.

[From the French. Republished Venice, 1730; Naples, 1740, 1761.]

  

II. FRENCH.

1. L'homme de cour de Baltasar Gracian. Traduit & commente par le Sieur Amelot de la Houssaie, cidevant Secretaire de l'Ambassade de France a Venise. Paris, 1684.

[Reprinted La Hague, 1692; Lyons, 1693; Rotterdam, 1716, 1728; also editions in Paris, 1691, 170Z, 1732, 1765, 1808.]

[p. lii]

2. Maximes de Baltazar Gracien, traduites de l'Espagnol [par J. de Courbeville]. Paris, 1730.

  

III. ENGLISH.

1. The / Courtier's / Oracle; / or the / Art of Prudence / . . . Written originally in Spanish / And now done into English. London, 1694.

[From the French of Amelot de la Houssaie.]

2. The Art of Prudence; or a Companion for a Man of Sense. Made English . . and illustrated with the Sieur Amelot de la Houssaie's notes, by Mr. Savage. London, 1702.

[Two more editions, 1705, 1714. The hook was simply a revision of the earlier translation.]

  

IV. LATIN.

1. Balthas. Graciani, Hispani, Aulicus sive de prudentia civili et maxime aulica liber singularis olim hispanice conscriptus, postes et Gallice, Italice, Germanice editus, nunc ex Ameloti versione Latine redditus . . . Franc. Glarianus Meldenus, Constantiensis, recensuit, latine vertit . . . et notis illustravit. Accessit Joh. Gottl. Heineccii J.C. praefatio. Francofurti ad Viadrum MDCCXXXI.

[A reprint at Vienna, 1750.]

2. Hominis Aulici notum Graciani oraculum prudentiae, depromptum in sententiarum politicarum centurias III . . . Latinorum lingua loquens per interpretem P. A. Ulrich. 1734.

  

V. HUNGARIAN.

1. Bolts es figyelmetes udvari ember. Irta Spanyol nyelven Gratzian B. Forditotta Nemetbul Faludi F. . . . Posonyban, 1770, 1771.

[p. liii]

2. Udvari Kato Vagy is Gratzian B. nak Faludi F. altal Magyarra forditatott CCC Makszimai . . . Gyorolt, 1790.

[In verse.]

  

VI. POLISH.

Baltazar Gracyan doskonalacy dworskiego cz###322###owjeka przez 300 maxym . . . Krakow, 1802.

[By Count Sierakowski.]

  

VII. GERMAN.

1. L'Homme de cour Oder der heutige politische Welt- und Staats-Weife / furgestellet von Balthasar Gracian, Hispanieren Und wegen seiner hohen Wurde in unsre hochteutche Sprache ubersetzet anitzo aus dem Original vermehret, und zum Undernmahl herausgegeben von Joh Leonhard Sauter, J. U. D. Franctfurth und Leipzig, 1687.

[Pp. CXVIII, 775, 240.]

2. Balthasar Gracian's Homme de Cour, oder: Kluger Hof- und Weltmann, nach Mr. Amelot de la Houssaie seiner franzosischen Version, in's Teutsche ubersetzet von Selintes [= C. Weissbach]. Nebst Herrn C. Thomasii judicio vom Gracian. Augsburg, 1711.

3. Balthasar Gracians Oracul; d. i. Regeln der Klugheit. Aus dem Spanischen von A. F. Muller. 2 Bande. Leipzig, 1715-1717.

[Two thick volumes containing Spanish original, Germ. paraphrase, and elaborate notes. Went into a second edition in 1733.]

4. Uomo di corte oder fluger Hof- und Weltmann. Nach der Italienischen Uebersetzung ins Deutsche ubersetzt [von Christoph Heinrich Freisleben]. Ultenburg, 1723.

[With the Italian text.]

[p. liv]

5. Die Kunst zu leben; vortressliche Regeln eines alten Weltmannes furs menschliche leben. Nach Balthasar Gracian [von K. H. Heydenreich], Leipzig, 1786.

6. Der Mann von Welt, eingeweiht in die Geheimnisse der Lebensflugheit, ein nach Balthasar Gracian frei bearbeitetes vollstandig hinterlassenes Manuscript [von K. H. Heydenreich], Leipzig, Martini, 1803.

[Reprinted Reutlingen, 1804.]

7. Dos schwarze Buch oder Lehren der Lebensweisheit Gracian's . . . 1826.

8. Mannerschule von B. Gracian. Aus dem Spanischen ubersetzt von Fr. Kolle. Stuttgart, 1838.

9. Balthasar Gracian's Handorafel und Kunst der Weltlugheit, treu und forgfaltig ubersetzt von Arthur Schopenhauer. Nachgelassenes, Leipzig, 1861.

[Edited by Frauenstadt; reprinted 1862, 1877. Another edition from the original MS. by Grisebach in the Reclam series, 1889.]

  

VIII. DUTCH.

De Konst der Wysheit getrokken ujt de Spaensche van Gracian en nu vertaalt door M. Smallegange In's Gravenhage, MDCXCVI.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. lv]

  

LEADING MAXIMS

        i

       Everything is   at its Acme (Todo esta ya en su   punto)

       <page 1>

     
      ii

       Character and   Intellect (Genio y ingenio)

       <page 1>

     
      iii

       Keep Matters   for a Time in Suspense (Llevar sus   cosas con suspencion)

       <page 2>

     
      iv

       Knowledge and   Courage (El saber y el valor)

       <page 3>

     
      v

       Create a   Feeling of Dependence (Hazer depender)

       <page 3>

     
      vi

       A Man at his   Highest Point (Hombre en su pinto)

       <page 3>

     
      vii

       Avoid Victories   over Superiors (Escusar vitorias del   patron)

       <page 4>

     
      viii

       To be without   Passions (Hombre inapasionable)

       <page 5>

     
      ix

       Avoid the   Faults of your Nation (Desmentir los   achaques de su nation)

       <page 5>

     
      x

       Fortune and   Fame (Fortuna y Fama)

       <page 6>

     
      xi

       Cultivate those   who can teach you (Tratar con quien se   pueda aprender)

       <page 6>

     
      xii

       Nature and Art   (Naturaleza y Arte)

       <page 7>

     
       

       [p. lvi]

        

     
      xiii

       Act sometimes   on Second Thoughts, sometimes on First Impulse (Obrar de intencion, ya segunda y ya primera)

       <page 7>

     
      xiv

       The Thing   Itself and the Way it is done (La   realidad ye el modo)

       <page 8>

     
      xv

       Keep   Ministering Spirits (Tener ingenios   auxiliares)

       <page 9>

     
      xvi

       Knowledge and   Good Intentions (Saber con recta   intention)

       <page 10>

     
      xvii

       Vary the Mode   of Action (Variar de tenor en el obrar)

       <page 10>

     
      xviii

       Application and   Ability (Aplicacion y Minerva)

       <page 11>

     
      xix

       Arouse no   Exaggerated Expectations on entering (No   entrar con sobrada expectation)

       <page 11>

     
      xx

       A Man of the   Age (Hombre en su siglo)

       <page 12>

     
      xxi

       The Art of   being Lucky (Arte para ser dichoso)

       <page 13>

     
      xxii

       A Man of   Knowledge to the Point (Hombre de   plausibles noticias)

       <page 13>

     
      xxiii

       Be Spotless (No tener algun desdoro)

       <page 14>

     
      xxiv

       Keep the   Imagination under Control (Templar la   imaginacion)

       <page 14>

     
      xxv

       Know how to   take a Hint (Buen entendedor)

       <page 15>

     
      xxvi

       Find out each   Man's Thumbscrew (Hallarle su torcedor   a cada uno)

       <page 15>

     
      xxvii

       Prize Intensity   more than Extent (Pagarse mas de   Intenciones que de Extenciones)

       <page 16>

     
      xxviii

       Common in   Nothing (En nada vulgar)

       <page 16>

     
      xxix

       A Man of   Rectitude (Hombre de entereza)

       <page 17>

     
      xxx

       Have naught to   do with Occupations of Ill-repute (No   hazer profesion de empleos desautorizados)

       <page 18>

     
       

       [p. lvii]

        

     
      xxxi

       Select the   Lucky and avoid the Unlucky (Conocer   los afortunados para la election y los desdichados para la fuga)

       <page 18>

     
      xxxii

       Have the   Reputation of being Gracious (Estar en   opinion de dar gusto)

       <page 19>

     
      xxxiii

       Know how to   Withdraw (Saber abstraer)

       <page 19>

     
      xxxiv

       Know your   strongest Point (Conocer su realce Rey)

       <page 20>

     
      xxxv

       Think over   Things, most over the most Important (Hazer   concepto y mas de lo que importa mas)

       <page 20>

     
      xxxvi

       In Acting or   Refraining, weigh your Luck (Tener   tanteada su Fortuna, para el proceder, para desempenarse)

       <page 21>

     
      xxxvii

       Keep a Store of   Sarcasms, and know how to use them (Conocer   y saber usar de las varrillas)

       <page 22>

     
      xxxviii

       Leave your Luck   while Winning (Saberse dexar ganando   con la fortuna)

       <page 23>

     
      xxxix

       Recognise when   Things are ripe, and then enjoy them (Conocer   las cosas en su punto, en su sazon y saberlas lograr)

       <page 23>

     
      xl

       The Goodwill of   People (Gracia de las gentes)

       <page 24>

     
      xli

       Never   Exaggerate (Nunca exagerar)

       <page 24>

     
      xlii

       Born to command   (Del natural Imperio)

       <page 25>

     
      xliii

       Think with the   Few and speak with the Many (Sentir con   los menos y hablar con los mas)

       <page 25>

     
      xliv

       Sympathy with   great Minds (Simpatia con los   grandes varones)

       <page 26>

     
      xiv

       Use, but do not   abuse, Cunning (Usar, no abusar de las   reflexas)

       <page 27>

     
       

       [p. lviii]

        

     
      xlvi

       Master your   Antipathies (Corregir su antipatia)

       <page 27>

     
      xlvii

       Avoid   "Affairs of Honour" (Huir los   empeno)

       <page 28>

     
      xlviii

       Be Thorough (Hombre con fondos)

       <page 28>

     
      xlix

       Observation and   judgment (Hombre juyzioso y notante)

       <page 29>

     
      l

       Never lose   Self-respect (Nunca perderse el respeto   a si mismo)

       <page 29>

     
      li

       Know how to   Choose well (Hombre de buena election)

       <page 30>

     
      lii

       Never be put   out (Nunca descomponerse)

       <page 30>

     
      liii

       Diligent and   Intelligent (Diligente y inteligente)

       <page 31>

     
      liv

       Know how to   show your Teeth (Tener brios a   lo cuerdo)

       <page 31>

     
      lv

       Wait (Hombre de espera)

       <page 32>

     
      lvi

       Have Presence   of Mind (Tener buenos repentes)

       <page 33>

     
      lvii

       Slow and Sure (Mas seguros son los pensados)

       <page 33>

     
      lviii

       Adapt Yourself   to your Company (Saberse atemperar)

       <page 34>

     
      lix

       Finish off well   (Hombre de buen dexo)

       <page 34>

     
      lx

       A Sound   judgment (Buenos dictamenes)

       <page 35>

     
      lxi

       To Excel in   what is Excellent (Eminencia en lo   mejor)

       <page 35>

     
      lxii

       Use good   Instruments (Obrar con buenos   instrumentos)

       <page 36>

     
      lxiii

       To be the First   of the Kind is an Excellence (Excelencia   de primero)

       <page 36>

     
      lxiv

       Avoid Worry (Saberse escusar pesares)

       <page 37>

     
      lxv

       Elevated Taste   (Gusto relevante)

       <page 37>

     
      lxvi

       See that Things   end well (Atencion que salgan bien las   cosas)

       <page 38>

     
       

       [p. lix]

        

     
      lxvii

       Prefer Callings   en Evidence (Preferir los empleos plausibles)

       <page 39>

     
      lxviii

       It is better to   help with Intelligence than with Memory (Dar   entendimiento es de mas primor que el dar memoria)

       <page 39>

     
      lxix

       Do not give way   to every common Impulse (No rendirse   a un vulgar humor)

       <page 40>

     
      lxx

       Know how to   Refuse (Saber negar)

       <page 41>

     
      lxxi

       Do not   Vacillate (No ser desigual)

       <page 42>

     
      lxxii

       Be Resolute (Hombre de resolution)

       <page 42>

     
      lxxiii

       Utilise Slips (Saber usar del desliz)

       <page 43>

     
      lxxiv

       Do not be   Unsociable (No ser intratable)

       <page 43>

     
      lxxv

       Choose an   Heroic Ideal (Elegir idea heroyca)

       <page 44>

     
      lxxvi

       Do not always   be jesting (No estar siempre de   burlas)

       <page 45>

     
      lxxvii

       Be all Things   to all Men (Saber hazerse a   todos)

       <page 45>

     
      lxxviii

       The Art of   undertaking Things (Arte en el intentar)

       <page 46>

     
      lxxix

       A Genial   Disposition (Genio genial)

       <page 46>

     
      lxxx

       Take care to   get Information (Atencion al informarse)

       <page 47>

     
      lxxxi

       Renew your   Brilliance (Usar el renovar su   lucimiento)

       <page 47>

     
      lxxxii

       Drain Nothing   to the Dregs, neither Good nor Ill (Nunca   apurar, ni el mal, ni el bien)

       <page 48>

     
      lxxxiii

       Allow Yourself   some venial Fault (Permitese algun venial desliz)

       <page 48>

     
      lxxxiv

       Make use of   your Enemies (Saber usar de los   enemigos)

       <page 49>

     
      lxxxv

       Do not play   Manille (No ser malilla)

       <page 50>

     
      lxxxvi

       Prevent Scandal   (Prevenir las malas vozes)

       <page 50>

     
       

       [p. lx]

        

     
      lxxxvii

       Culture and Elegance   (Cultura y alino)

       <page 51>

     
      lxxxviii

       Let your   Behaviour be Fine and Noble (Sea el   trato por mayor procurando la sublimida en el)

       <page 52>

     
      lxxxix

       Know Yourself (Comprehension de si)

       <page 52>

     
      xc

       The Secret of   Long Life (Arte para vivir mucho)

       <page 53>

     
      xci

       Never set to   work at Anything if you have any Doubts of its Prudence (Obrar siempre sin escrupolos de imprudencia)

       <page 53>

     
      xcii

       Transcendant   Wisdom (Seso transcendental)

       <page 54>

     
      xciii

       Versatility (Hombre universal)

       <page 54>

     
      xciv

       Keep the extent   of your Abilities unknown (Incomprehensibilidad   de caudal)

       <page 55>

     
      xcv

       Keep   Expectation alive (Saber entretenir la   expectation)

       <page 55>

     
      xcvi

       The highest   Discretion (De la gran sinderesis)

       <page 55>

     
      xcvii

       Obtain and   preserve a Reputation (Conseguir y   conservar la reputation)

       <page 56>

     
      xcviii

       Write your   Intentions in Cypher (Cifrar la   voluntad)

       <page 56>

     
      xcix

       Reality and   Appearance (Realidad y aparencia)

       <page 57>

     
      c

       A Man without   Illusions, a wise Christian, a philosophic Courtier (Varon desenganado, Christiana sabio, Cortesano filosofo)

       <page 57>

     
      ci

       One half of the   World laughs at the other, and Fools are they all (La mitad del mundo se esta riendo a la otra mitad, con   necedad de todos)

       <page 58>

     
      cii

       Be able to   stomach big slices of Luck (Estomago   para grander bocados de la fortuna)

       <page 58>

     
       

       [p. lxi]

        

     
      ciii

       Let each keep   up his Dignity (Cada uno la magestad en   su modo)

       <page 59>

     
      civ

       Try your hand   at Office (Tener tomado el pulso   a los empleos)

       <page 59>

     
      cv

       Don't be a Bore   (No cansar)

       <page 60>

     
      cvi

       Do not parade   your Position (No afectar la fortuna)

       <page 61>

     
      cvii

       Show no   Self-satisfaction (No mostrar   satisfaccion de si)

       <page 62>

     
      cviii

       The Path to   Greatness is along with Others (Atajo   para ser persona, saber ladear)

       <page 62>

     
      cix

       Be not   Censorious (No ser acriminador)

       <page 63>

     
      cx

       Do not wait   till you are a Sinking Sun (No aguardar   a ser sol que se pone)

       <page 63>

     
      cxi

       Have Friends (Tener amigos)

       <page 64>

     
      cxii

       Gain Good-will   (Ganar la pia aficcion)

       <page 65>

     
      cxiii

       In Prosperity   prepare for Adversity (Prevenirse en la   fortuna prospera para la adversa)

       <page 65>

     
      cxiv

       Never Compete (Nunca competir)

       <page 66>

     
      cxv

       Get used to the   Failings of your Familiars (Hazerse   a las malas condiciones de los familiares)

       <page 66>

     
      cxvi

       Only act with   Honourable Men (Tratar siempre con   gente de obligaciones)

       <page 67>

     
      cxvii

       Never talk of   Yourself (Nunca hablar de si)

       <page 67>

     
      cxviii

       Acquire the   Reputation of Courtesy (Cobrar fama de   cortes)

       <page 68>

     
      cxix

       Avoid becoming   Disliked (No hazerse de mal querer)

       <page 69>

     
      cxx

       Live   Practically (Vivir a lo platico)

       <page 69>

     
       

       [p. lxii]

        

     
      cxxi

       Do not make a   Business of what is no Business (No   hazar negocio del no negocio)

       <page 70>

     
      cxxii

       Distinction in   Speech and Action (Senorio en el   dezir y en el hazar)

       <page 71>

     
      cxxiii

       Avoid   Affectation (Hombre desafectado)

       <page 71>

     
      cxxiv

        Get Yourself missed (Llegar a ser deseados)

       <page 72>

     
      cxxv

       Do not be a   Black List (No ser libro verde)

       <page 73>

     
      cxxvi

       Folly consists   not in committing Folly, but in not hiding it when committed (No es necio el que haze la necedad, sino   el que hecha no la sabe encubrir)

       <page 73>

     
      cxxvii

       Grace in   Everything (El despojo en todo)

       <page 74>

     
      cxxviii

       Highmindedness   (Alteza de animo)

       <page 74>

     
      cxxix

       Never Complain   (Nunca quexarse)

       <page 75>

     
      cxxx

       Do and be seen   Doing (Hazer y hazer parecer)

       <page 76>

     
      cxxxi

       Nobility of   Feeling (Galanteria de condition)

       <page 76>

     
      cxxxii

       Revise your   Judgments (Usar del reconsejo)

       <page 77>

     
      cxxxiii

       Better Mad with   the rest of the World than Wise alone (Antes   loco con todos que cuerdo a solas)

       <page 77>

     
      cxxxiv

       Double your   Resources (Doblar los requisitos de la   vida)

       <page 78>

     
      cxxxv

       Do not nourish   the Spirit of Contradiction (No tenga   espiritu de contradicion)

       <page 79>

     
      cxxxvi

       Post Yourself   in the Centre of Things (Ponerse bien   en las materias)

       <page 79>

     
      cxxxvii

       The Sage should   be Self-sufficing (Bastase a   si mismo el sabio)

       <page 80>

     
      cxxxviii

       The Art of   letting Things alone (Arte de dexar   estar)

       <page 80>

     
       

       [p. lxiii]

        

     
      cxxxix

       Recognise   unlucky Days (Conocer el dia aziago)

       <page 81>

     
      cxl

       Find the Good   in a Thing at once (Hallar luego con lo   buena en cada cosa)

       <page 82>

     
      cxli

       Do not listen   to Yourself (No escucharse)

       <page 82>

     
      cxlii

       Never from   Obstinacy take the Wrong Side because your Opponent has anticipated you in   taking the Right One (Nunca por tema   seguir el peor partido porque el contrario se adelanto y   escogeo el mejor)

       <page 83>

     
      cxliii

       Never become   Paradoxical in order to avoid the Trite (No   dar en paradoxo por huir de vulgar)

       <page 84>

     
      cxliv

       Begin with   Another's to end with your Own (Entrar   con la agena para salir con la suya)

       <page 85>

     
      cxlv

       Do not show   your wounded Finger (No descubrir el   dedo malo)

       <page 85>

     
      cxlvi

       Look into the   Interior of Things (Mirar por dentro)

       <page 86>

     
      cxlvii

       Do not be   Inaccessible (No ser inaccessible)

       <page 86>

     
      cxlviii

       Have the Art of   Conversation (Tener el arte de   conversar)

       <page 87>

     
      cxlix

       Know how to put   off Ills on Others (Saber declinar   a otro los males)

       <page 88>

     
      cl

       Know how to get   your Price for Things (Saber vender sus   cosas)

       <page 89>

     
      cli

       Think   beforehand (Pensar anticipado)

       <page 89>

     
      clii

       Never have a   Companion who casts you in the Shade (Nunca   acompanarse con quien que pueda deslucir)

       <page 90>

     
       

       [p. lxiv]

        

     
      cliii

       Beware of   entering where there is a great Gap to be filled (Huya de entrar a llenar grandes vacios)

       <page 91>

     
      cliv

       Do not Believe,   or Like, lightly (No ser facil en creer   ni en querer)

       <page 91>

     
      clv

       The Art of   getting into a Passion (Arte en el   apassionarse)

       <page 92>

     
      clvi

       Select your   friends (Amigos de eleccion)

       <page 93>

     
      clvii

       Do not make   Mistakes about Character (No   enganarse en las personas)

       <page 94>

     
      clviii

       Make use of   your Friends (Saber usar de los amigos)

       <page 94>

     
      clix

       Put up with   Fools (Saber sufrir necios)

       <page 95>

     
      clx

       Be careful in   Speaking (Hablar de atento)

       <page 96>

     
      clxi

       Know your pet   Faults (Conocer los defectos dulces)

       <page 96>

     
      clxii

       How to triumph   over Rivals and Detractors (Saber   triunfar de la emulation y malevolencia)

       <page 97>

     
      clxiii

       Never, from   Sympathy with the unfortunate, involve Yourself in his Fate (Nunca por la compassion del infeliz se ha   de incurrir en la desgracia del afortunado)

       <page 97>

     
      clxiv

       Throw Straws in   the Air (Echar al ayre algunas cosas)

       <page 98>

     
      clxv

       Wage War   Honourably (Hazer buena guerra)

       <page 98>

     
      clxvi

       Distinguish the   Man of Words from the Man of Deeds (Diferenciar   el hombre de palabras del de obras)

       <page 99>

     
      clxvii

       Know how to   take your own Part (Saber se ayudar)

       <page 100>

     
       

       [p. lxv]

        

     
      clxviii

       Do not indulge   in the Eccentricities of Folly (No   dar en monstruo de la necedad)

       <page 100>

     
      clxix

       Be more careful   not to Miss once than to Hit a hundred times (Atencion a no errar una mas que a acertar ciento)

       <page 101>

     
      clxx

       In all Things   keep Something in Reserve (Usar del   reten en todas las cosas)

       <page 101>

     
      clxxi

       Waste not   Influence (No gastar el favor)

       <page 102>

     
      clxxii

       Never contend   with a Man who has nothing to Lose (No   empenarse con quien no tiene que perder)

       <page 103>

     
      clxxiii

       Do not be Glass   in Intercourse, still less in Friendship (No   ser de vitrio en el trato y menos en la amistad)

       <page 103>

     
      clxxiv

       Do not live in   a Hurry (No vivir apriesa)

       <page 104>

     
      clxxv

       A Solid Man (Hombre substancial)

       <page 105>

     
      clxxvi

       Have Knowledge,   or know those that have Knowledge (Saber   o escuchar a quien sabe)

       <page 106>

     
      clxxvii

       Avoid   Familiarities in Intercourse (Escusar   llanezas en el trato)

       <page 106>

     
      clxxviii

       Trust your   Heart (Creer al coracon)

       <page 107>

     
      clxxix

       Reticence is   the Seal of Capacity (La retentiva es   el sello de la capacidad)

       <page 107>

     
      clxxx

       Never guide the   Enemy to what he has to do (Nunca   regirse por lo que el enemigo avia de hazer)

       <page 108>

     
      clxxxi

       The Truth, but   not the whole Truth (Sin mentir, no   dezir todas las verdades)

       <page 108>

     
      clxxxii

       A Grain of   Boldness in Everything (Un grano de   audacia con todo)

       <page 109>

     
       

       [p. lxvi]

        

     
      clxxxiii

       Do not hold   your Views too firmly (No aprender   fuertemente)

       <page 110>

     
      clxxxiv

       Do not be   Ceremonious (No ser ceremonial)

       <page 110>

     
      clxxxv

       Never stake   your Credit on a single Cast (Nunca   exponer el credito a la prueba de sola una vez)

       <page 111>

     
      clxxxvi

       Recognise   Faults, however high placed (Conocer   los defectos por mas autorizados que ester)

       <page 111>

     
      clxxxvii

       Do pleasant   Things Yourself, unpleasant things through Others (Todo lo favorable, obrarlo por si, todo lo odioso, por   terceros)

       <page 112>

     
      clxxxviii

       Be the Bearer   of Praise (Traer que alabar)

       <page 113>

     
      clxxxix

       Utilise   Another's Wants (Valerse de la   privacion agena)

       <page 114>

     
      cxc

       Find   Consolation in all Things (Hallar el   consuelo en todo)

       <page 114>

     
      cxci

       Do not take   Payment in Politeness (No pagarse de la   mucha cortesia)

       <page 114>

     
      cxcii

       Peaceful Life,   a long Life (Hombre de gran paz hombre   de mucha vida)

       <page 115>

     
      cxciii

       Watch him that   begins with Another's to end with his Own (Atencion al que entra con agena por salir a la suya)

       <page 115>

     
      cxciv

       Have reasonable   Views of Yourself and of your Affairs (Concebir   de si y de sus cosas cuerdamente)

       <page 116>

     
      cxcv

       Know how to   Appreciate (Saber estimar)

       <page 117>

     
      cxcvi

       Know your   ruling Star (Conocer su estrella)

       <page 117>

     
      cxcvii 

       Do not carry   Fools on your Back (Nunca   embaracarse con los necios)

       <page 118>

     
       

       [p. lxvii]

        

     
      cxcvii

       Know how to   transplant Yourself (Saberse   transplantar)

       <page 119>

     
      cxcix

       To find a   proper Place by Merit, not by Presumption (Saberse hazer lugar a lo cuerdo, no a lo entremetido)

       <page 120>

     
      cc

       Leave Something   to wish for (Tener que desear)

       <page 120>

     
      cci

       They are all   Fools who seem so besides half the rest (Son   tontos todos los que lo parecen y la mitad de los que no le parecen)

       <page 121>

     
      ccii

       Words and Deeds   make the Perfect Man (Dichos y hechos   hazen un varon consumado)

       <page 121>

     
      cciii

       Know the great   Men of your Age (Conocer las eminencias   de su siglo)

       <page 122>

     
      cciv

       Attempt easy   Tasks as if they were difficult, and difficult as if they were easy (Lo facil se ha de emprender como   dificultoso y lo dificultoso como facil)

       <page 122>

     
      ccv

       Know how to   play the Card of Contempt (Saber jugar   del desprechio)

       <page 123>

     
      ccvi

       Know that there   are vulgar Natures everywhere (Sepase   que ay vulgo en todas partes)

       <page 124>

     
      ccvii

       Be Moderate (Usar del reporte)

       <page 124>

     
      ccviii

       Do not die of   the Fools' Disease (No morir de achaque   de necio)

       <page 125>

     
      ccix

       Keep Yourself   free from common Follies (Librarse de   las comunes necedades)

       <page 126>

     
      ccx

       Know how to   play the Card of Truth (Saber jugar de   la verdad)

       <page 126>

     
      ccxi

       In Heaven all   is bliss (En el cielo todo es contento)

       <page 127>

     
       

       [p. lxviii]

        

     
      ccxii

       Keep to   Yourself the final Touches of your Art (Reservarse   siempre las ultimas tretas del arte)

       <page 128>

     
      ccxiii

       Know how to   Contradict (Saber contradecir)

       <page 128>

     
      ccxiv

       Do not turn one   Blunder into two (No hazer de una   necedad dos)

       <page 129>

     
      ccxv

       Watch him that   acts on Second Thoughts (Atencion al   que llega de segunda intencion)

       <page 129>

     
      ccxvi

       Be Expressive (Tener la declarativa)

       <page 130>

     
      ccxvii

       Neither Love   nor Hate for ever (No se ha de querer   ni aborrecer para siempre)

       <page 131>

     
      ccxviii

       Never act from   Obstinacy but from Knowledge (Nunca   obrar por tema sino por intencion)

       <page 131>

     
      ccxix

       Do not pass for   a Hypocrite (No ser tenido por hombre   de artificio)

       <page 132>

     
      ccxx

       If you cannot   clothe yourself in Lionskin use Foxpelt (Quando   no puede uno vestirse la piel del Leon, vestase la de la Vulpeja)

       <page 133>

     
      ccxxi

       Do not seize   Occasions to embarrass Yourself or Others (No ser ocasionado ni para empenarse, ni para empenar)

       <page 133>

     
      ccxxii

       Reserve is   proof of Prudence (Hombre detenido   evidencia de prudente)

       <page 134>

     
      ccxxiii

       Be not   Eccentric (No ser muy individuado)

       <page 134>

     
      ccxxiv

       Never take   Things against the Grain (Saber tomar   las cosas nunca al repelo)

       <page 135>

     
      ccxxv

       Know your chief   Fault (Conocer su defecto Rey)

       <page 136>

     
      ccxxvi

       Take care to be   Obliging (Atencion a obligar)

       <page 136>

     
      ccxxvii

       Do not be the   Slave of First Impressions (No ser de   primera Impression)

       <page 137>

     
       

       [p. lxix]

        

     
      ccxxviii

       Do not be a   Scandalmonger (No tener voz de mala voz)

       <page 137>

     
      ccxxix

       Plan out your   Life wisely (Saber repartir su vida   a lo discreto)

       <page 138>

     
      ccxxx

       Open your Eyes   betimes (Abrir los ojos con tiempo)

       <page 139>

     
      ccxxxi

       Never let   Things be seen half-finished (Nunca   permitir a medio hazer las cosas)

       <page 139>

     
      ccxxxii

       Have a Touch of   the Trader (Tener un punto de negociante)

       <page 140>

     
      ccxxxiii

       Let not the   proffered Morsel be distasteful (No   errarle el golpe al gusto)

       <page 141>

     
      ccxxxiv

       Never trust   your Honour to another, unless you have his in Pledge (Nunca fiar reputacion sin prendas de honra agena)

       <page 141>

     
      ccxxxv

       Know how to Ask   (Saber pedir)

       <page 142>

     
      ccxxxvi

       Make an   Obligation beforehand of what would have to be a Reward afterwards (Hazer obligation antes de lo que havia de   ser premio despues)

       <page 143>

     
      ccxxxvii

       Never share the   Secrets of your Superiors (Nunca partir   secretos con mayores)

       <page 143>

     
      ccxxxviii

       Know what is   wanting in Yourself (Conocer la pieza   que falta)

       <page 144>

     
      ccxxxix

       Do not be   Captious (No ser reagudo)

       <page 145>

     
      ccxl

       Make use of   Folly (Saber usar de la necedad)

       <page 145>

     
      ccxli

       Put up with   Raillery, but do not practise it (Las   burlas sufrirlas, pero no usarlas)

       <page 146>

     
      ccxlii

       Push Advantages   (Seguir los alcances)

       <page 146>

     
       

       [p. lxx]

        

     
      ccxliii

       Do not be too   much of a Dove (No ser todo colombino)

       <page 147>

     
      ccxliv

       Create a feeling   of Obligation (Saber obligar)

       <page 147>

     
      ccxlv

       Original and   out-of-the-way Views (Discurrir tal vez   a lo singular y fuera de lo comun)

       <page 148>

     
      ccxlvi

       Never offer   Satisfaction unless it is demanded (Nunca   dar satisfacion a quien no la pedia)

       <page 149>

     
      ccxlvii

       Know a little   more, Live a little less (Saber un poco   mas, y vivir un poco menos)

       <page 149>

     
      ccxlviii

       Do not go with   the last Speaker (No se le lleve el   ultimo)

       <page 150>

     
      

       Never begin   Life with what should end it (No   comencar a vivir por donde se ha de acabar)

       <page 150>

     
      ccl

       When to change   the Conversation (Quando se ha de   discurrir a reves)

       <page 151>

     
      ccli

       Use human Means   as if there were no divine ones, and divine as if there were no human ones (Hanse de procurar los medios humanos como   sino huviesse Divinos, y los Divinos como sino huviesse humanos)

       <page 151>

     
      cclii

       Neither belong   entirely to Yourself nor entirely to Others (Ni todo suyo ni todo ageno)

       <page 151>

     
      ccliii

       Do not Explain   overmuch (No allanarse sobrado en el   concepto)

       <page 152>

     
      ccliv

       Never despise   an Evil, however small (No despreciar   el mal por poco)

       <page 153>

     
       

       [p. lxxi]

        

     
      cclv

       Do Good a   little at a time, but often (Saber   hazer el bien poco y muchas vezes)

       <page 154>

     
      cclvi

       Go armed   against Discourtesy (Ir siempre   prevenido contra los discorteses)

       <page 154>

     
      cclvii

       Never let   Matters come to a Rupture (Nunca llegar   a rompimiento)

       <page 155>

     
      cclviii

       Find out some   one to share your Troubles (Buscar   quien le ayude a llevar las infelicidades)

       <page 156>

     
      cclix

       Anticipate   Injuries and turn them into Favours (Prevenir   las injurias y hazar dellas favores)

       <page 156>

     
      cclx

       We belong to   none and none to us entirely (Ni   sera ni tendra a ninguno todo por suyo)

       <page 157>

     
      cclxi

       Do not follow   up a Folly (No proseguir la necedad)

       <page 157>

     
      cclxii

       Be able to   Forget (Saber olvidar)

       <page 158>

     
      cclxiii

       Many Things of   Taste one should not possess oneself (Muchas   cosas de gusto no se han de poseer en propricdad)

       <page 158>

     
      cclxiv

       Have no   careless Days (No tenga dias de   descuydo)

       <page 159>

     
      cclxv

       Set those under   you difficult Tasks (Saber   empenar los dependientes)

       <page 159>

     
      cclxvi

       Do not become   Bad from sheer Goodness (No ser malo de   puro bueno)

       <page 160>

     
      cclxvii

       Silken Words,   Sugared Manners (Palabras de seda con   suavidad de condition)

       <page 161>

     
      cclxviii

       The Wise does   at once what the Fool does at last (Haga   al principio el cuerdo lo que el necio al fin)

       <page 161>

     
       

       [p. lxxii]

        

     
      cclxix

       Make use of the   Novelty of your Position (Valgase de su   novedad)

       <page 162>

     
      cclxx

       Do not condemn   alone that which pleases all (No   condenar solo lo que a muchos agrada)

       <page 162>

     
      cclxxi

       In every   Occupation if you know little stick to the safest (El que supiere poco tengase siempre a lo mas seguro en toda   profession)

       <page 162>

     
      cclxxii

       Sell The Things   the Tariff of Courtesy (Vender las   cosas a precio de cortesia)

       <page 163>

     
      cclxxiii

       Comprehend   their Dispositions with whom you deal (Comprehension   de los genios con quien trata)

       <page 163>

     
      cclxxiv

       Be Attractive (Tener la atractiva)

       <page 164>

     
      cclxxv

       Join in the   Game as far as Decency permits (Corriente   pero no indecente)

       <page 164>

     
      cclxxvi

       Know how to   renew your Character (Saber renovar el   genio)

       <page 165>

     
      cclxxvii

       Display   Yourself (Hombre de ostentacion)

       <page 166>

     
      cclxxviii

       Avoid Notoriety   in all Things (Huir la nota en toda)

       <page 166>

     
      cclxxix

       Do not   contradict the Contradicter (No dezir   al contradezir)

       <page 168>

     
      cclxxx

       Be Trustworthy   (Hombre de ley)

       <page 168>

     
      cclxxxi

       Find Favour   with Men of Sense (Gracia con los   entendidos)

       <page 169>

     
      cclxxxii

       Make use of   Absence to make more esteemed or yourself valued (Usar de la ausencia a para el respecta, o para la   estimation)

       <page 170>

     
       

       [p. lxxiii]

        

     
      cclxxxiii

        Have the Gift of Discovery (Hombre de Inventiva)

       <page 170>

     
      cclxxxiv

       Do not be   Importunate (No ser entremedido)

       <page 171>

     
      cclxxxv

       Never die of   another's Ill-luck (No perecer de   desdicha agena)

       <page 171>

     
      cclxxxvi

       Do not become   responsible for all or for every one (No   dexarse obligar del todo ni de todos)

       <page 172>

     
      cclxxxvii

       Never act in a   Passion (Nunca obrar apassionado)

       <page 172>

     
      cclxxxviii

       Live for the   Moment (Vivir a la ocasion)

       <page 173>

     
      cclxxxix

       Nothing   depreciates a Man more than to show he is a Man like other Men (El mayor desdoro de un hombre es   dar muestras de que es hombre)

       <page 173>

     
      ccxc

       'Tis a   piece of Good Fortune to combine Men's Love and Respect (Es felicidad juntar el aprecio con el afecta)

       <page 174>

     
      ccxci

       Know how to   Test (Saber hazer la tentativa)

       <page 174>

     
      ccxcii

       Let your personal   Qualities surpass those of your Office (Venca   el natural las obligaciones del empleo)

       <page 175>

     
      ccxciii

       Maturity (De la madurez)

       <page 175>

     
      ccxciv

       Be moderate in   your Views (Moderarse en el sentir)

       <page 176>

     
      ccxcv

       Do not Affect   what you have not effected (No   hazanero sino hazanoso)

       <page 176>

     
      ccxcvi

       Noble Qualities   (Varon de prendas y magestuosas)

       <page 177>

     
      ccxcvii

       Act always as   if your Acts were seen (Obrar siempre   como a vista)

       <page 178>

     
       

       [p. lxxiv]

        

     
      ccxcviii

       Three Things go   to a Prodigy (Tres cosas hazer un   prodigio)

       <page 178>

     
      ccxcix

       Leave off   Hungry (Dexar con hambre)

       <page 179>

     
      ccc

       In one word, be   a Saint (En una palabra santo)

       <page 179>

     
  

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. lxxxv]

  

To the Reader

No laws for the just, no counsels for the wise. Yet no one ever knew as much as he had need. One thing you must forgive, another, thank me for. I have called this manual of worldly wisdom an Oracle, for it is one in curtness and sententiousness. On the other hand, I offer you in one all the twelve works of Gracian. Each of these is so highly thought of that his Prudent Man had scarcely appeared in Spain than it was enjoyed among the French, in whose language it was translated and at whose court it was printed. May this be Wisdom's bill of fare at the banquet of her sages, in which she inscribes the items of the feast of reason to be found in Gracian's other works.

DON VINCENCIO JUAN DE LASTANOSA.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

i Everything is at its Acme;

especially the art of making one's way in the world. There is more required nowadays to make a single wise man than formerly to make Seven Sages, and more is needed nowadays to deal with a single person than was required with a whole people in former times.

ii Character and Intellect:

the two poles of our capacity; one without the other is but halfway to happiness. Intellect sufficeth not, character is also needed. On the other hand, it is the fool's misfortune, to fail in obtaining the position, the employment, the neighbourhood, and the circle of friends that suit him.

[p. 2]

iii Keep Matters for a Time in Suspense.

Admiration at their novelty heightens the value of your achievements, It is both useless and insipid to play with the cards on the table. If you do not declare yourself immediately, you arouse expectation, especially when the importance of your position makes you the object of general attention. Mix a little mystery with everything, and the very mystery arouses veneration. And when you explain, be not too explicit, just as you do not expose your inmost thoughts in ordinary intercourse. Cautious silence is the holy of holies of worldly wisdom. A resolution declared is never highly thought of; it only leaves room for criticism. And if it happens to fail, you are doubly unfortunate. Besides you imitate the Divine way when you cause men to wonder and watch.

iv Knowledge and Courage

are the elements of Greatness. They give immortality, because they are immortal. Each is as much as he knows, and the wise can do anything. A man without knowledge, a world without light. Wisdom and strength, eyes and hands. Knowledge without courage is sterile.

[p. 3]

v Create a Feeling of Dependence.

Not he that adorns but he that adores makes a divinity. The wise man would rather see men needing him than thanking him. To keep them on the threshold of hope is diplomatic, to trust to their gratitude boorish; hope has a good memory, gratitude a bad one. More is to be got from dependence than from courtesy. He that has satisfied his thirst turns his back on the well, and the orange once sucked falls from the golden platter into the waste-basket. When dependence disappears, good behaviour goes with it as well as respect. Let it be one of the chief lessons of experience to keep hope alive without entirely satisfying it, by preserving it to make oneself always needed even by a patron on the throne. But let not silence be carried to excess lest you go wrong, nor let another's failing grow incurable for the sake of your own advantage.

vi A Man at his Highest Point.

We are not born perfect: every day we develop in our personality and in our calling till we reach the highest point of our completed being, to the full round of our accomplishments, of our excellences. This is known by the

[p. 4]

purity of our taste, the clearness of our thought, the maturity of our judgment, and the firmness of our will. Some never arrive at being complete; somewhat is always awanting: others ripen late. The complete man, wise in speech, prudent in act, is admitted to the familiar intimacy of discreet persons, is even sought for by them.

vii Avoid Victories over Superiors.

All victories breed hate, and that over your superior is foolish or fatal. Superiority is always detested, a fortiori superiority over superiority. Caution can gloss over common advantages; for example, good looks may be cloaked by careless attire. There be some that will grant you precedence in good luck or good temper, but none in good sense, least of all a prince; for good sense is a royal prerogative, any claim to that is a case of lese majeste. They are princes, and wish to be so in that most princely of qualities. They will allow a man to help them but not to surpass them, and will have any advice tendered them appear like a recollection of something they have forgotten rather than as a guide to something they cannot find. The stars teach us this finesse with happy tact; though they are his

[p. 5]

children and brilliant like him, they never rival the brilliancy of the sun.

viii To be without Passions.

'Tis a privilege of the highest order of mind. Their very eminence redeems them from being affected by transient and low impulses. There is no higher rule than that over oneself, over one's impulses: there is the triumph of free will. While passion rules the character, no aiming at high office; the less the higher. It is the only refined way of avoiding scandals; nay, 'tis the shortest way back to good repute.

ix Avoid the Faults of your Nation.

Water shares the good or bad qualities of the strata through which it flows, and man those of the climate in which he is born. Some owe more than others to their native land, because there is a more favourable sky in the zenith. There is not a nation even among the most civilised that has not some fault peculiar to itself which other nations blame by way of boast or as a warning. 'Tis a triumph of cleverness to correct in oneself such national failings, or even to hide them: you get great credit for being unique among your

[p. 6]

fellows, and as it is less expected of you it is esteemed the more. There are also family failings as well as faults of position, of office or of age. If these all meet in one person and are not carefully guarded against, they make an intolerable monster.

x Fortune and Fame.

Where the one is fickle the other is enduring. The first for life, the second afterwards; the one against envy, the other against oblivion. Fortune is desired, at times assisted: fame is earned. The desire for fame springs from man's best part. It was and is the sister of the giants; it always goes to extremes--horrible monsters or brilliant prodigies.

xi Cultivate those who can teach you.

Let friendly intercourse be a school of knowledge, and culture be taught through conversation: thus you make your friends your teachers and mingle the pleasures of conversation with the advantages of instruction. Sensible persons thus enjoy alternating pleasures: they reap applause for what they say, and gain instruction from what they hear. We are always attracted to others by our own interest,

[p. 7]

but in this case it is of a higher kind. Wise men frequent the houses of great noblemen not because they are temples of vanity, but as theatres of good breeding. There be gentlemen who have the credit of worldly wisdom, because they are not only themselves oracles of all nobleness by their example and their behaviour, but those who surround them form a well-bred academy of worldly wisdom of the best and noblest kind.

xii Nature and Art:

material and workmanship. There is no beauty unadorned and no excellence that would not become barbaric if it were not supported by artifice: this remedies the evil and improves the good. Nature scarcely ever gives us the very best; for that we must have recourse to art. Without this the best of natural dispositions is uncultured, and half is lacking to any excellence if training is absent. Every one has something unpolished without artificial training, and every kind of excellence needs some polish.

xiii Act sometimes on Second Thoughts, sometimes on First Impulse.

Man's life is a warfare against the malice of

[p. 8]

men. Sagacity fights with strategic changes of intention: it never does what it threatens, it aims only at escaping notice. It aims in the air with dexterity and strikes home in an unexpected direction, always seeking to conceal its game. It lets a purpose appear in order to attract the opponent's attention, but then turns round and conquers by the unexpected. But a penetrating intelligence anticipates this by watchfulness and lurks in ambush. It always understands the opposite of what the opponent wishes it to understand, and recognises every feint of guile. It lets the first impulse pass by and waits for the second, or even the third. Sagacity now rises to higher flights on seeing its artifice foreseen, and tries to deceive by truth itself, changes its game in order to change its deceit, and cheats by not cheating, and founds deception on the greatest candour. But the opposing intelligence is on guard with increased watchfulness, and discovers the darkness concealed by the light and deciphers every move, the more subtle because more simple. In this way the guile of the Python combats the far darting rays of Apollo.

xiv The Thing Itself and the Way it is done.

"Substance" is not enough: "accident"

[p. 9]

is also required, as the scholastics say. A bad manner spoils everything, even reason and justice; a good one supplies everything, gilds a No, sweetens truth, and adds a touch of beauty to old age itself. The how plays a large part in affairs, a good manner steals into the affections. Fine behaviour is a joy in life, and a pleasant expression helps out of a difficulty in a remarkable way.

xv Keep Ministering Spirits.

It is a privilege of the mighty to surround themselves with the champions of intellect; these extricate them from every fear of ignorance, these worry out for them the moot points of every difficulty. 'Tis a rare greatness to make use of the wise, and far exceeds the barbarous taste of Tigranes, who had a fancy for captive monarchs as his servants. It is a novel kind of supremacy, the best that life can offer, to have as servants by skill those who by nature are our masters. 'Tis a great thing to know, little to live: no real life without knowledge. There is remarkable cleverness in studying without study, in getting much by means of many, and through them all to become wise. Afterwards you speak in the council chamber on behalf of many, and as many sages speak through your

[p. 10]

mouth as were consulted beforehand: you thus obtain the fame of an oracle by others' toil. Such ministering spirits distil the best books and serve up the quintessence of wisdom. But he that cannot have sages in service should have them for his friends.

xvi Knowledge and Good Intentions

together ensure continuance of success. A fine intellect wedded to a wicked will was always an unnatural monster. A wicked will envenoms all excellences: helped by knowledge it only ruins with greater subtlety. 'Tis a miserable superiority that only results in ruin. Knowledge without sense is double folly.

 

xvii Vary the Mode of Action;

not always the same way, so as to distract attention, especially if there be a rival. Not always from first impulse; they will soon recognise the uniformity, and by anticipating, frustrate your designs. It is easy to kill a bird on the wing that flies straight: not so one that twists. Nor always act on second thoughts: they can discern the plan the second time. The enemy is on the watch, great skill is required to circumvent him. The gamester

[p. 11]

never plays the card the opponent expects, still less that which he wants.

xviii Application and Ability.

There is no attaining eminence without both, and where they unite there is the greatest eminence. Mediocrity obtains more with application than superiority without it. Work is the price which is paid for reputation. What costs little is little worth. Even for the highest posts it is only in some cases application that is wanting, rarely the talent. To prefer moderate success in great things than eminence in a humble post has the excuse of a generous mind, but not so to be content with humble mediocrity when you could shine among the highest. Thus nature and art are both needed, and application sets on them the seal.

xix Arouse no Exaggerated Expectations on entering.

It is the usual ill-luck of all celebrities not to fulfil afterwards the expectations beforehand formed of them. The real can never equal the imagined, for it is easy to form ideals but very difficult to realise them. Imagination

[p. 12]

weds Hope and gives birth to much more than things are in themselves. However great the excellences, they never suffice to fulfil expectations, and as men find themselves disappointed with their exorbitant expectations they are more ready to be disillusionised than to admire. Hope is a great falsifier of truth; let skill guard against this by ensuring that fruition exceeds desire. A few creditable attempts at the beginning are sufficient to arouse curiosity without pledging one to the final object. It is better that reality should surpass the design and is better than was thought. This rule does not apply to the wicked, for the same exaggeration is a great aid to them; they are defeated amid general applause, and what seemed at first extreme ruin comes to be thought quite bearable.

xx A Man of the Age.

The rarest individuals depend on their age. It is not every one that finds the age he deserves, and even when he finds it he does not always know how to utilise it. Some men have been worthy of a better century, for every species of good does not always triumph. Things have their period; even excellences are subject to fashion. The sage has one advantage: he is

[p. 13]

immortal. If this is not his century many others will be.

xxi The Art of being Lucky.

There are rules of luck: it is not all chance with the wise: it can be assisted by care. Some content themselves with placing them-selves confidently at the gate of Fortune, waiting till she opens it. Others do better, and press forward and profit by their clever boldness, reaching the goddess and winning her favour on the wings of their virtue and valour. But on a true philosophy there is no other umpire than virtue and insight; for there is no luck or ill-luck except wisdom and the reverse.

xxii A Man of Knowledge to the Point.

Wise men arm themselves with tasteful and elegant erudition; a practical knowledge of what is going on not of a common kind but more like an expert. They possess a copious store of wise and witty sayings, and of noble deeds, and know how to employ them on fitting occasions. More is often taught by a jest than by the most serious teaching. Pat knowledge helps some more than the seven arts, be they ever so liberal.

[p. 14]

xxiii Be Spotless:

the indispensable condition of perfection. Few live without some weak point, either physical or moral, which they pamper because they could easily cure it. The keenness of others often regrets to see a slight defect attaching itself to a whole assembly of elevated qualities, and yet a single cloud can hide the whole of the sun. There are likewise patches on our reputation which ill-will soon finds out and is continually noticing. The highest skill is to transform them into ornament. So Caesar hid his natural defects with the laurel.

xxiv Keep the Imagination under Control;

sometimes correcting, sometimes assisting it. For it is all-important for our happiness, and even sets the reason right. It can tyrannise, and is not content with looking on, but influences and even often dominates life, causing it to be happy or burdensome according to the folly to which it leads. For it makes us either contented or discontented with ourselves. Before some it continually holds up the penalties of action, and becomes the mortifying lash of these fools. To others it promises happiness and adventure with blissful

[p. 15]

delusion. It can do all this unless the most prudent self-control keeps it in subjection.

xxv Know how to take a Hint.

'Twas once the art of arts to be able to discourse; now 'tis no longer sufficient. We must know how to take a hint, especially in disabusing ourselves. He cannot make himself understood who does not himself easily understand. But on the other hand there are pretended diviners of the heart and lynxes of the intentions. The very truths which concern us most can only be half spoken, but with attention we can grasp the whole meaning. When you hear anything favourable keep a tight rein on your credulity; if unfavourable, give it the spur.

xxvi Find out each Man's Thumbscrew.

'Tis the art of setting their wills in action. It needs more skill than resolution. You must know where to get at any one. Every volition has a special motive which varies according to taste. All men are idolaters, some of fame, others of self-interest, most of pleasure. Skill consists in knowing these idols in order to bring them into play. Knowing any man's mainspring

[p. 16]

of motive you have as it were the key to his will. Have resort to primary motors, which are not always the highest but more often the lowest part of his nature: there are more dispositions badly organised than well. First guess a man's ruling passion, appeal to it by a word, set it in motion by temptation, and you will infallibly give checkmate to his freedom of will.

xxvii Prize Intensity more than Extent.

Excellence resides in quality not in quantity. The best is always few and rare: much lowers value. Even among men giants are commonly the real dwarfs. Some reckon books by the thickness, as if they were written to try the brawn more than the brain. Extent alone never rises above mediocrity: it is the misfortune of universal geniuses that in attempting to be at home everywhere, are so nowhere. Intensity gives eminence, and rises to the heroic in matters sublime.

xxviii Common in Nothing.

First, not in taste. O great and wise, to be ill at ease when your deeds please the mob! The excesses of popular applause never satisfy

[p. 17]

the sensible. Some there are such chameleons of popularity that they find enjoyment not in the sweet savours of Apollo but in the breath of the mob. Secondly, not in intelligence. Take no pleasure in the wonder of the mob, for ignorance never gets beyond wonder. While vulgar folly wonders wisdom watches for the trick.

xxix A Man of Rectitude

clings to the sect of right with such tenacity of purpose that neither the passions of the mob nor the violence of the tyrant can ever cause him to transgress the bounds of right. But who shall be such a Phoenix of equity? What a scanty following has rectitude! Many praise it indeed, but--for others. Others follow it till danger threatens; then the false deny it, the politic conceal it. For it cares not if it fights with friendship, power, or even self-interest: then comes the danger of desertion. Then astute men make plausible distinctions so as not to stand in the way of their superiors or of reasons of state. But the straightforward and constant regard dissimulation as a kind of treason, and set more store on tenacity than on sagacity. Such are always to be found on the side of truth, and if they desert a party, they do

[p. 18]

not change from fickleness, but because the others have first deserted truth.

xxx Have naught to do with Occupations of Ill-repute,

still less with fads that bring more notoriety than repute. There are many fanciful sects, and from all the prudent man has to flee. There are bizarre tastes that always take to their heart all that wise men repudiate; they live in love with singularity. This may make them well known indeed, but more as objects of ridicule than of repute. A cautious man does not even make profession of his wisdom, still less of those matters that make their followers ridiculous. These need not be specified, for common contempt has sufficiently singled them out.

xxxi Select the Lucky and avoid the Unlucky.

Ill-luck is generally the penalty of folly, and there is no disease so contagious to those who share in it. Never open the door to a lesser evil, for other and greater ones invariably slink in after it. The greatest skill at cards is to know when to discard; the smallest of current trumps is worth more than the ace of trumps of the last game. When in doubt, follow the

[p. 19]

suit of the wise and prudent; sooner or later they will win the odd trick.

xxxii Have the Reputation of being Gracious.

'Tis the chief glory of the high and mighty to be gracious, a prerogative of kings to conquer universal goodwill. That is the great advantage of a commanding position--to be able to do more good than others. Those make friends who do friendly acts. On the other hand, there are some who lay themselves out for not being gracious, not on account of the difficulty, but from a bad disposition. In all things they are the opposite of Divine grace.

xxxiii Know how to Withdraw.

If it is a great lesson in life to know how to deny, it is a still greater to know how to deny oneself as regards both affairs and persons. There are extraneous occupations which eat away precious time. To be occupied in what does not concern you is worse than doing nothing. It is not enough for a careful man not to interfere with others, he must see that they do not interfere with him. One is not obliged to belong so much to all as not to belong at all to oneself. So with friends, their

[p. 20]

help should not be abused or more demanded from them than they themselves will grant. All excess is a failing, but above all in personal intercourse. A wise moderation in this best preserves the goodwill and esteem of all, for by this means that precious boon of courtesy is not gradually worn away. Thus you preserve your genius free to select the elect, and never sin against the unwritten laws of good taste.

xxxiv Know your strongest Point--

your pre-eminent gift; cultivate that and you will assist the rest. Every one would have excelled in something if he had known his strong point. Notice in what quality you surpass, and take charge of that. In some judgment excels, in others valour. Most do violence to their natural aptitude, and thus attain superiority in nothing. Time disillusionises us too late of what first flattered the passions.

xxv Think over Things, most over the most Important.

All fools come to grief from want of thought. They never see even the half of things, and as they do not observe their own loss or gain, still

[p. 21]

less do they apply any diligence to them. Some make much of what imports little and little of much, always weighing in the wrong scale. Many never lose their common sense, because they have none to lose. There are matters which should be observed with the closest attention of the mind, and thenceforth kept in its lowest depths. The wise man thinks over everything, but with a difference, most profoundly where there is some profound difficulty, and thinks that perhaps there is more in it than he thinks. Thus his comprehension extends as far as his apprehension.

xxxvi In Acting or Refraining, weigh your Luck.

More depends on that than on noticing your temperament. If he is a fool who at forty applies to Hippocrates for health, still more is he one who then first applies to Seneca for wisdom. It is a great piece of skill to know how to guide your luck even while waiting for it. For something is to be done with it by waiting so as to use it at the proper moment, since it has periods and offers opportunities, though one cannot calculate its path, its steps are so irregular. When you find Fortune favourable, stride boldly forward, for she favours the bold and, being a woman, the young. But

[p. 22]

if you have bad luck, keep retired so as not to redouble the influence of your unlucky star.

xxxvii Keep a Store of Sarcasms, and know how to use them.

This is the point of greatest tact in human intercourse. Such sarcasms are often thrown out to test men's moods, and by their means one often obtains the most subtle and penetrating touchstone of the heart. Other sarcasms are malicious, insolent, poisoned by envy or envenomed by passion, unexpected flashes which destroy at once all favour and esteem. Struck by the slightest word of this kind, many fall away from the closest intimacy with superiors or inferiors which could not be the slightest shaken by a whole conspiracy of popular insinuation or private malevolence. Other sarcasms, on the other hand, work favourably, confirming and assisting one's reputation. But the greater the skill with which they are launched, the greater the caution with which they should be received and the foresight with which they should he foreseen. For here a knowledge of the evil is in itself a means of defence, and a shot foreseen always misses its mark.

[p. 23]

xxxviii Leave your Luck while Winning.

All the best players do it. A fine retreat is as good as a gallant attack. Bring your exploits under cover when there are enough, or even when there are many of them. Luck long lasting was ever suspicious; interrupted seems safer, and is even sweeter to the taste for a little infusion of bitter-sweet. The higher the heap of luck, the greater the risk of a slip, and down comes all. Fortune pays you sometimes for the intensity of her favours by the shortness of their duration. She soon tires of carrying any one long on her shoulders.

xxxix Recognise when Things are ripe, and then enjoy them.

The works of nature all reach a certain point of maturity; up to that they improve, after that they degenerate. Few works of art reach such a point that they cannot be improved. It is an especial privilege of good taste to enjoy everything at its ripest. Not all can do this, nor do all who can know this. There is a ripening point too for fruits of intellect; it is well to know this both for their value in use and for their value in exchange.

[p. 24]

xl The Goodwill of People.

'Tis much to gain universal admiration; more, universal love. Something depends on natural disposition, more on practice: the first founds, the second then builds on that foundation. Brilliant parts suffice not, though they are presupposed; win good opinion and 'tis easy to win goodwill. Kindly acts besides are required to produce kindly feelings, doing good with both hands, good words and better deeds, loving so as to be loved. Courtesy is the politic witchery of great personages. First lay hand on deeds and then on pens; words follow swords; for there is goodwill to be won among writers, and it is eternal.

xli Never Exaggerate.

It is an important object of attention not to talk in superlatives, so as neither to offend against truth nor to give a mean idea of one's understanding. Exaggeration is a prodigality of the judgment which shows the narrowness of one's knowledge or one's taste. Praise arouses lively curiosity, begets desire, and if afterwards the value does not correspond to the price, as generally happens, expectation revolts against

[p. 25]

the deception, and revenges itself by under-estimating the thing recommended and the person recommending. A prudent man goes more cautiously to work, and prefers to err by omission than by commission. Extraordinary things are rare, therefore moderate ordinary valuation. Exaggeration is a branch of lying, and you lose by it the credit of good taste, which is much, and of good sense, which is more.

xlii Born to Command.

It is a secret force of superiority not to have to get on by artful trickery but by an inborn power of rule. All submit to it without knowing why, recognising the secret vigour of connatural authority. Such magisterial spirits are kings by merit and lions by innate privilege. By the esteem which they inspire, they hold the hearts and minds of the rest. If their other qualities permit, such men are born to be the prime motors of the state. They per-form more by a gesture than others by a long harangue.

xliii Think with the Few and speak with the Many.

By swimming against the stream it is impossible to remove error, easy to fall into

[p. 26]

danger; only a Socrates can undertake it. To dissent from others' views is regarded as an insult, because it is their condemnation. Disgust is doubled on account of the thing blamed and of the person who praised it. Truth is for the few, error is both common and vulgar. The wise man is not known by what he says on the house-tops, for there he speaks not with his own voice but with that of common folly, however much his inmost thoughts may gainsay it. The prudent avoid being contradicted as much as contradicting: though they have their censure ready they are not ready to publish it. Thought is free, force cannot and should not be used to it. The wise man therefore retires into silence, and if he allows himself to come out of it, he does so in the shade and before few and fit persons.

xliv Sympathy with great Minds.

It is an heroic quality to agree with heroes. 'Tis like a miracle of nature for mystery and for use. There is a natural kinship of hearts and minds: its effects are such that vulgar ignorance scents witchcraft. Esteem established, goodwill follows, which at times reaches affection. It persuades without words and obtains without earning. This sympathy

[p. 27]

is sometimes active, sometimes passive, both alike felicific; the more so, the more sublime. 'Tis a great art to recognise, to distinguish and to utilise this gift. No amount of energy suffices without that favour of nature.

xlv Use, but do not abuse, Cunning.

One ought not to delight in it, still less to boast of it. Everything artificial should be concealed, most of all cunning, which is hated. Deceit is much in use; therefore our caution has to be redoubled, but not so as to show itself, for it arouses distrust, causes much annoy, awakens revenge, and gives rise to more ills than you would imagine. To go to work with caution is of great advantage in action, and there is no greater proof of wisdom. The greatest skill in any deed consists in the sure mastery with which it is executed.

xlvi Master your Antipathies.

We often allow ourselves to take dislikes, and that before we know anything of a person. At times this innate yet vulgar aversion attaches Itself to eminent personalities. Good sense masters this feeling, for there is nothing more discreditable than to dislike those better than

[p. 28]

ourselves. As sympathy with great men en-nobles us, so dislike to them degrades us.

xlvii Avoid "Affairs of Honour"

--one of the chiefest aims of prudence. In men of great ability the extremes are kept far asunder, so that there is a long distance between them, and they always keep in the middle of their caution, so that they take time to break through it. It is easier to avoid such affairs than to come well out of them. They test our judgment; it is better to avoid them than to conquer in them. One affair of honour leads to another, and may lead to an affair of dishonour. There are men so constituted by nature or by nation that they easily enter upon such obligations. But for him that walks by the light of reason, such a matter requires long thinking over. There is more valour needed not to take up the affair than to conquer in it. When there is one fool ready for the occasion, one may excuse oneself from being the second.

xlviii Be Thorough.

How much depends on the person. The interior must be at least as much as the exterior. There are natures all frontage, like houses that

[p. 29]

for want of means have the portico of a palace leading to the rooms of a cottage. It is no use boring into such persons, although they bore you, for conversation flags after the first salutation. They prance through the first compliments like Sicilian barbs, but silence soon succeeds, for the flow of words soon ceases where there is no spring of thoughts. Others may be taken in by them because they themselves have but a view of the surface, but not the prudent, who look within them and find nothing there except material for scorn.

xlix Observation and Judgment.

A man with these rules things, not they him. He sounds at once the profoundest depths; he is a phrenologist by means of physiognomy. On seeing a person he understands him and judges of his inmost nature. From a few observations he deciphers the most hidden recesses of his nature. Keen observation, subtile insight, judicious inference: with these he discovers, notices, grasps, and comprehends everything.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

l Never lose Self-respect,

or be too familiar with oneself. Let your

[p. 30]

own right feeling be the true standard of your rectitude, and owe more to the strictness of your own self-judgment than to all external sanctions. Leave off anything unseemly more from regard for your own self-respect than from fear of external authority. Pay regard to that and there is no need of Seneca's imaginary tutor.

li Know how to Choose well.

Most of life depends thereon. It needs good taste and correct judgment, for which neither intellect nor study suffices. To be choice, you must choose, and for this two things are needed: to be able to choose at all, and then to choose the best. There are many men of fecund and subtle mind, of keen judgment, of much learning, and of great observation who yet are at a loss when they come to choose. They always take the worst as if they had tried to go wrong. Thus this is one of the greatest gifts from above.

lii Never be put out.

'Tis a great aim of prudence never to be embarrassed. It is the sign of a real man. of a noble heart, for magnanimity is not easily put

[p. 31]

out. The passions are the humours of the soul, and every excess in them weakens prudence; if they overflow through the mouth, the reputation will be in danger. Let a man therefore be so much and so great a master over himself that neither in the most fortunate nor in the most adverse circumstances can anything cause his reputation injury by disturbing his self-possession, but rather enhance it by showing his superiority.

liii Diligent and Intelligent.

Diligence promptly executes what intelligence slowly excogitates. Hurry is the failing of fools; they know not the crucial point and set to work without preparation. On the other hand, the wise more often fail from procrastination; foresight begets deliberation, and remiss action often nullifies prompt judgment. Celerity is the mother of good fortune. He has done much who leaves nothing over till to-morrow. Festina lente is a royal motto.

liv Know how to show your Teeth.

Even hares can pull the mane of a dead lion. There is no joke about courage. Give way

[p. 32]

to the first and you must yield to the second, and so on till the last, and to gain your point at last costs as much trouble as would have gained much more at first. Moral courage exceeds physical; it should be like a sword kept ready for use in the scabbard of caution. It Is the shield of great place; moral cowardice lowers one more than physical. Many have had eminent qualities, yet, for want of a stout heart, they passed inanimate lives and found a tomb in their own sloth. Wise Nature has thoughtfully combined in the bee the sweetness of its honey with the sharpness of its sting.

lv Wait.

It's a sign of a noble heart dowered with patience, never to be in a hurry, never to be in a passion. First be master over yourself if you would be master over others. You must pass through the circumference of time before arriving at the centre of opportunity. A wise reserve seasons the aims and matures the means. Time's crutch effects more than the iron club of Hercules. God Himself chasteneth not with a rod but with time. He [*1] spake a great word who said, "Time and I against any two."

[p. 33]

[paragraph continues] Fortune herself rewards waiting with the first prize.

lvi Have Presence of Mind.

The child of a happy promptitude of spirit. Owing to this vivacity and wideawakeness there is no fear of danger or mischance. Many reflect much only to go wrong in the end: others attain their aim without thinking of it beforehand. There are natures of Antiperistasis who work best in an emergency. They are like monsters who succeed in all they do offhand, but fail in aught they think over. A thing occurs to them at once or never: for them there is no court of appeal. Celerity wins applause because it proves remarkable capacity; subtlety of judgment, prudence in action.

lvii Slow and Sure.

Early enough if well. Quickly done can be quickly undone. To last an eternity requires an eternity of preparation. Only excellence counts; only achievement endures. Profound intelligence is the only foundation for immortality. Worth much costs much. The precious metals are the heaviest.

[p. 34]

lviii Adapt Yourself to your Company.

There is no need to show your ability before every one. Employ no more force than is necessary. Let there be no unnecessary expenditure either of knowledge or of power. The skilful falconer only flies enough birds to serve for the chase. If there is too much display to-day there will be nothing to show to-morrow. Always have some novelty wherewith to dazzle. To show something fresh each day keeps expectation alive and conceals the limits of capacity.

lix Finish off well.

In the house of Fortune, if you enter by the gate of pleasure you must leave by that of sorrow and vice versa. You ought therefore to think of the finish, and attach more importance to a graceful exit than to applause on entrance. 'Tis the common lot of the unlucky to have a very fortunate outset and a very tragic end. The important point is not the vulgar applause on entrance--that comes to nearly all--but the general feeling at exit. Few in life are felt to deserve an encore. Fortune rarely accompanies any one to the

[p. 35]

door: warmly as she may welcome the coming, she speeds but coldly the parting guest.

lx A Sound Judgment.

Some are born wise, and with this natural advantage enter upon their studies, with a moiety already mastered. With age and experience their reason ripens, and thus they attain a sound judgment. They abhor everything whimsical as leading prudence astray, especially in matters of state, where certainty is so necessary, owing to the importance of the affairs involved., Such men deserve to stand by the helm of state either as pilots or as men at the wheel.

lxi To Excel in what is Excellent.

A great rarity among excellences. You cannot have a great man without something pre-eminent. Mediocrities never win applause. Eminence in some distinguished post distinguishes one from the vulgar mob and ranks us with the elect. To be distinguished in a Small post is to be great in little: the more comfort, the less glory. The highest eminence in great affairs has the royal characteristic of exciting admiration and winning goodwill.

[p. 36]

lxii Use good Instruments.

Some would have the subtlety of their wits proven by the meanness of their instruments. 'Tis a dangerous satisfaction, and deserves a fatal punishment. The excellence of a minister never diminished the greatness of his lord. All the glory of exploits reverts to the principal actor; also all the blame. Fame only does business with principals. She does not say, "This had good, that had bad servants," but, "This was a good artist, that a bad one." Let your assistants be selected and tested therefore, for you have to trust to them for an immortality of fame.

lxiii To he the First of the Kind is an Excellence,

and to be eminent in it as well, a double one. To have the first move is a great ad-vantage when the players are equal. Many a man would have been a veritable Phoenix if he had been the first of the sort. Those who come first are the heirs of Fame; the others get only a younger brother's allowance: whatever they do, they cannot persuade the world they are anything more than parrots. The skill of prodigies may find a new path to

[p. 37]

eminence, but prudence accompanies them all the way. By the novelty of their enterprises sages write their names in the golden book of heroes. Some prefer to be first in things of minor import than second in greater exploits.

lxiv Avoid Worry.

Such prudence brings its own reward. It escapes much, and is thus the midwife of comfort and so of happiness. Neither give nor take bad news unless it can help. Some men's ears are stuffed with the sweets of flattery; others with the bitters of scandal, while some cannot live without a daily annoyance no more than Mithridates could without poison. It is no rule of life to prepare for yourself lifelong trouble in order to give a temporary enjoyment to another, however near and dear. You never ought to spoil your own chances to please another who advises and keeps out of the affair, and in all cases where to oblige another involves disobliging yourself, 'tis a standing rule that it is better he should suffer now than you afterwards and in vain.

lxv Elevated Taste.

You can train it like the intellect. Full

[p. 38]

knowledge whets desire and increases enjoyment. You may know a noble spirit by the elevation of his taste: it must be a great thing that can satisfy a great mind. Big bites for big mouths, lofty things for lofty spirits. Before their judgment the bravest tremble, the most perfect lose confidence. Things of the first importance are few; let appreciation be rare. Taste can be imparted by intercourse: great good luck to associate with the highest taste. But do not affect to be dissatisfied with everything: 'tis the extreme of folly, and more odious if from affectation than if from Quixotry. Some would have God create another world and other ideals to satisfy their fantastic imagination.

lxvi See that Things end well.

Some regard more the rigour of the game than the winning of it, but to the world the discredit of the final failure does away with any recognition of the previous care. The victor need not explain. The world does not notice the details of the measures employed; but only the good or ill result. You lose nothing if you gain your end. A good end gilds everything, however unsatisfactory the means. Thus at times it is part of the art of

[p. 39]

life to transgress the rules of the art, if you cannot end well otherwise.

lxvii Prefer Callings "en Evidence."

Most things depend on the satisfaction of others. Esteem is to excellence what the zephyr is to flowers, the breath of life. There are some callings which gain universal esteem, while others more important are without credit. The former, pursued before the eyes of all, obtain the universal favour; the others, though they are rarer and more valuable, remain obscure and unperceived, honoured but not applauded. Among princes conquerors are the most celebrated, and therefore the kings of Aragon earned such applause as warriors, conquerors, and great men. An able man will prefer callings en evidence which all men know of and utilise, and he thus becomes immortalised by universal suffrage.

lxviii It is better to help with Intelligence than with Memory.

The more as the latter needs only recollection, the former nous. Many persons omit the a propos because it does not occur to them; a friend's advice on such occasions may enable

[p. 40]

them to see the advantages. 'Tis one of the greatest gifts of mind to be able to offer what is needed at the moment: for want of that many things fail to be performed. Share the light of your intelligence, when you have any, and ask for it when you have it not, the first cautiously, the last anxiously. Give no more than a hint: this finesse is especially needful when it touches the interest of him whose attention you awaken. You should give but a taste at first, and then pass on to more when that is not sufficient. If he thinks of No, go in search of Yes. Therein lies the cleverness, for most things are not obtained simply because they are not attempted.

lxix Do not give way to every common Impulse.

He is a great man who never allows himself to be influenced by the impressions of others. Self-reflection is the school of wisdom. To know one's disposition and to allow for it, even going to the other extreme so as to find the juste milieu between nature and art. Self-knowledge is the beginning of self-improvement. There be some whose humours are so monstrous that they are always under the influence of one or other of them, and put them in place of their real inclinations. They

[p. 41]

are torn asunder by such disharmony and get involved in contradictory obligations. Such excesses not only destroy firmness of will; all power of judgment gets lost, desire and knowledge pulling in opposite directions.

lxx Know how to Refuse.

One ought not to give way in everything nor to everybody. To know how to refuse is therefore as important as to know how to consent. This is especially the case with men of position. All depends on the how. Some men's No is thought more of than the Yes of others: for a gilded No is more satisfactory than a dry Yes. There are some who always have No on their lips, whereby they make everything distasteful. No always comes first with them, and when sometimes they give way after all, it does them no good on account of the unpleasing herald. Your refusal need not be point-blank: let the disappointment come by degrees. Nor let the refusal be final; that would be to destroy dependence; let some spice of hope remain to soften the rejection. Let politeness compensate and fine words supply the place of deeds. Yes and No are soon said, but give much to think over.

[p. 42]

lxxi Do not Vacillate.

Let not your actions be abnormal either from disposition or affectation. An able man is always the same in his best qualities; he gets the credit of trustworthiness. If he changes, he does so for good reason or good consideration. In matters of conduct change is hateful. There are some who are different every day; their intelligence varies, still more their will, and with this their fortune. Yesterday's white is to-day's black: to-day's No was yesterday's Yes. They always give the lie to their own credit and destroy their credit with others.

lxxii Be Resolute.

Bad execution of your designs does less harm than irresolution in forming them. Streams do less harm flowing than when dammed up. There are some men so infirm of purpose that they always require direction from others, and this not on account of any perplexity, for they judge clearly, but from sheer incapacity for action. It needs some skill to find out difficulties, but more to find a way out of them. There are others who are never in straits . their clear judgment and determined character

[p. 43]

it them for the highest callings: their intelligence tells them where to insert the thin end of the wedge, their resolution how to drive it home. They soon get through anything: as soon as they have done with one sphere of action, they are ready for another. Affianced to Fortune, they make themselves sure of success.

lxxiii Utilise Slips.

That is how smart people get out of difficulties. They extricate themselves from the most intricate labyrinth by some witty application of a bright remark. They get out of a serious contention by an airy nothing or by raising a smile. Most of the great leaders are well grounded in this art. When you have to refuse, it is often the polite way to talk of something else. Sometimes it proves the highest understanding not to understand.

lxxiv Do not be Unsociable.

The truest wild beasts live in the most populous places. To be inaccessible is the fault of those who distrust themselves, whose honours change their manners. It is no way of earning people's goodwill by being ill-tempered

[p. 44]

with them. It is a sight to see one of those unsociable monsters who make a point of being proudly impertinent. Their dependants who have the misfortune to be obliged to speak with them, enter as if prepared for a fight with a tiger armed with patience and with fear. To obtain their post these persons must have ingratiated themselves with every one, but having once obtained it they seek to indemnify themselves by disobliging all. It is a condition of their position that they should be accessible to all, yet, from pride or spleen, they are so to none. 'Tis a civil way to punish such men by letting them alone, and depriving them of opportunities of improvement by granting them no opportunity of intercourse.

lxxv Choose an Heroic Ideal;

but rather to emulate than to imitate. There are exemplars of greatness, living texts of honour. Let every one have before his mind the chief of his calling not so much to follow him as to spur himself on. Alexander wept not on account of Achilles dead and buried, but over himself, because his fame had not yet spread throughout the world. Nothing arouses ambition so much in the heart as the trumpet-clang of another's fame. The same

[p. 45]

thing that sharpens envy, nourishes a generous spirit.

lxxvi Do not always be Jesting.

Wisdom is shown in serious matters, and is more appreciated than mere wit. He that is always ready for jests is never ready for serious things. They resemble liars in that men never believe either, always expecting a lie in one, a joke in the other. One never knows when you speak with judgment, which is the same as if you had none. A continual jest soon loses all zest. Many get the repute of being witty, but thereby lose the credit of being sensible. Jest has its little hour, seriousness should have all the rest.

lxxvii Be all Things to all Men

--a discreet Proteus, learned with the learned, saintly with the sainted. It is the great art to gain every one's suffrages; their goodwill gains general agreement. Notice men's moods and adapt yourself to each, genial or serious as the case may be. Follow their lead, glossing over the changes as cunningly as possible. This is an indispensable art for dependent persons. But this savoir faire calls for great cleverness. He only will find no difficulty who has a

[p. 46]

universal genius in his knowledge and universal ingenuity in his wit.

lxxviii The Art of undertaking Things.

Fools rush in through the door; for folly is always bold. The same simplicity which robs them of all attention to precautions deprives them of all sense of shame at failure. But prudence enters with more deliberation. Its forerunners are caution and care; they advance and discover whether you can also advance without danger. Every rush forward is freed from danger by caution, while fortune some-times helps in such cases. Step cautiously where you suspect depth. Sagacity goes cautiously forward while precaution covers the ground. Nowadays there are unsuspected depths in human. intercourse, you must therefore cast the lead at every step.

lxxix A Genial Disposition.

If with moderation 'tis an accomplishment, not a defect. A grain of gaiety seasons all. The greatest men join in the fun at times, and it makes them liked by all. But they should always on such occasions preserve their dignity, nor go beyond the bounds of decorum. Others,

[p. 47]

again, get themselves out of difficulty quickest by a joke. For there are things you must take in fun, though others perhaps mean them in earnest. You show a sense of placability, which acts as a magnet on all hearts.

lxxx Take care to get Information.

We live by information, not by sight. We exist by faith in others. The ear is the area-gate of truth but the front-door of lies. The truth is generally seen, rarely heard; seldom she comes in elemental purity, especially from afar; there is always some admixture of the moods of those through whom she has passed. The passions tinge her with their colours wherever they touch her, sometimes favourably, sometimes the reverse. She always brings out the disposition, therefore receive her with caution from him that praises, with more caution from him that blames. Pay attention to the intention of the speaker; you should know beforehand on what footing he comes. Let reflection assay falsity and exaggeration.

lxxxi Renew your Brilliance.

'Tis the privilege of the Phoenix. Ability is wont to grow old, and with it fame. The

[p. 48]

staleness of custom weakens admiration, and a mediocrity that's new often eclipses the highest excellence grown old. Try therefore to be born again in valour, in genius, in fortune, in all. Display startling novelties, rise afresh like the sun every day. Change too the scene on which you shine, so that your loss may be felt in the old scenes of your triumph, while the novelty of your powers wins you applause in the new.

lxxxii Drain Nothing to the Dregs, neither Good nor Ill.

A sage once reduced all virtue to the golden mean. Push right to the extreme and it becomes wrong: press all the juice from an orange and it becomes bitter. Even in enjoyment never go to extremes. Thought too subtle is dull. If you milk a cow too much you draw blood, not milk.

lxxxiii Allow Yourself some venial Fault.

Some such carelessness is often the greatest recommendation of talent. For envy exercises ostracism, most envenomed when most polite, It counts it to perfection as a failing that it has no faults; for being perfect in all it condemns

[p. 49]

it in all. It becomes an Argus, all eyes for imperfection: 'tis its only consolation. Blame is like the lightning; it hits the highest. Let Homer nod now and then and affect some negligence in valour or in intellect--not in prudence--so as to disarm malevolence, or at least to prevent its bursting with its own venom. You thus leave your cloak on the horns of Envy in order to save your immortal parts.

lxxxiv Make use of your Enemies.

You should learn to seize things not by the blade, which cuts, but by the handle, which saves you from harm: especially is this the rule with the doings of your enemies. A wise man gets more use from his enemies than a fool from his friends. Their ill-will often levels mountains of difficulties which one would otherwise not face. Many have had their greatness made for them by their enemies. Flattery is more dangerous than hatred, because it covers the stains which the other causes to be wiped out. The wise will turn ill-will into a mirror more faithful than that of kindness. and remove or improve the faults referred to. Caution thrives well when rivalry and ill-will are next-door neighbours.

[p. 50]

lxxxv Do not play Manille.

It is a fault of excellence that being so much in use it is liable to abuse. Because all covet it, all are vexed by it. It is a great misfortune to be of use to nobody; scarcely less to be of use to everybody. People who reach this stage lose by gaining, and at last bore those who desired them before. These Manilles wear away all kinds of excellence: losing the earlier esteem of the few, they obtain discredit among the vulgar. The remedy against this extreme is to moderate your brilliance. Be extraordinary in your excellence, if you like, but be ordinary in your display of it. The more light a torch gives, the more it burns away and the nearer 'tis to going out. Show yourself less and you will be rewarded by being esteemed more.

lxxxvi Prevent Scandal.

Many heads go to make the mob, and in each of them are eyes for malice to use and a tongue for detraction to wag. If a single ill report spread, it casts a blemish on your fair fame, and if it clings to you with a nickname, your reputation is in danger. Generally it is some salient defect or ridiculous trait that gives rise to the rumours. At times these are

[p. 51]

malicious additions of private envy to general distrust. For there are wicked tongues that ruin a great reputation more easily by a witty sneer than by a direct accusation. It is easy to get into bad repute, because it is easy to believe evil of any one: it is not easy to clear yourself. The wise accordingly avoid these mischances, guarding against vulgar scandal with sedulous vigilance. It is far easier to prevent than to rectify.

lxxxvii Culture and Elegance.

Man is born a barbarian, and only raises himself above the beast by culture. Culture therefore makes the man; the more a man, the higher. Thanks to it, Greece could call the rest of the world barbarians. Ignorance is very raw; nothing contributes so much to culture as knowledge. But even knowledge is coarse If without elegance. Not alone must our intelligence be elegant, but our desires, and above all our conversation. Some men are naturally elegant in internal and external qualities, in their thoughts, in their address, in their dress, which is the rind of the soul, and in their talents, which is its fruit. There are others, on the other hand, so gauche that everything about them, even their very excellences,

[p. 52]

is tarnished by an intolerable and barbaric want of neatness.

lxxxviii Let your Behaviour be Fine and Noble.

A great man ought not to be little in his behaviour. He ought never to pry too minutely into things, least of all in unpleasant matters. For though it is important to know all, it is not necessary to know all about all. One ought to act in such cases with the generosity of a gentleman, conduct worthy of a gallant man. To overlook forms a large part of the work of ruling. Most things must be left unnoticed among relatives and friends, and even among enemies. All superfluity is annoying, especially in things that annoy. To keep hovering around the object or your annoyance is a kind of mania. Generally speaking, every man behaves according to his heart and his understanding.

lxxxix Know Yourself

--in talents and capacity, in judgment and inclination. You cannot master yourself unless you know yourself. There are mirrors for the face but none for the mind. Let careful thought about yourself serve as a substitute.

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] When the outer image is forgotten, keep the inner one to improve and perfect. Learn the force of your intellect and capacity for affairs, test the force of your courage in order to apply it, and keep your foundations secure and your head clear for everything.

xc The Secret of Long Life

Lead a good life. Two things bring life speedily to an end: folly and immorality. Some lose their life because they have not the intelligence to keep it, others because they have not the will. Just as virtue is its own reward, so is vice its own punishment. He who lives a fast life runs through life in a double sense. A virtuous life never dies. The firmness of the soul is communicated to the body, and a good life is long not only in intention but also in extension.

xci Never set to work at anything if you have any doubts of its Prudence.

A suspicion of failure in the mind of the doer is proof positive of it in that of the onlooker, especially if he is a rival. If in the heat of action your judgment feels scruples, it will afterwards in cool reflection condemn it as a piece

[p. 54]

of folly. Action is dangerous where prudence is in doubt: better leave such things alone. Wisdom does not trust to probabilities; it always marches in the mid-day light of reason. How can an enterprise succeed which the judgment condemns as soon as conceived? And if resolutions passed nem. con. by inner court often turn out unfortunately, what can we expect of those undertaken by a doubting reason and a vacillating judgment?

xcii Transcendant Wisdom.

I mean in everything. The first and highest rule of all deed and speech, the more necessary to be followed the higher and more numerous our posts, is: an ounce of wisdom is worth more than tons of cleverness. It is the only sure way, though it may not gain so much applause. The reputation of wisdom is the last triumph of fame. It is enough if you satisfy the wise, for their judgment is the touchstone of true success.

xciii Versatility.

A man of many excellences equals many men. By imparting his own enjoyment of life to his circle he enriches their life. Variety in

[p. 55]

excellences is the delight of life. It is a great art to profit by all that is good, and since Nature has made man in his highest development an abstract of herself, so let Art create in him a true microcosm by training his taste and intellect.

xciv Keep the extent of your Abilities unknown.

The wise man does not allow his knowledge and abilities to be sounded to the bottom, if he desires to be honoured by all. He allows you to know them but not to comprehend them. No one must know the extent of his abilities, lest he be disappointed. No one ever has an opportunity of fathoming him entirely. For guesses and doubts about the extent of his talents arouse more veneration than accurate knowledge of them, be they ever so great.

xcv Keep Expectation alive.

Keep stirring it up. Let much promise more, and great deeds herald greater. Do not rest your whole fortune on a single cast of the die. It requires great skill to moderate your forces so as to keep expectation from being dissipated.

xcvi The highest Discretion.

It is the throne of reason, the foundation of

[p. 56]

prudence: by its means success is gained at little cost. It is a gift from above, and should be prayed for as the first and best quality. 'Tis the main piece of the panoply, and so important that its absence makes a man imperfect, whereas with other qualities it is merely a question of more or less. All the actions of life depend on its application; all require its assistance, for everything needs intelligence. Discretion consists in a natural tendency to the most rational course, combined with a liking for the surest.

xcvii Obtain and preserve a Reputation.

It is the usufruct of fame. It is expensive to obtain a reputation, for it only attaches to distinguished abilities, which are as rare as mediocrities are common. Once obtained, it is easily preserved. It confers many an obligation, but it does more. When it is owing to elevated powers or lofty spheres of action, it rises to a kind of veneration and yields a sort of majesty. But it is only a well-founded reputation that lasts permanently.

xcviii Write your Intentions in Cypher.

The passions are the gates of the soul. The most practical knowledge consists in disguising

[p. 57]

them. He that plays with cards exposed runs a risk of losing the stakes. The reserve of caution should combat the curiosity of inquirers: adopt the policy of the cuttlefish. Do not even let your tastes be known, lest others utilise them either by running counter to them or by flattering them.

xcix Reality and Appearance.

Things pass for what they seem, not for what they are. Few see inside; many take to the outside. It is not enough to be right, if right seem false and ill.

Footnotes

^32:1 Charles V.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

c A Man without Illusions, a wise Christian, a philosophic Courtier.

Be all these, not merely seem to be them, still less affect to be them. Philosophy is nowadays discredited, but yet it was always the chiefest concern of the wise. The art of thinking has lost all its former repute. Seneca introduced it at Rome: it went to court for some time, but now it is considered out of place there. And yet the discovery of deceit was always thought the true nourishment of a thoughtful mind, the true delight of a virtuous soul.

[p. 58]

ci One half of the World laughs at the other, and Fools are they all.

Everything is good or everything is bad according to the votes they gain. What one pursues another persecutes. He is an in-sufferable ass that would regulate everything according to his ideas. Excellences do not depend on a single man's pleasure. So many men, so many tastes, all different. There is no defect which is not affected by some, nor need we lose heart if things please not some, for others will appreciate them. Nor need their applause turn our head, for there will surely be others to condemn. The real test of praise is the approbation of famous men and of experts in the matter. You should aim to be independent of any one vote, of any one fashion, of any one century.

cii Be able to stomach big slices of Luck.

In the body of wisdom not the least important organ is a big stomach, for great capacity implies great parts. Big bits of luck do not embarrass one who can digest still bigger ones. What is a surfeit for one may be hunger for another. Many are troubled as it were with weak digestion, owing to their small capacity

[p. 59]

being neither born nor trained for great employment. Their actions turn sour, and the humours that arise from their undeserved honours turn their head and they incur great risks in high place: they do not find their proper place, for luck finds no proper place in them. A man of talent therefore should show that he has more room for even greater enterprises, and above all avoid showing signs of a little heart.

viii Let each keep up his Dignity.

Let each deed of a man in its degree, though he be not a king, be worthy of a prince, and let his action be princely within due limits. Sublime in action, lofty in thought, in all things like a king, at least in merit if not in might. For true kingship lies in spotless rectitude, and he need not envy greatness who can serve as a model of it. Especially should those near the throne aim at true superiority, and prefer to share the true qualities of royalty rather than take parts in its mere ceremonies, yet without affecting its imperfections but sharing in its true dignity.

civ Try your hand at Office.

It requires varied qualities, and to know which is needed taxes attention and calls for masterly

[p. 60]

discernment. Some demand courage, others tact. Those that merely require rectitude are the easiest, the most difficult those requiring cleverness. For the former all that is necessary is character; for the latter all one's attention and zeal may not suffice. 'Tis a troublesome business to rule men, still more fools or blockheads: double sense is needed with those who have none. It is intolerable when an office engrosses a man with fixed hours and a settled routine. Those are better that leave a man free to follow his own devices, combining variety with importance, for the change refreshes the mind. The most in repute are those that have least or most distant dependence on others; the worst is that which worries us both here and hereafter.

cv Don't be a Bore.

The man of one business or of one topic is apt to be heavy. Brevity flatters and does better business; it gains by courtesy what it loses by curtness. Good things, when short, are twice as good. The quintessence of the matter is more effective than a whole farrago of details. It is a well-known truth that talkative folk rarely have much sense whether in dealing with the matter itself or its formal

[p. 61]

treatment. There are that serve more for stumbling-stones than centrepieces, useless lumber in every one's way. The wise avoid being bores, especially to the great, who are fully occupied: it is worse to disturb one of them than all the rest. Well said is soon said.

cvi Do not parade your Position.

To outshine in dignity is more offensive than in personal attractions. To pose as a personage is to be hated: envy is surely enough. The more you seek esteem the less you obtain it, for it depends on the opinion of others. You cannot take it, but must earn and receive it from others. Great positions require an amount of authority sufficient to make them efficient: without it they cannot be adequately filled. Preserve therefore enough dignity to carry on the duties of the office. Do not enforce respect, but try and create it. Those who insist on the dignity of their office, show they have not deserved it, and that it is too much for them. If you wish to be valued, be valued for your talents, not for anything adventitious. Even kings prefer to be honoured for their personal qualifications rather than for their station.

[p. 62]

cvii Show no Self-satisfaction.

You must neither be discontented with yourself--and that were poor-spirited--nor self-satisfied--and that is folly. Self-satisfaction arises mostly from ignorance: it would be a happy ignorance not without its advantages if it did not injure our credit. Because a man cannot achieve the superlative perfections of others, he contents himself with any mediocre talent of his own. Distrust is wise, and even useful, either to evade mishaps or to afford consolation when they come, for a misfortune cannot surprise a man who has already feared it. Even Homer nods at times, and Alexander fell from his lofty state and out of his illusions. Things depend on many circumstances: what constitutes triumph in one set may cause a defeat in another. In the midst of all incorrigible folly remains the same with empty self-satisfaction, blossoming, flowering, and running all to seed.

cviii The Path to Greatness is along with Others.

Intercourse works well: manners and taste are shared: good sense and even talent grow insensibly. Let the sanguine man then make a comrade of the lymphatic, and so with the other

[p. 63]

temperaments, so that without any forcing the golden mean is obtained. It is a great art to agree with others. The alternation of contraries beautifies and sustains the world: if it can cause harmony in the physical world, still more can it do so in the moral. Adopt this policy in the choice of friends and defendants; by joining extremes the more effective middle way is found.

cix Be not Censorious.

There are men of gloomy character who regard everything as faulty, not from any evil motive but because it is their nature to. They condemn all: these for what they have done, those for what they will do. This indicates a nature worse than cruel, vile Indeed. They accuse with such exaggeration that they make out of motes beams wherewith to force out the eyes. They are always taskmasters who could turn a paradise into a prison; if passion intervenes they drive matters to the extreme. A noble nature, on the contrary, always knows how to find an excuse for failings, if not in the intention, at least from oversight.

cx Do not wait till you are a Sinking Sun.

'Tis a maxim of the wise to leave things

[p. 64]

before things leave them. One should be able to snatch a triumph at the end, just as the sun even at its brightest often retires behind a cloud so as not to be seen sinking, and to leave in doubt whether he has sunk or no. Wisely withdraw from the chance of mishaps, lest you have to do so from the reality Do not wait till they turn you the cold shoulder and carry you to the grave, alive in feeling but dead in esteem. Wise trainers put racers to grass before they arouse derision by falling on the course. A beauty should break her mirror early, lest she do so later with open eyes.

cxi Have Friends.

'Tis a second existence. Every friend is good and wise for his friend: among them all everything turns to good. Every one is as others wish him; that they may wish him well, he must win their hearts and so their tongues. There is no magic like a good turn, and the way to gain friendly feelings is to do friendly acts. The most and best of us depend on others; we have to live either among friends or among enemies. Seek some one every day to be a well-wisher if not a friend; by and by after trial some of these will become intimate.

[p. 65]

cxii Gain Good-will.

For thus the first and highest cause foresees and furthers the greatest objects. By gaining their good-will you gain men's good opinion. Some trust so much to merit that they neglect grace, but wise men know that Service Road without a lift from favour is a long way indeed. Good-will facilitates and supplies everything: is supposes gifts or even supplies them, as courage, zeal, knowledge, or even discretion; whereas defects it will not see because it does not search for them. It arises from some common interest, either material, as disposition, nationality, relationship, fatherland, office; or formal, which is of a higher kind of communion, in capacity, obligation, reputation, or merit. The whole difficulty is to gain good-will; to keep it is easy. It has, however, to be sought for, and, when found, to be utilised.

cxiii In Prosperity prepare for Adversity.

It is both wiser and easier to collect winter stores in summer. In prosperity favours are cheap and friends are many. 'Tis well therefore to keep them for more unlucky days, for adversity costs dear and has no helpers. Retain a store of friendly and obliged persons; the

[p. 66]

day may come when their price will go up. Low minds never have friends; in luck they will not recognise them: in misfortune they will not be recognised by them.

cxiv Never Compete.

Every competition damages the credit: our rivals seize occasion to obscure us so as to out-shine us. Few wage honourable war. Rivalry discloses faults which courtesy would hide. Many have lived in good repute while they had no rivals. The heat of conflict gives life, or even new life, to dead scandals, and digs up long-buried skeletons. Competition begins with belittling, and seeks aid wherever it can, not only where it ought. And when the weapons of abuse do not effect their purpose, as often or mostly happens, our opponents use them for revenge, and use them at least for beating away the dust of oblivion from anything to our discredit. Men of good-will are always at peace; men of good repute and dignity are men of good-will.

cxv Get used to the Failings of your Familiars,

as you do to ugly faces. It is indispensable if they depend on us, or we on them. There

[p. 67]

are wretched characters with whom one cannot live, nor yet without them. Therefore clever folk get used to them, as to ugly faces, so that they are not obliged to do so suddenly under the pressure of necessity. At first they arouse disgust, but gradually they lose this influence, and reflection provides for disgust or puts up with it.

cxvi Only act with Honourable Men.

You can trust them and they you. Their honour is the best surety of their behaviour even in misunderstandings, for they always act having regard to what they are. Hence 'tis better to have a dispute with honourable people than to have a victory over dishonourable ones. You cannot treat with the ruined, for they have no hostages for rectitude. With them there is no true friendship, and their agreements are not binding, however stringent they may appear, because they have no feeling of honour. Never have to do with such men, for if honour does not restrain a man, virtue will not, since honour is the throne of rectitude.

cxvii Never talk of Yourself.

You must either praise yourself, which is vain, or blame yourself, which is little-minded:

[p. 68]

it ill beseems him that speaks, and ill pleases him that hears. And if you should avoid this in ordinary conversation, how much more in official matters, and above all, in public speaking, where every appearance of unwisdom really is unwise. The same want of tact lies in speaking of a man in his presence, owing to the danger of going to one of two extremes: flattery or censure.

cxviii Acquire the Reputation of Courtesy;

for it is enough to make you liked. Politeness is the main ingredient of culture,--a kind of witchery that wins the regard of all as surely as discourtesy gains their disfavour and opposition; if this latter springs from pride, it is abominable; if from bad breeding, it is despicable. Better too much courtesy than too little, provided it be not the same for all, which degenerates into injustice. Between opponents it is especially due as a proof of valour. It costs little and helps much: every one is honoured who gives honour. Politeness and honour have this advantage, that they remain with him who displays them to others.

[p. 69]

cxix Avoid becoming Disliked.

There is no occasion to seek dislike: it comes without seeking quickly enough. There are many who hate of their own accord without knowing the why or the how. Their ill-will outruns our readiness to please. Their ill-nature is more prone to do others harm than their cupidity is eager to gain advantage for themselves. Some manage to be on bad terms with all, because they always either produce or experience vexation of spirit. Once hate has taken root it is, like bad repute, difficult to eradicate. Wise men are feared, the malevolent are abhorred, the arrogant are regarded with disdain, buffoons with contempt, eccentrics with neglect. Therefore pay respect that you may be respected, and know that to be esteemed you must show esteem.

cxx Live Practically.

Even knowledge has to be in the fashion, and where it is not it is wise to affect ignorance. Thought and taste change with the times. Do not be old-fashioned in your ways of thinking, and let your taste be in the modern style. In everything the taste of the many carries the votes; for the time being

[p. 70]

one must follow it in the hope of leading it to higher things. In the adornment of the body as of the mind adapt yourself to the present, even though the past appear better. But this rule does not apply to kindness, for goodness is for all time. It is neglected nowadays and seems out of date. Truth-speaking, keeping your word, and so too good people, seem to come from the good old times: yet they are liked for all that, but in such a way that even when they all exist they are not in the fashion and are not imitated. What a misfortune for our age that it regards virtue as a stranger and vice as a matter of course! If you are wise, live as you can, if you cannot live as you would. Think more highly of what fate has given you than of what it has denied.

cxxi Do not make a Business of what is no Business.

As some make gossip out of everything, so others business. They always talk big, take everything in earnest, and turn it into a dispute or a secret. Troublesome things must not be taken too seriously if they can be avoided. It is preposterous to take to heart that which you should throw over your shoulders. Much that would be something has become nothing by

[p. 71]

being left alone, and what was nothing has become of consequence by being made much of. At the outset things can be easily settled, but not afterwards. Often the remedy causes the disease. 'Tis by no means the least of life's rules: to let things alone.

cxxii Distinction in Speech and Action.

By this you gain a position in many places and carry esteem beforehand. It shows itself in everything, in talk, in look, even in gait. It is a great victory to conquer men's hearts: it does not arise from any foolish presumption or pompous talk, but in a becoming tone of authority born of superior talent combined with true merit.

cxxiii Avoid Affectation.

The more merit, the less affectation, which gives a vulgar flavour to all. It is wearisome to others and troublesome to the one affected, for he becomes a martyr to care and tortures himself with attention. The most eminent merits lose most by it, for they appear proud and artificial instead of being the product of nature, and the natural is always more pleasing than the artificial. One always feels sure that

[p. 72]

the man who affects a virtue has it not. The more pains you take with a thing, the more should you conceal them, so that it may appear to arise spontaneously from your own natural character. Do not, however, in avoiding affectation fall into it by affecting to be unaffected. The sage never seems to know his own merits, for only by not noticing them can you call others' attention to them. He is twice great who has all the perfections in the opinion of all except of himself; he attains applause by two opposite paths.

cxxiv Get Yourself missed.

Few reach such favour with the many; if with the wise 'tis the height of happiness. When one has finished one's work, coldness is the general rule. But there are ways of earning this reward of goodwill. The sure way is to excel in your office and talents: add to this agreeable manner and you reach the point where you become necessary to your office, not your office to you. Some do honour to their post, with others 'tis the other way. It is no great gain if a poor successor makes the predecessor seem good, for this does not imply that the one is missed, but that the other is wished away.

[p. 73]

cxxv Do not be a Black List.

It is a sign of having a tarnished name to concern oneself with the ill-fame of others. Some wish to hide their own stains with those of others, or at least wash them away: or they seek consolation therein--'tis the consolation of fools. They must have bad breath who form the sewers of scandal for the whole town. The more one grubs about in such matters, the more one befouls oneself. There are few without stain somewhere or other, but it is of little known people that the failings are little known. Be careful then to avoid being a registrar of faults. That is to be an abominable thing, a man that lives without a heart.

cxxvi Folly consists not in committing Folly, but in not hiding it when committed.

You should keep your desires sealed up, still more your defects. All go wrong sometimes, but the wise try to hide the errors, but fools boast of them. Reputation depends more on what is hidden than on what is done; if a man does not live chastely, he must live cautiously. The errors of great men are like the eclipses of the greater lights. Even in friendship it is rare to expose one's failings

[p. 74]

to one's friend. Nay, one should conceal them from oneself if one can. But here one can help with that other great rule of life: learn to forget.

cxxvii Grace in Everything.

'Tis the life of talents, the breath of speech, the soul of action, and the ornament of ornament. Perfections are the adornment of our nature, but this is the adornment of perfection itself. It shows itself even in the thoughts. 'Tis most a gift of nature and owes least to education; it even triumphs over training. It is more than ease, approaches the free and easy, gets over embarrassment, and adds the finishing touch to perfection. Without it beauty is lifeless, graciousness ungraceful: it surpasses valour, discretion, prudence, even majesty it-self. 'Tis a short way to dispatch and an easy escape from embarrassment.

cxxviii Highmindedness.

One of the principal qualifications for a gentleman, for it spurs on to all kinds of nobility. It improves the taste, ennobles the heart, elevates the mind, refines the feelings, and intensifies dignity. It raises him in whom

[p. 75]

it is found, and at times remedies the bad turns of Fortune, which only raises by striking. It can find full scope in the will when it cannot be exercised in act. Magnanimity, generosity, and all heroic qualities recognise in it their source.

cxxix Never complain.

To complain always brings discredit. Better be a model of self-reliance opposed to the passion of others than an object of their compassion. For it opens the way for the hearer to what we are complaining of, and to disclose one insult forms an excuse for another. By complaining of past offences we give occasion for future ones, and in seeking aid or counsel we only obtain indifference or contempt. It is much more politic to praise one man's favours, so that others may feel obliged to follow suit. To recount the favours we owe the absent is to demand similar ones from the present, and thus we sell our credit with the one to the other. The shrewd will therefore never publish to the world his failures or his defects, but only those marks of consideration which serve to keep friendship alive and enmity silent.

[p. 76]

cxxx Do and be seen Doing.

Things do not pass for what they are but for what they seem. To be of use and to know how to show yourself of use, is to be twice as useful. What is not seen is as if it was not. Even the Right does not receive proper consideration if it does not seem right. The observant are far fewer in number than those who are deceived by appearances. Deceit rules the roast, and things are judged by their jackets, and many things are other than they seem. A good exterior is the best recommendation of the inner perfection.

cxxxi Nobility of Feeling.

There is a certain distinction of the soul, a highmindedness prompting to gallant acts, that gives an air of grace to the whole character. It is not found often, for it presupposes great magnanimity. Its chief characteristic is to speak well of an enemy, and to act even better to-wards him. It shines brightest when a chance comes of revenge: not alone does it let the occasion pass, but it improves it by using a complete victory in order to display unexpected generosity. 'Tis a fine stroke of policy, nay, the very acme of statecraft. It makes no pretence

[p. 77]

to victory, for it pretends to nothing, and while obtaining its deserts it conceals its merits.

cxxxii Revise your Judgments.

To appeal to an inner Court of Revision makes things safe. Especially when the course of action is not clear, you gain time either to confirm or improve your decision. It affords new grounds for strengthening or corroborating your judgment. And if it is a matter of giving, the gift is the more valued from its being evidently well considered than for being promptly bestowed: long expected is highest prized. And if you have to deny, you gain time to decide how and when to mature the No that it may be made palatable. Besides, after the first heat of desire is passed the repulse of refusal is felt less keenly in cold blood. But especially when men press for a reply is it best to defer it, for as often as not that is only a feint to disarm attention.

cxxxiii Better Mad with the rest of the World than Wise alone.

So say politicians. If all are so, one is no worse off than the rest, whereas solitary wisdom passes for folly. So important is it to sail with

[p. 78]

the stream. The greatest wisdom often consists in ignorance, or the pretence of it. One has to live with others, and others are mostly ignorant. "To live entirely alone one must be very like a god or quite like a wild beast," but I would turn the aphorism by saying: Better be wise with the many than a fool all alone. There be some too who seek to be original by seeking chimeras.

cxxxiv Double your Resources.

You thereby double your life. One must not depend on one thing or trust to only one resource, however pre-eminent. Everything should be kept double, especially the causes of success, of favour, or of esteem. The moon's mutability transcends everything and gives a limit to all existence, especially of things dependent on human will, the most brittle of all things. To guard against this inconstancy should be the sage's care, and for this the chief rule of life is to keep a double store of good and useful qualities. Thus as Nature gives us in duplicate the most important of our limbs and those most exposed to risk, so Art should deal with the qualities on which we depend for success.

[p. 79]

cxxxv Do not nourish the Spirit of Contradiction.

It only proves you foolish or peevish, and prudence should guard against this strenuously. To find difficulties in everything may prove you clever, but such wrangling writes you down a fool. Such folk make a mimic war out of the most pleasant conversation, and in this way act as enemies towards their associates rather than towards those with whom they do not consort. Grit grates most in delicacies, and so does contradiction in amusement. They are both foolish and cruel who yoke together the wild beast and the tame.

cxxxvi Post Yourself in the Centre of Things.

So you feel the pulse of affairs. Many lose their way either in the ramifications of useless discussion or in the brushwood of wearisome verbosity without ever realising the real matter at issue. They go over a single point a hundred times, wearying themselves and others, and yet never touch the all-important centre of affairs. This comes from a confusion of mind from which they cannot extricate themselves. They waste time and patience on matters they should leave alone, and cannot spare them afterwards for what they have left alone.

[p. 80]

cxxxvii The Sage should be Self-sufficing.

He that was all in all to himself carried all with him when he carried himself. If a universal friend can represent to us Rome and the rest of the world, let a man be his own universal friend, and then he is in a position to live alone. Whom could such a man want if there is no clearer intellect or finer taste than his own? He would then depend on himself alone, which is the highest happiness and like the Supreme Being. He that can live alone resembles the brute beast in nothing, the sage in much and God in everything.

cxxxviii The Art of letting Things alone.

The more so the wilder the waves of public or of private life. There are hurricanes in human affairs, tempests of passion, when it is wise to retire to a harbour and ride at anchor. Remedies often make diseases worse: in such cases one has to leave them to their natural course and the moral suasion of time. It takes a wise doctor to know when not to prescribe, and at times the greater skill consists in not applying remedies. The proper way to still the storms of the vulgar is to hold your hand and let them calm down of themselves. To

[p. 81]

give way now is to conquer by and by. A fountain gets muddy with but little stirring up, and does not get clear by our meddling with it but by our leaving it alone. The best remedy for disturbances is to let them run their course, for so they quiet down.

cxxxix Recognise unlucky Days.

They exist: nothing goes well on them; even though the game may be changed the ill-luck remains. Two tries should be enough to tell if one is in luck to-day or not. Everything is in process of change, even the mind, and no one is always wise: chance has something to say, even how to write a good letter. All perfection turns on the time; even beauty has its hours. Even wisdom fails at times by doing too much or too little. To turn out well a thing must be done on its own day. This is why with some everything turns out ill, with others all goes well, even with less trouble. They find everything ready, their wit prompt, their presiding genius favourable, their lucky star in the ascendant. At such times one must seize the occasion and not throw away the slightest chance. But a shrewd person will not decide on the day's

[p. 82]

luck by a single piece of good or bad fortune, for the one may be only a lucky chance and the other only a slight annoyance.

cxl Find the Good in a Thing at once.

'Tis the advantage of good taste. The bee goes to the honey for her comb, the serpent to the gall for its venom. So with taste: some seek the good, others the ill. There is nothing that has no good in it, especially in books, as giving food for thought. But many have such a scent that amid a thousand excellences they fix upon a single defect, and single it out for blame as if they were scavengers of men's minds and hearts. So they draw up a balance sheet of defects which does more credit to their bad taste than to their intelligence. They lead a sad life, nourishing themselves on bitters and battening on garbage. They have the luckier taste who midst a thousand defects seize upon a single beauty they may have hit upon by chance.

cxli Do not listen to Yourself.

It is no use pleasing yourself if you do not please others, and as a rule general contempt is the punishment for self-satisfaction. The

[p. 83]

attention you pay to yourself you probably owe to others. To speak and at the same time listen to yourself cannot turn out well. If to talk to oneself when alone is folly, it must be doubly unwise to listen to oneself in the presence of others. It is a weakness of the great to talk with a recurrent "as I was saying" and "eh?" which bewilders their hearers. At every sentence they look for applause or flattery, taxing the patience of the wise. So too the pompous speak with an echo, and as their talk can only totter on with the aid of stilts, at every word they need the support of a stupid "bravo!"

cxlii Never from Obstinacy take the Wrong Side because your Opponent has anticipated you in taking the Right One.

You begin the fight already beaten and must soon take to flight in disgrace. With bad weapons one can never win. It was astute in the opponent to seize the better side first: it would be folly to come lagging after with the worst. Such obstinacy is more dangerous in actions than in words, for action encounters more risk than talk. 'Tis the common failing of the obstinate that they lose the true by contradicting it, and the useful by

[p. 84]

quarrelling with it. The sage never places himself on the side of passion, but espouses the cause of right, either discovering it first or improving it later. If the enemy is a fool, he will in such a case turn round to follow the opposite and worse way. Thus the only way to drive him from the better course is to take it yourself, for his folly will cause him to desert it, and his obstinacy be punished for so doing.

cxliii Never become Paradoxical in order to avoid the Trite.

Both extremes damage our reputation. Every undertaking which differs from the reasonable approaches foolishness. The paradox is a cheat: it wins applause at first by its novelty and piquancy, but afterwards it becomes discredited when the deceit is fore-seen and its emptiness becomes apparent. It is a species of jugglery, and in matters political would be the ruin of states. Those who cannot or dare not reach great deeds on the direct road of excellence go round by way of Paradox, admired by fools but making wise men true prophets. It argues an unbalanced judgment, and if it is not

[p. 85]

altogether based on the false, it is certainly founded on the uncertain, and risks the weightier matters of life.

cxliv Begin with Another's to end with your Own.

'Tis a politic means to your end. Even in heavenly matters Christian teachers lay stress on this holy cunning. It is a weighty piece of dissimulation, for the foreseen advantages serve as a lure to influence the other's will. His affair seems to be in train when it is really only leading the way for another's. One should never advance unless under cover, especially where the ground is dangerous. Likewise with persons who always say No at first, it is useful to ward off this blow, because the difficulty of conceding much more does not occur to them when your version is presented to them. This advice belongs to the rule about second thoughts [xiii], which covers the most subtle manoeuvres of life.

cxlv Do not show your wounded Finger,

for everything will knock up against it; nor complain about it, for malice always aims where weakness can be injured. It is no use to be vexed: being the butt of the talk will only vex

[p. 86]

you the more. Ill-will searches for wounds to irritate, aims darts to try the temper, and tries a thousand ways to sting to the quick. The wise never own to being hit, or disclose any evil, whether personal or hereditary. For even Fate sometimes likes to wound us where we are most tender. It always mortifies wounded flesh. Never therefore disclose the source of mortification or of joy, if you wish the one to cease, the other to endure.

cxlvi Look into the Interior of Things.

Things are generally other than they seem, and ignorance that never looks beneath the rind becomes disabused when you show the kernel. Lies always come first, dragging fools along by their irreparable vulgarity. Truth always lags last, limping along on the arm of Time. The wise therefore reserve for it the other half of that power which the common mother has wisely given in duplicate. Deceit is very superficial, and the superficial therefore easily fall into it. Prudence lives retired within its recesses, visited only by sages and wise men.

cxlvii Do not be Inaccessible.

None is so perfect that he does not need

[p. 87]

at times the advice of others. He is an in-corrigible ass who will never listen to any one. Even the most surpassing intellect should find a place for friendly counsel. Sovereignty itself must learn to lean. There are some that are incorrigible simply because they are : they fall to ruin because none dares to extricate them. The highest should have the door open for friendship; it may prove the gate of help. A friend must be free to advise, and even to upbraid, without feeling embarrassed. Our satisfaction in him and our trust in his steadfast faith give him that power. One need not pay respect or give credit to every one, but in the innermost of his precaution man has a true mirror of a confidant to whom he owes the correction of his errors, and has to thank for it.

cxlviii Have the Art of Conversation.

That is where the real personality shows itself. No act in life requires more attention, though it be the commonest thing in life. You must either lose or gain by it. If it needs care to write a letter which is but a deliberate and written conversation, how much more the ordinary kind in which there

[p. 88]

is occasion for a prompt display of intelligence? Experts feel the pulse of the soul in the tongue, wherefore the sage said, "Speak, that I may know thee." Some hold that the art of conversation is to be without art--that it should be neat, not gaudy, like the garments. This holds good for talk between friends. But when held with persons to whom one would show respect, it should be more dignified to answer to the dignity of the person addressed. To be appropriate it should adapt itself to the mind and tone of the interlocutor. And do not be a critic of words, or you will be taken for a pedant; nor a taxgatherer of ideas, or men will avoid you, or at least sell their thoughts dear. in conversation discretion is more important than eloquence.

cxlix Know how to put off Ills on Others.

To have a shield against ill-will is a great piece of skill in a ruler. It is not the resort of incapacity, as ill-wishers imagine, but is due to the higher policy of having some one to receive the censure of the disaffected and the punishment of universal detestation. Everything cannot turn out well, nor can every one be satisfied: it is well therefore, even at the

[p. 89]

cost of our pride, to have such a scapegoat, such a target for unlucky undertakings.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

cl Know to get your Price for Things.

Their intrinsic value is not sufficient; for all do not bite at the kernel or look into the interior. Most go with the crowd, and go because they see others go. It is a great stroke of art to bring things into repute; at times by praising them, for praise arouses desire at times by giving them a striking name, which is very useful for putting things at a premium, provided it is done without affectation. Again, it is generally an inducement to profess to supply only connoisseurs, for all think themselves such, and if not, the sense of want arouses the desire. Never call things easy or common: that makes them depreciated rather than made accessible. All rush after the unusual, which is more appetising both for the taste and for the intelligence.

cli Think beforehand.

To-day for to-morrow, and even for many days hence. The greatest foresight consists in determining beforehand the time of trouble. For the provident there are no mischances and

[p. 90]

for the careful no narrow escapes. We must not put off thought till we are up to the chin in mire. Mature reflection can get over the most formidable difficulty. The pillow is a silent Sibyl, and it is better to sleep on things beforehand than lie awake about them afterwards. Many act first and then think afterwards--that is, they think less of consequences than of excuses: others think neither before nor after. The whole of life should be one course of thought how not to miss the right path. Rumination and foresight enable one to determine the line of life.

clii Never have a Companion who casts you in the Shade.

The more he does so, the less desirable a companion he is. The more he excels in quality the more in repute: he will always play first fiddle and you second. If you get any consideration, it is only his leavings. The moon shines bright alone among the stars: when the sun rises she becomes either invisible or imperceptible. Never join one that eclipses you, but rather one who sets you in a brighter light. By this means the cunning Fabula in Martial was able to appear beautiful and

[p. 91]

brilliant, owing to the ugliness and disorder of her companions. But one should as little imperil oneself by an evil companion as pay honour to another at the cost of one's own credit. When you are on the way to fortune associate with the eminent; when arrived, with the mediocre.

cliii Beware of entering where there is a great Gap to be filled.

But if you do it be sure to surpass your predecessor; merely to equal him requires twice his worth. As it is a fine stroke to arrange that our successor shall cause us to be wished back, so it is policy to see that our predecessor does not eclipse us. To fill a great gap is difficult, for the past always seems best, and to equal the predecessor is not enough, since he has the right of first possession. You must therefore possess additional claims to oust the other from his hold on public opinion.

cliv Do not Believe, or Like, lightly.

Maturity of mind is best shown in slow belief. Lying is the usual thing; then let belief be unusual. He that is lightly led away, soon falls into contempt. At the same

[p. 92]

time there is no necessity to betray your doubts in the good faith of others, for this adds insult to discourtesy, since you make out your informant to be either deceiver or deceived. Nor is this the only evil: want of belief is the mark of the liar, who suffers from two failings: he neither believes nor is believed. Suspension of judgment is prudent in a hearer: the speaker can appeal to his original source of in-formation. There is a similar kind of imprudence in liking too easily, for lies may be told by deeds as well as in words, and this deceit is more dangerous for practical life.

clv The Art of getting into a Passion.

If possible, oppose vulgar importunity with prudent reflection; it will not be difficult for a really prudent man. The first step towards getting into a passion is to announce that you are in a passion. By this means you begin the conflict with command over your temper, for one has to regulate one's passion to the exact point that is necessary and no further. This is the art of arts in falling into and getting out of a rage. You should know how and when best to come to a stop: it is most difficult to halt while running at the double. It is a great

[p. 93]

proof of wisdom to remain clear-sighted during paroxysms of rage. Every excess of passion is a digression from rational conduct. But by this masterly policy reason will never be transgressed, nor pass the bounds of its own synteresis. To keep control of passion one must hold firm the reins of attention: he who can do so will be the first man "wise on horseback," and probably the last.

clvi Select your Friends.

Only after passing the matriculation of experience and the examination of fortune will they be graduates not alone in affection but in discernment. Though this is the most important thing in life, it is the one least cared for. Intelligence brings friends to some, chance to most. Yet a man is judged by his friends, for there was never agreement between wise men and fools. At the same time, to find pleasure in a man's society is no proof of near friendship: it may come from the pleasantness of his company more than from trust in his capacity. There are some friendships legitimate, others illicit; the latter for pleasure, the former for their fecundity of ideas and motives. Few are the friends of a man's self, most those of

[p. 94]

his circumstances. The insight of a true friend is more useful than the goodwill of others: therefore gain them by choice, not by chance. A wise friend wards off worries, a foolish one brings them about. But do not wish them too much luck, or you may lose them.

civil Do not make Mistakes about Character.

That is the worst and yet easiest error. Better be cheated in the price than in the quality of goods. In dealing with men, more than with other things, it is necessary to look within. To know men is different from knowing things. It is profound philosophy to sound the depths of feeling and distinguish traits of character. Men must be studied as deeply as books.

clviii Make use of your Friends.

This requires all the art of discretion. Some are good afar off, some when near. Many are no good at conversation but excellent as correspondents, for distance removes some failings which are unbearable in close proximity to them. Friends are for use even more than for pleasure, for they have the three qualities of the Good, or, as some say, of Being

[p. 95]

in general: unity, goodness, and truth. For a friend is all in all. Few are worthy to be good friends, and even these become fewer because men do not know how to pick them out. To keep is more important than to make friends. Select those that will wear well; if they are new at first, it is some consolation they will become old. Absolutely the best are those well salted, though they may require soaking in the testing. There is no desert like living without friends. Friendship multiplies the good of life and divides the evil. 'Tis the sole remedy against misfortune, the very ventilation of the soul.

clix Put up with Fools.

The wise are always impatient, for he that increases knowledge increase impatience of folly. Much knowledge is difficult to satisfy. The first great rule of life, according to Epictetus, is to put up with things: he makes that the moiety of wisdom. To put up with all the varieties of folly would need much patience. We often have to put up with most from those on whom we most depend: a useful lesson in self-control. Out of patience comes forth peace, the priceless boon which is the happiness

[p. 96]

of the world. But let him that bath no power of patience retire within himself, though even there he will have to put up with himself.

clx Be careful in Speaking.

With your rivals from prudence; with others for the sake of appearance. There is always time to add a word, never to withdraw one. Talk as if you were making your will: the fewer words the less litigation. In trivial matters exercise yourself for the more weighty matters of speech. Profound secrecy has some of the lustre of the divine. He who speaks lightly soon falls or fails.

clxi Know your pet Faults.

The most perfect of men has them, and is either wedded to them or has illicit relations with them. They are often faults of intellect, and the greater this is, the greater they are, or at least the more conspicuous. It is not so much that their possessor does not know them: he loves them, which is a double evil: irrational affection for avoidable faults. They are spots on perfection; they displease the onlooker as much as they please the possessor. 'Tis a gallant thing to get clear of them, and so give play to one's other qualities. For all

[p. 97]

men hit upon such a failing, and on going over your qualifications they make a long stay at this blot, and blacken it as deeply as possible in order to cast your other talents into the shade.

clxii How to triumph over Rivals and Detractors.

It is not enough to despise them, though this is often wise: a gallant bearing is the thing. One cannot praise a man too much who speaks well of them who speak ill of him. There is no more heroic vengeance than that of talents and services which at once conquer and torment the envious. Every success is a further twist of the cord round the neck of the ill-affected, and an enemy's glory is the rival's hell. The envious die not once, but as oft as the envied wins applause. The immortality of his fame is the measure of the other's torture: the one lives in endless honour, the other in endless pain. The clarion of Fame announces immortality to the one and death to the other, the slow death of envy long drawn out.

clxiii Never, from Sympathy with the Unfortunate, involve Yourself in his Fate.

One man's misfortune is another man's luck,

[p. 98]

for one cannot be lucky without many being unlucky. It is a peculiarity of the unfortunate to arouse people's goodwill who desire to compensate them for the blows of fortune with their useless favour, and it happens that one who was abhorred by all in prosperity is adored by all in adversity. Vengeance on the wing is exchanged for compassion afoot. Yet 'tis to be noticed how fate shuffles the cards. There are men who always consort with the unlucky, and he that yesterday flew high and happy stands to-day miserable at their side. That argues nobility of soul, but not worldly wisdom.

clxiv Throw Straws in the Air,

to find how things will be received, especially those whose reception or success is doubtful. One can thus be assured of its turning out well, and an opportunity is afforded for going on in earnest or withdrawing entirely. By trying men's intentions in this way, the wise man knows on what ground he stands. This is the great rule of foresight in asking, in desiring, and in ruling.

clxv Wage War Honourably.

You may be obliged to wage war, but not to

[p. 99]

use poisoned arrows. Every one must needs act as he is, not as others would make him to be. Gallantry in the battle of life wins all men's praise: one should fight so as to conquer, not alone by force but by the way it is used. A mean victory brings no glory, but rather disgrace. Honour always has the upper hand. An honourable man never uses forbidden weapons, such as using a friendship that's ended for the purposes of a hatred just begun: a confidence must never be used for a vengeance. The slightest taint of treason tarnishes the good name. In men of honour the smallest trace of meanness repels: the noble and the ignoble should be miles apart. Be able to boast that if gallantry, generosity, and fidelity were lost in the world men would be able to find them again in your own breast.

clxvi Distinguish the Man of Words from the Man of Deeds.

Discrimination here is as important as in the case of friends, persons, and employments, which have all many varieties. Bad words even without bad deeds are bad enough: good words with bad deeds are worse. One cannot dine off words, which are wind, nor off politeness, which

[p. 100]

is but polite deceit. To catch birds with a mirror is the ideal snare. It is the vain alone who take their wages in windy words. Words should be the pledges of work, and, like pawn-tickets, have their market price. Trees that bear leaves but not fruit have usually no pith. Know them for what they are, of no use except for shade.

clxvii Know how to take your own Part.

In great crises there is no better companion than a bold heart, and if it becomes weak it must be strengthened from the neighbouring parts. Worries die away before a man who asserts himself. One must not surrender to misfortune, or else it would become intolerable. Many men do not help themselves in their troubles, and double their weight by not knowing how to bear them. He that knows himself knows how to strengthen his weakness, and the wise man conquers everything, even the stars in their courses.

clxviii Do not indulge in the Eccentricities of Folly.

Like vain, presumptuous, egotistical, untrustworthy, capricious, obstinate, fanciful, theatrical,

[p. 101]

whimsical, inquisitive, paradoxical, sectarian people and all kinds of one-sided persons: they are all monstrosities of impertinence. All deformity of mind is more obnoxious than that of the body, because it contravenes a higher beauty. Yet who can assist such a complete confusion of mind? Where self-control is wanting, there is no room for others' guidance. Instead of paying attention to other people's real derision, men of this kind blind themselves with the unfounded assumption of their imaginary applause.

clxix Be more careful not to Miss once than to Hit a hundred times.

No one looks at the blazing sun; all gaze when he is eclipsed. The common talk does not reckon what goes right but what goes wrong. Evil report carries farther than any applause. Many men are not known to the world till they have left it. All the exploits of a man taken together are not enough to wipe out a single small blemish. Avoid therefore falling into error, seeing that ill-will notices every error and no success.

clxx In all Things keep Something in Reserve.

'Tis a sure means of keeping up your importance.

[p. 102]

[paragraph continues] A man should not employ all his capacity and power at once and on every occasion. Even in knowledge there should be a rearguard, so that your resources are doubled. One must always have something to resort to when there is fear of a defeat. The reserve is of more importance than the attacking force: for it is distinguished for valour and reputation. Prudence always sets to work with assurance of safety: in this matter the piquant paradox holds good that the half is more than the whole.

clxxi Waste not Influence.

The great as friends are for great occasions. One should not make use of great confidence for little things: for that is to waste a favour. The sheet anchor should be reserved for the last extremity. If you use up the great for little ends what remains afterwards? Nothing is more valuable than a protector, and nothing costs more nowadays than a favour. It can make or unmake a whole world. It can even give sense and take it away. As Nature and Fame are favourable to the wise, so Luck is generally envious of them. It is therefore more important to keep the favour of the mighty than goods and chattels.

[p. 103]

clxxii Never contend with a Man who has nothing to Lose;

for thereby you enter into an unequal conflict. The other enters without anxiety; having lost everything, including shame, he has no further loss to fear. He therefore re-sorts to all kinds of insolence. One should never expose a valuable reputation to so terrible a risk, lest what has cost years to gain may be lost in a moment, since a single slight may wipe out much sweat. A man of honour and responsibility has a reputation, because he has much to lose. He balances his own and the other's reputation: he only enters into the contest with the greatest caution, and then goes to work with such circumspection that he gives time to prudence to retire in time and bring his reputation under cover. For even by victory he cannot gain what he has lost by exposing himself to the chances of loss.

clxxiii Do not be Glass in Intercourse, still less in Friendship.

Some break very easily, and thereby show their want of consistency. They attribute to themselves imaginary offences and to others oppressive intentions. Their feelings are even

[p. 104]

more sensitive than the eye itself, and must not be touched in jest or in earnest. Motes offend them: they need not wait for beams. Those who consort with them must treat them with the greatest delicacy, have regard to their sensitiveness, and watch their demeanour, since the slightest slight arouses their annoyance. They are mostly very egoistic, slaves of their moods, for the sake of which they cast everything aside: they are the worshippers of punctilio. On the other hand, the disposition of the true lover is firm and enduring, so that it may be said that the Arrant is half adamant.

clxxiv Do not live in a Hurry.

To know how to separate things is to know how to enjoy them. Many finish their fortune sooner than their life: they run through pleasures without enjoying them, and would like to go back when they find they have over-leaped the mark. Postilions of life, they increase the ordinary pace of life by the hurry of their own calling. They devour more in one day than they can digest in a whole life-time; they live in advance of pleasures, eat up the years beforehand, and by their hurry get through everything too soon. Even in the

[p. 105]

search for knowledge there should be moderation, lest we learn things better left unknown. We have more days to live through than pleasures. Be slow in enjoyment, quick at work, for men see work ended with pleasure, pleasure ended with regret.

clxxv A Solid Man.

One who is finds no satisfaction in those that are not. 'Tis a pitiable eminence that is not well founded. Not all are men that seem to be so. Some are sources of deceit; impregnated by chimeras they give birth to impositions. Others are like them so far that they take more pleasure in a lie, because it promises much, than in the truth, because it performs little. But in the end these caprices come to a bad end, for they have no solid foundation. Only Truth can give true reputation: only reality can be of real profit. One deceit needs many others, and so the whole house is built in the air and must soon come to the ground. Unfounded things never reach old age. They promise too much to be much trusted, just as that cannot be true which proves too much.

[p. 106]

clxxvi Have Knowledge, or know those that have Knowledge.

Without intelligence, either one's own or another's, true life is impossible. But many do not know that they do not know, and many think they know when they know nothing. Failings of the intelligence are incorrigible, since those who do not know, do not know themselves, and cannot therefore seek what they lack. Many would be wise if they did not think themselves wise. Thus it happens that though the oracles of wisdom are rare, they are rarely used. To seek advice does not lessen greatness or argue incapacity. On the contrary, to ask advice proves you well advised. Take counsel with reason it you do not wish to court defeat.

clxxvii Avoid Familiarities in Intercourse.

Neither use them nor permit them. He that is familiar, loses any superiority his Influence gives him, and so loses respect. The stars keep their brilliance by not making themselves common. The Divine demands decorum. Every familiarity breeds contempt. In human affairs, the more a man shows, the less he has, for in open communication you

[p. 107]

communicate the failings that reserve might keep under cover. Familiarity is never desirable; with superiors because it is dangerous, with inferiors because it is unbecoming, least of all with the common herd, who become insolent from sheer folly: they mistake favour shown them for need felt of them. Familiarity trenches on vulgarity.

clxxviii Trust your Heart,

especially when it has been proved. Never deny it a hearing. It is a kind of house oracle that often foretells the most important. Many have perished because they feared their own heart, but of what use is it to fear it without finding a better remedy? Many are endowed by Nature with a heart so true that it always warns them of misfortune and wards off its effects. It is unwise to seek evils, unless you seek to conquer them.

clxxix Reticence is the Seal of Capacity.

A breast without a secret is an open letter. Where there is a solid foundation secrets can be kept profound: there are spacious cellars where things of moment may be hid. Reticence springs from self-control, and to control

[p. 108]

oneself in this is a true triumph. You must pay ransom to each you tell. The security of wisdom consists in temperance in the inner man. The risk that reticence runs lies in the cross-questioning of others, in the use of contradiction to worm out secrets, in the darts of irony: to avoid these the prudent become more reticent than before. What must be done need not be said, and what must be said need not be done.

clxxx Never guide the Enemy to what he has to do.

The fool never does what the wise judge wise, because he does not follow up the suitable means. He that is discreet follows still less a plan laid out, or even carried out, by another. One has to discuss matters from both points of view--turn it over on both sides. Judgments vary; let him that has not decided attend rather to what is possible than what is probable.

clxxxi The Truth, but not the whole Truth.

Nothing demands more caution than the truth: 'tis the lancet of the heart. It requires as much to tell the truth as to conceal it.

[p. 109]

[paragraph continues] A single lie destroys a whole reputation for integrity. The deceit is regarded as treason and the deceiver as a traitor, which is worse. Yet not all truths can be spoken: some for our own sake, others for the sake of others.

clxxxii A Grain of Boldness in Everything.

'Tis an important piece of prudence. You must moderate your opinion of others so that you may not think so high of them as to fear them. The imagination should never yield to the heart. Many appear great till you know them personally, and then dealing with them does more to disillusionise than to raise esteem. No one o'ersteps the narrow bounds of humanity: all have their weaknesses either in heart or head. Dignity gives apparent authority, which is rarely accompanied by personal power: for Fortune often redresses the height of office by the inferiority of the holder. The imagination always jumps too soon, and paints things in brighter colours than the real: it thinks things not as they are but as it wishes them to be. Attentive experience disillusionised in the past soon corrects all that. Yet if wisdom should not be timorous, neither should folly be rash.

[p. 110]

[paragraph continues] And if self-reliance helps the ignorant, how much more the brave and wise?

clxxxiii Do not hold your Views too firmly.

Every fool is fully convinced, and every one fully persuaded is a fool: the more erroneous his judgment the more firmly he holds it. Even in cases of obvious certainty, it is fine to yield: our reasons for holding the view cannot escape notice, our courtesy in yielding must be the more recognised. Our obstinacy loses more than our victory yields: that is not to champion truth but rather rudeness. There be some heads of iron most difficult to turn: add caprice to obstinacy and the sum is a wearisome fool. Steadfastness should be for the will, not for the mind. Yet there are exceptions where one would fail twice, owning oneself wrong both in judgment and in the execution of it.

clxxxiv Do not be Ceremonious.

Even in a king affectation in this was renowned for its eccentricity. To be punctilious is to be a bore, yet whole nations have this peculiarity. The garb of folly is woven out of such things. Such folk are worshippers

[p. 111]

of their own dignity, yet show how little it is justified since they fear that the least thing can destroy it. It is right to demand respect, but not to be considered a master of ceremonies. Yet it is true that a man to do without ceremonies must possess supreme qualities. Neither affect nor despise etiquette: he cannot be great who is great at such little things.

clxxxv Never stake your Credit on a single Cast;

for if it miscarries the damage is irreparable. It may easy happen that a man should fail once, especially at first: circumstances are not always favourable: hence they say, "Every dog has his day." Always connect your second attempt with your first: whether it succeed or fail, the first will redeem the second. Always have resort to better means and appeal to more resources. Things depend on all sorts of chances. That is why the satisfaction of success is so rare.

clxxxvi Recognise Faults, however high placed.

Integrity cannot mistake vice even when clothed in brocade or perchance crowned with gold, but will not be able to hide its character

[p. 112]

for all that. Slavery does not lose its vileness, however it vaunt the nobility of its lord and master. Vices may stand in high place, but are low for all that. Men can see that many a great man has great faults, yet they do not see that he is not great because of them. The example of the great is so specious that it even glosses over viciousness, till it may so affect those who flatter it that they do not notice that what they gloss over in the great they abominate in the lower classes.

clxxxvii Do pleasant Things Yourself, unpleasant Things through Others.

By the one course you gain goodwill, by the other you avoid hatred. A great man takes more pleasure in doing a favour than in receiving one: it is the privilege of his generous nature. One cannot easily cause pain to another without suffering pain either from sympathy or from remorse. In high place one can only work by means of rewards and punishment, so grant the first yourself, inflict the other through others. Have some one against whom the weapons of discontent, hatred, and slander may be directed. For the rage of the mob is like

[p. 113]

that of a dog: missing the cause of its pain it turns to bite the whip itself, and though this is not the real culprit, it has to pay the penalty.

clxxxviii Be the Bearer of Praise.

This increases our credit for good taste, since it shows that we have learnt elsewhere to know what is excellent, and hence how to prize it in the present company. It gives material for conversation and for imitation, and encourages praiseworthy exertions. We do homage besides in a very delicate way to the excellences before us. Others do the opposite; they accompany their talk with a sneer, and fancy they flatter those present by belittling the absent. This may serve them with superficial people, who do not notice how cunning it is to speak ill of every one to every one else. Many pursue the plan of valuing more highly the mediocrities of the day than the most distinguished exploits of the past. Let the cautious penetrate through these subtleties, and let him not be dismayed by the exaggerations of the one or made over-confident by the flatteries of the other; knowing that both act in the same way by different methods, adapting their talk to the company they are in.

[p. 114]

clxxxix Utilise Another's Wants.

The greater his wants the greater the turn of the screw. Philosophers say privation is non-existent, statesmen say it is all-embracing, and they are right. Many make ladders to attain their ends out of wants of others. They make use of the opportunity and tantalise the appetite by pointing out the difficulty of satisfaction. The energy of desire promises more than the inertia of possession. The passion of desire increases with every increase of opposition. It is a subtle point to satisfy the desire and yet preserve the dependence.

cxc Find Consolation in all Things.

Even the useless may find it in being immortal. No trouble without compensation. Fools are held to be lucky, and the good-luck of the ugly is proverbial. Be worth little and you will live long: it is the cracked glass that never gets broken, but worries one with its durability. It seems that Fortune envies the great, so it equalises things by giving long life to the use-less, a short one to the important. Those who bear the burden come soon to grief, while those who are of no importance live on and on: in one case it appears so, in the other it

[p. 115]

is so. The unlucky thinks he has been for-gotten by both Death and Fortune.

cxci Do not take Payment in Politeness;

for it is a kind of fraud. Some do not need the herbs of Thessaly for their magic, for they can enchant fools by the grace of their salute. Theirs is the Bank of Elegance, and they pay with the wind of fine words. To promise everything is to promise nothing: promises are the pitfalls of fools. The true courtesy is performance of duty: the spurious and especially the useless is deceit. It is not respect but rather a means to power. Obeisance is paid not to the man but to his means, and compliments are offered not to the qualities that are recognised but to the advantages that are desired.

cxcii Peaceful Life, a long Life.

To live, let live. Peacemakers not only live: they rule life. Hear, see, and be silent. A day without dispute brings sleep without dreams. Long life and a pleasant one is life enough for two: that is the fruit of peace. He has all that makes nothing of what is nothing to him. There is no greater perversity

[p. 116]

than to take everything to heart. There is equal folly in troubling our heart about what does not concern us and in not taking to heart what does.

cxciii Watch him that begins with Another's to end with his own.

Watchfulness is the only guard against cunning. Be intent on his intentions. Many succeed in making others do their own affairs, and unless you possess the key to their motives you may at any moment be forced to take their chestnuts out of the fire to the damage of your own fingers.

cxciv Have reasonable Views of Yourself and of your Affairs,

especially in the beginning of life. Every one has a high opinion of himself, especially those who have least ground for it. Every one dreams of his good-luck and thinks himself a wonder. Hope gives rise to extravagant promises which experience does not fulfil. Such idle imaginations merely serve as a well-spring of annoyance when disillusion comes with the true reality. The wise man anticipates such errors: he may always hope for the

[p. 117]

best. but he always expects the worst, so as to receive what comes with equanimity. True, It is wise to aim high so as to hit your mark, but not so high that you miss your mission at the very beginning of life. This correction of the ideas is necessary, because before experience comes expectation is sure to soar too high. The best panacea against folly is prudence. If a man knows the true sphere of his activity and position, the can reconcile his ideals with reality.

cxcv Know how to Appreciate.

There is none who cannot teach somebody something, and there is none so excellent but he is excelled. To know how to make use of every one is useful knowledge. Wise men appreciate all men, for they see the good in each and know how hard it is to make anything good. Fools depreciate all men, not recognising the good and selecting the bad.

cxcvi Know your ruling Star.

None so helpless as not to have one; if he is unlucky, that is because he does not know it. Some stand high in the favour of princes and potentates without knowing why or wherefore,

[p. 118]

except that good luck itself has granted them favour on easy terms, merely requiring them to aid it with a little exertion. Others find favour with the wise. One man is better received by one nation than by another, or is more welcome in one city than in another. He finds more luck in one office or position than another, and all this though his qualifications are equal or even identical. Luck shuffles the cards how and when she will. Let each man know his luck as well as his talents, for on this depends whether he loses or wins. Follow your guiding star and help it without mistaking any other for it, for that would be to miss the North, though its neighbour (the polestar) calls us to it with a voice of thunder.

cxcvii Do not carry Fools on your Back.

He that does not know a fool when he sees him is one himself: still more he that knows him but will not keep clear of him. They are dangerous company and ruinous confidants. Even though their own caution and others' care keeps them in bounds for a time, still at length they are sure to do or to say some foolishness which is all the greater for being kept so long in stock. They cannot help

[p. 119]

another's credit who have none of their own. They are most unlucky, which is the Nemesis of fools, and they have to pay for one thing or the other. There is only one thing which is not so bad about them, and this is that though they can be of no use to the wise, they can be of much use to them as signposts or as warnings.

cxcviii Know how to transplant Yourself.

There are nations with whom one must cross their borders to make one's value felt, especially in great posts. Their native land is always a stepmother to great talents: envy flourishes there on its native soil, and they remember one's small beginnings rather than the greatness one has reached. A needle is appreciated that comes from one end of the world to the other, and a piece of painted glass might outvie the diamond in value if it comes from afar. Everything foreign is respected, partly because it comes from afar, partly because It is ready made and perfect. We have seen persons once the laughing-stock of their village and now the wonder of the whole world, honoured by their fellow-countrymen and by the foreigners [among whom they dwell]; by the latter because they

[p. 120]

come from afar, by the former because they are seen from afar. The statue on the altar is never reverenced by him who knew it as a trunk in the garden.

cxcix To find a proper Place by Merit, not by Presumption.

The true road to respect is through merit, and if industry accompany merit the path becomes shorter. Integrity alone is not sufficient, push and insistence is degrading, for things arrive by that means so besprinkled with dust that the discredit destroys reputation. The true way is the middle one, half-way between de-serving a place and pushing oneself into it.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

cc Leave Something to wish for,

so as not to be miserable from very happiness. The body must respire and the soul aspire. If one possessed all, all would be disillusion and discontent. Even in knowledge there should be always something left to know in order to arouse curiosity and excite hope. Surfeits of happiness are fatal. In giving assistance it is a piece of policy not to satisfy entirely. If there is nothing left to desire, there is everything to fear, an unhappy

[p. 121]

state of happiness. When desire dies, fear is born.

cci They are all Fools who seem so besides half the rest.

Folly arose with the world, and if there be any wisdom it is folly compared with the divine. But the greatest fool is he who thinks he is not one and all others are. To be wise It is not enough to seem wise, least of all to oneself. He knows who does not think that he knows, and he does not see who does not see that others see. Though all the world is full of fools, there is none that thinks himself one, or even suspects the fact.

ccii Words and Deeds make the Perfect Man.

One should speak well and act honourably: the one is an excellence of the head, the other of the heart, and both arise from nobility of soul. Words are the shadows of deeds; the former are feminine, the latter masculine. It is more important to be renowned than to convey renown. Speech is easy, action hard. Actions are the stuff of life, words its frippery. Eminent deeds endure, striking words pass away. Actions are the fruit of thought; if this is wise, they are effective.

[p. 122]

cciii Know the great Men of your Age.

They are not many. There is one Phoenix in the whole world, one great general, one perfect orator, one true philosopher in a century, a really illustrious king in several. Mediocrities are as numerous as they are worth-less: eminent greatness is rare in every respect, since it needs complete perfection, and the higher the species the more difficult is the highest rank in it. Many have claimed the title "Great," like Caesar and Alexander, but in vain, for without great deeds the title is a mere breath of air. There have been few Senecas, and fame records but one Apelles.

cciv Attempt easy Tasks as if they were difficult, and difficult as if they were easy.

In the one case that confidence may not fall asleep, in the other that it may not be dismayed. For a thing to remain undone nothing more is needed than to think it done. On the other hand, patient industry overcomes impossibilities. Great undertakings are not to be brooded over, lest their difficulty when seen causes despair.

[p. 123]

ccv Know how to play the Card of Contempt.

It is a shrewd way of getting things you want, by affecting to depreciate them: generally they are not to be had when sought for, but fall into one's hands when one is not looking for them. As all mundane things are but shadows of the things eternal, they share with shadows this quality, that they flee from him who follows them and follow him that flees from them. Contempt is besides the most subtle form of revenge. It is a fixed rule with the wise never to defend themselves with the pen. For such defence always leaves a stain, and does more to glorify one's opponent than to punish his offence. It is a trick of the worthless to stand forth as opponents of great men, so as to win notoriety by a roundabout way, which they would never do by the straight road of merit. There are many we would not have heard of if their eminent opponents had not taken notice of them. There is no revenge like oblivion, through which they are buried in the dust of their unworthiness. Audacious persons hope to make themselves eternally famous by setting fire to one of the wonders of the world and of the ages. The art of reproving scandal is to

[p. 124]

take no notice of it, to combat it damages our own case; even if credited it causes discredit, and is a source of satisfaction to our opponent, for this shadow of a stain dulls the lustre of our fame even if it cannot altogether deaden it.

ccvi Know that there are vulgar Natures everywhere,

even in Corinth itself, even in the highest families. Every one may try the experiment within his own gates. But there is also such a thing as vulgar opposition to vulgarity, which is worse. This special kind shares all the qualities of the common kind, just as bits of a broken glass: but this kind is still more pernicious; it speaks folly, blames impertinently, is a disciple of ignorance, a patron of folly, and past master of scandal; you need not notice what it says, still less what it thinks. It is important to know vulgarity in order to avoid it, whether it is subjective or objective. For all folly is vulgarity, and the vulgar consist of fools.

ccvii Be Moderate.

One has to consider the chance of a mischance. The impulses of the passions cause

[p. 125]

prudence to slip, and there is the risk of ruin. A moment of wrath or of pleasure carries you on farther than many hours of calm, and often a short diversion may put a whole life to shame. The cunning of others uses such moments of temptation to search the recesses of the mind: they use such thumbscrews as are wont to test the best caution. Moderation serves as a counterplot, especially in sudden emergencies. Much thought is needed to prevent a passion taking the bit in the teeth, and he is doubly wise who is wise on horseback. He who knows the danger may with care pursue his journey. Light as a word may appear to him who throws it out, it may import much to him that hears it and ponders on it.

ccviii Do not die of the Fools' Disease.

The wise generally die after they have lost their reason: fools before they have found it. To die of the fools' disease is to die of too much thought. Some die because they think and feel too much: others live because they do not think and feel: these are fools because they do not die of sorrow, the others because they do. A fool is he that dies of too much knowledge: thus some die because they are too

[p. 126]

knowing, others because they are not knowing enough. Yet though many die like fools, few die fools.

ccix Keep Yourself free from common Follies.

This is a special stroke of policy. They are of special power because they are general, so that many who would not be led away by any individual folly cannot escape the universal failing. Among these are to be counted the common prejudice that any one is satisfied with his fortune, however great, or unsatisfied with his intellect, however poor it is. Or again, that each, being discontented with his own lot, envies that of others; or further, that persons of to-day praise the things of yesterday, and those here the things there. Everything past seems best and everything distant is more valued. He is as great a fool that laughs at all as he that weeps at all.

ccx Know how to play the Card of Truth.

'Tis dangerous, yet a good man cannot avoid speaking it. But great skill is needed here: the most expert doctors of the soul pay great attention to the means of sweetening the pill of truth. For when it deals with the destroying

[p. 127]

of illusion it is the quintessence of bitterness. A pleasant manner has here an opportunity for a display of skill: with the same truth it can flatter one and fell another to the ground. Matters of to-day should be treated as if they were long past. For those who can understand a word is sufficient, and if it does not suffice, it is a case for silence. Princes must not be cured with bitter draughts; it is therefore desirable in their case to gild the pill of disillusion.

ccxi In Heaven all is bliss:

in Hell all misery. On earth, between the two, both one thing and the other. We stand between the two extremes, and therefore share both. Fate varies: all is not good luck nor all mischance. This world is merely zero: by itself it is of no value, but with Heaven in Front of it, it means much. Indifference at its ups and downs is prudent, nor is there any novelty for the wise. Our life gets as complicated as a comedy as it goes on, but the complications get gradually resolved: see that the curtain comes down on a good denoument.

[p. 128]

ccxii Keep to Yourself the final Touches of your Art.

This is a maxim of the great masters who pride themselves on this subtlety in teaching their pupils: one must always remain superior, remain master. One must teach an art artfully. The source of knowledge need not be pointed out no more than that of giving. By this means a man preserves the respect and the dependence of others. In amusing and teaching you must keep to the rule: keep up expectation and advance in perfection. To keep a reserve is a great rule for life and for success, especially for those in high place.

ccxiii Know how to Contradict.

A chief means of finding things out--to embarrass others without being embarrassed. The true thumbscrew, it brings the passions into play. Tepid incredulity acts as an emetic on secrets. It is the key to a locked-up breast, and with great subtlety makes a double trial of both mind and will. A sly depreciation of another's mysterious word scents out the profoundest secrets; some sweet bait brings them into the mouth till they fall from the tongue and are caught in the net of astute deceit.

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] By reserving your attention the other becomes less attentive, and lets his thoughts appear while otherwise his heart were inscrutable. An affected doubt is the subtlest picklock that curiosity can use to find out what it wants to know. Also in learning it is a subtle plan of the pupil to contradict the master, who thereupon takes pains to explain the truth more thoroughly and with more force, so that a moderate contradiction produces complete instruction.

ccxiv Do not turn one Blunder into two.

It is quite usual to commit four others in order to remedy one, or to excuse one piece of impertinence by still another. Folly is either related to, or identical with the family of Lies, for in both cases it needs many to support one. The worst of a bad case is having to fight it, and worse than the ill itself is not being able to conceal it. The annuity of one failing serves to support many others. A wise man may make one slip but never two, and that only in running, not while standing still.

ccxv Watch him that acts on Second Thoughts.

It is a device of business men to put the

[p. 130]

opponent off his guard before attacking him, and thus to conquer by being defeated: they dissemble their desire so as to attain it. They put themselves second so as to come out first in the final spurt. This method rarely fails if it is not noticed. Let therefore the attention never sleep when the intention is so wide awake. And if the other puts himself second so to hide his plan, put yourself first to discover it. Prudence can discern the artifices which such a man uses, and notices the pretexts he puts forward to gain his ends. He aims at one thing to get another: then he turns round smartly and fires straight at his target. It is well to know what you grant him, and at times it is desirable to give him to understand that you understand.

ccxvi Be Expressive.

This depends not only on the clearness but also on the vivacity of your thoughts. Some have an easy conception but a hard labour, for without clearness the children of the mind, thoughts and judgments, cannot be brought into the world. Many have a capacity like that of vessels with a large mouth and a small vent. Others again say more than they think.

[p. 131]

Resolution for the will, expression for the thought: two great gifts. Plausible minds are applauded: yet confused ones are often venerated just because they are not understood, and at times obscurity is convenient if you wish to avoid vulgarity; yet how shall the audience understand one that connects no definite idea with what he says?

ccxvii Neither Love nor Hate, for ever

Trust the friends of to-day as if they will be enemies to-morrow, and that of the worst kind. As this happens in reality, let it happen in your precaution. Do not put weapons in the hand for deserters from friendship to wage war with. On the other hand, leave the door of reconciliation open for enemies, and if it is also the gate of generosity so much the more safe. The vengeance of long ago is at times the torment of to-day, and the joy over the ill we have done is turned to grief,

ccxviii Never act from Obstinacy but from Knowledge.

All obstinacy is an excrescence of the mind, a grandchild of passion which never did anything right. There are persons who make

[p. 132]

a war out of everything, real banditti of intercourse. All that they undertake must end in victory; they do not know how to get on in peace. Such men are fatal when they rule and govern, for they make government rebellion, and enemies out of those whom they ought to regard as children. They try to effect everything with strategy and treat it as the fruit of their skill. But when others have recognised their perverse humour all revolt against them and learn to overturn their chimerical plans, and they succeed in nothing but only heap up a mass of troubles, since everything serves to increase their disappointment. They have a head turned and a heart spoilt. Nothing can be done with such monsters except to flee from them, even to the Antipodes, where the savagery is easier to bear than their loathsome nature.

ccxix Do not pass for a Hypocrite,

though such men are indispensable nowadays. Be considered rather prudent than astute. Sincerity in behaviour pleases all, though not all can show it in their own affairs. Sincerity should not degenerate into simplicity nor sagacity into cunning. Be

[p. 133]

rather respected as wise than feared as sly. The open-hearted are loved but deceived. The great art consists in disclosing what is thought to be deceit. In the golden age simplicity flourished, in these days of iron cunning. 'The reputation of being a man who knows what he has to do is honourable and inspires confidence, but to be considered a hypocrite is deceptive and arouses mistrust.

ccxx If you cannot clothe Yourself in Lionskin use Foxpelt.

To follow the times is to lead them. He that gets what he wants never loses his reputation. Cleverness when force will not do. One way or another, the king's highway of valour or the bypath of cunning. Skill has effected more than force, and astuteness has conquered courage more often than the other way. When you cannot get a thing then is the time to despise it.

ccxxi Do not seize Occasions to embarrass Yourself or Others.

There are some men stumbling-blocks of good manners either for themselves or for others: they are always on the point of some stupidity. You

[p. 134]

meet with them easily and part from them uneasily. A hundred annoyances a day is nothing to them. Their humour always strokes the wrong way since they contradict all and every. They put on the judgment cap wrong side foremost and thus condemn all. Yet the greatest test of others' patience and prudence are just those who do no good and speak ill of all. There are many monsters in the wide realm of Indecorum.

ccxxii Reserve is proof of Prudence.

The tongue is a wild beast; once let loose it is difficult to chain. It is the pulse of the soul by which wise men judge of its health: by this pulse a careful observer feels every movement of the heart. The worst is that he who should be most reserved is the least. The sage saves himself from worries and embarrassments, and shows his mastery over himself. He goes his way carefully, a Janus for impartiality, an Argus for watchfulness. Truly Momus had better placed the eyes in the hand than the window in the breast.

ccxxiii Be not Eccentric,

neither from affectation nor carelessness.

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] Many have some remarkable and individual quality leading to eccentric actions. These are more defects than excellent differences. And just as some are known for some special ugliness, so these for something repellant in their outward behaviour. Such eccentricities simply serve as trademarks through their atrocious singularity: they cause either derision or ill-will.

ccxxiv Never take Things against the Grain,

no matter how they come. Everything has a smooth and a seamy side, and the best weapon wounds if taken by the blade, while the enemy's spear may be our best protection if taken by the staff. Many things cause pain which would cause pleasure if you regarded their advantages. There is a favourable and an unfavourable side to everything, the cleverness consists in finding out the favourable. The same thing looks quite different in another light; look at it therefore on its best side and do not exchange good for evil. Thus it haps that many find joy, many grief, in everything. This remark is a great protection against the frowns of fortune, and a weighty rule of life for all times and all conditions.

[p. 136]

ccxxv Know your chief Fault.

There lives none that has not in himself' a counterbalance to his most conspicuous merit: if this be nourished by desire it may grow to be a tyrant. Commence war against it, summoning prudence as your ally, and the first thing to do is the public manifesto, for an evil once known is soon conquered, especially when the one afflicted regards it in the same light as the onlookers. To be master of oneself one should know oneself. If the chief imperfection surrender, the rest will come to an end.

ccxxvi Take care to be Obliging.

Most talk and act, not as they are, but as they are obliged. To persuade people of ill is easy for any, since the ill is easily credited even when at times it is incredible. The best we have depends on the opinion of others. Some are satisfied if they have right on their side, but that is not enough, for it must be assisted by energy. To oblige persons often costs little and helps much. With words you may purchase deeds. In this great house of the world there is no chamber so hid that it may not be wanted one day in the year, and then you would miss it however little is its

[p. 137]

worth. Every one speaks of a subject according to his feelings.

ccxxvii Do not be the Slave of First Impressions.

Some marry the very first account they hear: all others must live with them as concubines. But as a lie has swift legs, the truth with them can find no lodging. We should neither satisfy our will with the first object nor our mind with the first proposition: for that were superficial. Many are like new casks who keep the scent of the first liquor they hold, be it good or bad. If this superficiality becomes known, it becomes fatal, for it then gives opportunity for cunning mischief; the ill-minded hasten to colour the mind of the credulous. Always therefore leave room for a second hearing. Alexander always kept one ear for the other side. Wait for the second or even third edition of news. To be the slave of your impressions argues want of capacity, and is not far from being the slave of your passions.

ccxxviii Do not be a Scandal-monger.

Still less pass for one, for that means to be considered a slanderer. Do not be witty at

[p. 138]

the cost of others: it is easy but hateful. All men have their revenge on such an one by speaking ill of him, and as they are many and he but one, he is more likely to be overcome than they convinced. Evil should never be our pleasure, and therefore never our theme. The backbiter is always hated, and if now and then one of the great consorts with him, it is less from pleasure in his sneers than from esteem for his insight. He that speaks ill will always hear worse.

ccxxix Plan out your Life wisely,

not as chance will have it, but with prudence and foresight. Without amusements it is wearisome, like a long journey where there are no inns: manifold knowledge gives manifold pleasure. The first day's journey of a noble life should be passed in conversing with the dead: we live to know and to know our-selves: hence true books make us truly men. The second day should be spent with the living, seeing and noticing all the good in the world. Everything is not to be found in a single country. The Universal Father has divided His gifts, and at times has given the richest dower to the ugliest. The third day is

[p. 139]

entirely for oneself. The last felicity is to be a philosopher.

ccxxx Open your Eyes betimes.

Not all that see have their eyes open, nor do all those see that look. To come up to things too late is more worry than help. Some just begin to see when there is nothing more to see: they pull their houses about their ears before they come to themselves. It is difficult to give sense to those who have no power of will, still more difficult to give energy to those who have no sense. Those who surround them play with them a game of blind man's buff, making them the butts of others, and be-cause they are hard of hearing, they do not open their eyes to see. There are often those who encourage such insensibility on which their very existence depends. Unhappy steed whose rider is blind: it will never grow sleek.

ccxxxi Never let Things be seen half-finished.

They can only be enjoyed when complete. All beginnings are misshapen, and this deformity sticks in the imagination. The recollection of having seen a thing imperfect disturbs our enjoyment of it when completed.

[p. 140]

[paragraph continues] To swallow something great at one gulp may disturb the judgment of the separate parts, but satisfies the taste. Till a thing is everything, it is nothing, and while it is in process of being it is still nothing. To see the tastiest dishes prepared arouses rather disgust than appetite. Let each great master take care not to let his work be seen in its embryonic stages: they might take this lesson from Dame Nature, who never brings the child to the light till it is fit to be seen.

ccxxxii Have a Touch of the Trader.

Life should not be all thought: there should be action as well. Very wise folk are generally easily deceived, for while they know out-of-the-way things they do not know the ordinary things of life, which are much more needful. The observation of higher things leaves them no time for things close at hand. Since they know not the very first thing they should know, and what everybody knows so well, they are either considered or thought ignorant by the superficial multitude. Let therefore the prudent take care to have something of the trader about him--enough to prevent him being deceived and so laughed at,

[p. 141]

[paragraph continues] Be a man adapted to the daily round, which if not the highest is the most necessary thing in life. Of what use is knowledge if it is not practical, and to know how to live is nowadays the true knowledge.

ccxxxiii Let not the proffered Morsel be distasteful;

otherwise it gives more discomfort than pleasure. Some displease when attempting to oblige, because they take no account of varieties of taste. What is flattery to one is an offence to another, and in attempting to be useful one may become insulting. It often costs more to displease a man than it would have cost to please him: you thereby lose both gift and thanks because you have lost the compass which steers for pleasure. He who knows not another's taste, knows not how to please him. Thus it haps that many insult where they mean to praise, and get soundly punished, and rightly so. Others desire to charm by their conversation, and only succeed in boring by their loquacity.

ccxxxiv Never trust your Honour to another, unless you have his in Pledge.

Arrange that silence is a mutual advantage;

[p. 142]

disclosure a danger to both. Where honour is at stake you must act with a partner, so that each must be careful of the other's honour for the sake of his own. Never entrust your honour to another; but if you have, let caution surpass prudence. Let the danger be in common and the risk mutual, so that your partner cannot turn king's evidence.

ccxxxv Know how to Ask.

With some nothing easier: with others nothing so difficult. For there are men who cannot refuse: with them no skill is required. But with others their first word at all times is No; with them great art is required, and with all the propitious moment. Surprise them when in a pleasant mood, when a repast of body or soul has just left them refreshed, if only their shrewdness has not anticipated the cunning of the applicant. The days of joy are the days of favour, for joy overflows from the inner man into the outward creation. It is no use applying when another has been refused, since the objection to a No has just been overcome. Nor is it a good time after sorrow. To oblige a person beforehand is a sure way, unless he is mean.

[p. 143]

ccxxxvi Make an Obligation beforehand of what would have to be a Reward afterwards.

This is a stroke of subtle policy; to grant favours before they are deserved is a proof of being obliging. Favours thus granted beforehand have two great advantages: the promptness of the gift obliges the recipient the more strongly; and the same gift which would afterwards be merely a reward is beforehand an obligation. This is a subtle means of transforming obligations, since that which would have forced the superior to reward is changed into one that obliges the one obliged to satisfy the obligation. But this is only suitable for men who have the feeling of obligation, since with men of lower stamp the honorarium paid beforehand acts rather as a bit than as a spur.

ccxxxvii Never share the Secrets of your Superiors.

You may think you will share pears, but you will only share parings. Many have been ruined by being confidants: they are like sops of bread used as forks, they run the same risk of being eaten up afterwards. It is no favour in a prince to share a secret: it is only a relief. Many break the mirror that reminds them of their ugliness. We do

[p. 144]

not like seeing those who have seen us as we are: nor is he seen In a favourable light who has seen us in an unfavourable one. None ought to be too much beholden to us, least of all one of the great, unless it be for benefits done him rather than for such favours received from him. Especially dangerous are secrets entrusted to friends. He that communicates his secret to another makes himself that other's slave. With a prince this is an intolerable position which cannot last. He will desire to recover his lost liberty, and to gain it will overturn everything, including right and reason. Accordingly neither tell secrets nor listen to them.

ccxxxviii Know what is wanting in Yourself.

Many would have been great personages if they had not had something wanting without which they could not rise to the height of perfection. It is remarkable with some that they could be much better if they could he better in something. They do not perhaps take themselves seriously enough to do justice to their great abilities; some are wanting in geniality of disposition, a quality which their entourage soon find the want of, especially if

[p. 145]

they are in high office. Some are without organising ability, others lack moderation. In all such cases a careful man may make of habit a second nature.

ccxxxix Do not be Captious.

It is much more important to be sensible. To know more than is necessary blunts your weapons, for fine points generally bend or break. Common-sense truth is the surest. It is well to know but not to niggle. Lengthy comment leads to disputes. It is much better to have sound sense, which does not wander from the matter in hand.

ccxl Make use of Folly.

The wisest play this card at times, and there are times when the greatest wisdom lies in seeming not to be wise. You need not be unwise, but merely affect unwisdom. To be wise with fools and foolish with the wise were of little use. Speak to each in his own language. He is no fool who affects folly, but he is who suffers from it. Ingenuous folly rather than the pretended is the true foolishness, since cleverness has arrived at such a pitch. To be well liked one must dress in the skin of the simplest of animals.

[p. 146]

ccxli Put up with Raillery, but do not practise it.

The first is a form of courtesy, the second may lead to embarrassment. To snarl at play has something of the beast and seems to have more. Audacious raillery is delightful: to stand it proves power. To show oneself annoyed causes the other to be annoyed. Best leave it alone; the surest way not to put on the cap that might fit. The most serious matters have arisen out of jests. Nothing requires more tact and attention. Before you begin to joke know how far the subject of your joke is able to bear it.

ccxlii Push Advantages.

Some put all their strength in the commencement and never carry a thing to a conclusion. They invent but never execute. These be paltering spirits. They obtain no fame, for they sustain no game to the end. Everything stops at a single stop. This arises in some from impatience, which is the failing of the Spaniard, as patience is the virtue of the Belgian. The latter bring things to an end, the former come to an end with things. They sweat away till the obstacle is surmounted, but content themselves with surmounting it: they

[p. 147]

do not know how to push the victory home. They prove that they can but will not: but this proves always that they cannot, or have no stability. If the undertaking is good, why not finish it? If it is bad, why undertake it? Strike down your quarry, if you are wise; be not content to flush it.

ccxliii Do not be too much of a Dove.

Alternate the cunning of the serpent with the candour of the dove. Nothing is easier than to deceive an honest man. He believes in much who lies in naught; who does no deceit, has much confidence. To be deceived is not always due to stupidity, it may arise from sheer goodness. There are two sets of men who can guard themselves from injury: those who have experienced it at their own cost, and those who have observed it at the cost of others. Prudence should use as much suspicion as subtlety uses snares, and none need be so good as to enable others to do him ill. Combine in yourself the dove and the serpent, not as a monster but as a prodigy.

ccxliv Create a feeling of Obligation.

Some transform favours received into favours

[p. 148]

bestowed, and seem, or let it be thought, that they are doing a favour when receiving one. There are some so astute that they get honour by asking, and buy their own advantage with applause from others. They manage matters so cleverly that they seem to be doing others a service when receiving one from them. They transpose the order of obligation with extraordinary skill, or at least render it doubtful who has obliged whom. They buy the best by praising it, and make a flattering honour out of the pleasure they express. They oblige by their courtesy, and thus make men beholden for what they themselves should be beholden. In this way they conjugate "to oblige" in the active instead of in the passive voice, thereby proving themselves better politicians than grammarians. This is a subtle piece of finesse; a still greater is to perceive it, and to retaliate on such fools' bargains by paying in their own coin, and so coming by your own again.

ccxlv Original and out-of-the-way Views

are signs of superior ability. We do not think much of a man who never contradicts us that is no sign he loves us, but rather that he loves himself. Do not be deceived by flattery,

[p. 149]

and thereby have to pay for it: rather condemn it. Besides you may take credit for being censured by some, especially if they are those of whom the good speak ill. On the contrary, it should disturb us if our affairs please every one, for that is a sign that they are of little worth. Perfection is for the few.

ccxlvi Never offer Satisfaction unless it is demanded.

And if they do demand it, it is a kind of crime to give more than necessary. To excuse oneself before there is occasion is to accuse oneself. To draw blood in full health gives the hint to ill-will. An excuse unexpected arouses suspicion from its slumbers. Nor need a shrewd person show himself aware of another's suspicion, which is equivalent to seeking out offence. He had best disarm distrust by the integrity of his conduct.

ccxlvii Know a little more, live a little less.

Some say the opposite. To be at ease is better than to be at business. Nothing really belongs to us but time, which even he has who has nothing else. It is equally unfortunate to waste your precious life in mechanical tasks

[p. 150]

or in a profusion of important work. Do not heap up occupation and thereby envy: otherwise you complicate life and exhaust your mind. Some wish to apply the same principle to knowledge, but unless one knows one does not truly live.

ccxlviii Do not go with the last Speaker.

There are persons who go by the latest edition, and thereby go to irrational extremes. Their feelings and desires are of wax: the last comer stamps them with his seal and obliterates all previous impressions. These never gain anything, for they lose everything so soon. Every one dyes them with his own colour. They are of no use as confidants; they remain children their whole life. Owing to this instability of feeling and volition, they halt along cripples in will and thought, and totter from one side of the road to the other.

ccxlix Never begin Life with what should end it.

Many take their amusement at the beginning, putting off anxiety to the end; but the essential should come first and accessories afterwards if there is room. Others wish to triumph before

[p. 151]

they have fought. Others again begin with learning things of little consequence and leave studies that would bring them fame and gain to the end of life. Another is just about to make his fortune when he disappears from the scene. Method is essential for knowledge and for life.

     
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

ccl When to change the Conversation.

When they talk scandal. With some all goes contrariwise: their No is Yes, and their Yes No. If they speak ill of a thing it is the highest praise. For what they want for them-selves they depreciate to others. To praise a thing is not always to speak well of it, for some, to avoid praising what's good, praise what's bad, and nothing is good for him for whom nothing is bad.

ccli Use human Means as if there were no divine ones, and divine as if there were no human ones.

A masterly rule: it needs no comment.

cclii Neither belong entirely to Yourself nor entirely to Others.

Both are mean forms of tyranny. To desire to be all for oneself is the same as desiring to

[p. 152]

have all for oneself. Such persons will not yield a jot or lose a tittle of their comfort. They are rarely beholden, lean on their own luck, and their crutch generally breaks. It is convenient at times to belong to others, that others may belong to us. And he that holds public office is no more nor less than a public slave, or let a man give up both berth and burthen, as the old woman said to Hadrian. On the other hand, others are all for others, which is folly, that always flies to extremes, in this case in a most unfortunate manner. No day, no hour, is their own, but they have so much too much of others that they may be called the slaves of all. This applies even to knowledge, where a man may know everything for others and nothing for himself. A shrewd man knows that others when they seek him do not seek him, but their advantage in him and by him.

ccliii Do not Explain overmuch.

Most men do not esteem what they understand, and venerate what they do not see. To be valued things should cost dear: what is not understood becomes overrated. You have to appear wiser and more prudent than he

[p. 153]

requires with whom you deal, if you desire to give him a high opinion of you: yet in this there should be moderation and no excess. And though with sensible people common sense holds its own, with most men a little elaboration is necessary. Give them no time for blame: occupy them with understanding your drift. Many praise a thing without being able to tell why, if asked. The reason is that they venerate the unknown as a mystery, and praise it because they hear it praised.

ccliv Never despise an Evil, however small,

for they never come alone: they are linked together like pieces of good fortune. Fortune and misfortune generally go to find their fellows. Hence all avoid the unlucky and associate with the fortunate. Even the doves with all their innocence resort to the whitest walls. Everything fails with the unfortunate--himself, his words, and his luck. Do not wake Misfortune when she sleeps. One slip is a little thing: yet some fatal loss may follow it till you do not know where it will end. For just as no happiness is perfect, so no ill-luck is complete. Patience serves with what comes from above; prudence with that from below.

[p. 154]

cclv Do Good a little at a time, but often.

One should never give beyond the possibility of return. Who gives much does not give but sells. Nor drain gratitude to the dregs, for when the recipient sees all return is impossible he breaks off correspondence. With many persons it is not necessary to do more than overburden them with favours to lose them altogether: they cannot repay you, and so they retire, preferring rather to be enemies than perpetual debtors. The idol never wishes to see before him the sculptor who shaped him, nor does the benefited wish to see his benefactor always before his eyes. There is a great subtlety in giving what costs little yet is much desired, so that it is esteemed the more.

cclvi Go armed against Discourtesy,

and against perfidy, presumption, and all other kinds of folly. There is much of it in the world, and prudence lies in avoiding a meeting with it. Arm yourself each day before the mirror of attention with the weapons of defence. Thus you will beat down the attacks of folly. Be prepared for the occasion, and do not expose your reputation

[p. 155]

to vulgar contingencies. Armed with prudence, a man cannot be disarmed by impertinence. The road of human intercourse is difficult, for it is full of ruts which may jolt our credit. Best to take a byway, taking Ulysses as a model of shrewdness. Feigned misunderstanding is of great value in such matters. Aided by politeness it helps us over all, and is often the only way out of difficulties.

cclvii Never let Matters come to a Rupture,

for our reputation always comes injured out of the encounter. Every one may be of importance as an enemy if not as a friend. Few can do us good, almost any can do us harm. In Jove's bosom itself even his eagle never nestles securely from the day he has quarrelled with a beetle. Hidden foes use the paw of the declared enemy to stir up the fire, and meanwhile they lie in ambush for such an occasion. Friends provoked become the bitterest of enemies. They cover their own failings with the faults of others. Every one speaks as things seem to him, and things seem as he wishes them to appear. All blame us at the beginning for want of foresight, at the end for lack of patience, at all times for

[p. 156]

imprudence. If, however, a breach is inevitable, let it be rather excused as a slackening of friendship than by an outburst of wrath: here is a good application of the saying about a good retreat.

cclviii Find out some one to share your Troubles.

You will never be all alone, even in dangers, nor bear all the burden of hate. Some think by their high position to carry off the whole glory of success, and have to bear the whole humiliation of defeat. In this way they have none to excuse them, none to share the blame. Neither fate nor the mob are so bold against two. Hence the wise physician, if he has failed to cure, looks out for some one who, under the name of a consultation, may help him carry out, the corpse. Share weight and woe, for misfortune falls with double force on him that stands alone.

cclix Anticipate Injuries and turn them into Favours.

It is wiser to avoid than to revenge them. It is an uncommon piece of shrewdness to change a rival into a confidant, or transform into guards of honour those who were aiming

[p. 157]

attacks at us. It helps much to know how to oblige, for he leaves no time for injuries that fills it up with gratitude. That is true savoir faire to turn anxieties into pleasures. Try and make a confidential relation out of ill-will itself.

cclx We belong to none and none to us, entirely.

Neither relationship nor friendship nor the most intimate connection is sufficient to effect this. To give one's whole confidence is quite different from giving one's regard. The closest intimacy has its exceptions, without which the laws of friendship would be broken. The friend always keeps one secret to himself, and even the son always hides something from his father. Some things are kept from one that are revealed to another and vice versa. In this way one reveals all and conceals all, by making a distinction among the persons with whom we are connected.

cclxi Do not follow up a Folly.

Many make an obligation out of a blunder, and because they have entered the wrong path think it proves their strength of character to go on in it. Within they regret their error, while

[p. 158]

outwardly they excuse it. At the beginning of their mistake they were regarded as inattentive, in the end as fools. Neither an unconsidered promise nor a mistaken resolution are really binding. Yet some continue in their folly and prefer to be constant fools.

cclxii Be able to Forget.

It is more a matter of luck than of skill. The things we remember best are those better for-gotten. Memory is not only unruly, leaving us in the lurch when most needed, but stupid as well, putting its nose into places where it is not wanted. In painful things it is active, but neglectful in recalling the pleasurable. Very often the only remedy for the ill is to forget it, and all we forget is the remedy. Nevertheless one should cultivate good habits of memory, for it is capable of making existence a Paradise or an Inferno. The happy are an exception who enjoy innocently their simple happiness.

cclxiii Many things of Taste one should not possess oneself.

One enjoys them better if another's than if one's own. The owner has the good of them the first day, for all the rest of the time they

[p. 159]

are for others. You take a double enjoyment in other men's property, being without fear of spoiling it and with the pleasure of novelty. Everything tastes better for having been without it: even water from another's well tastes like nectar. Possession not alone hinders enjoyment: it increases annoyance whether you lend or keep. You gain nothing except keeping things for or from others, and by this means gain more enemies than friends.

cclxiv Have no careless Days.

Fate loves to play tricks, and will heap up chances to catch us unawares. Our intelligence, prudence, and courage, even our beauty, must always be ready for trial. For their day of careless trust will be that of their discredit. Care always fails just when it was most wanted. It is thoughtlessness that trips us up into destruction. Accordingly it is a piece of military strategy to put perfection to its trial when unprepared. The days of parade are known and are allowed to pass by, but the day is chosen when least expected so as to put valour to the severest test.

cclxv Set those under you difficult Task,

Many have proved themselves able at once

[p. 160]

when they had to deal with a difficulty, just as fear of drowning makes a swimmer of a man, In this way many have discovered their own courage, knowledge, or tact, which but for the opportunity would have been for ever buried beneath their want of enterprise. Dangers are the occasions to create a name for oneself; and if a noble mind sees honour at stake, he will do the work of thousands. Queen Isabella the Catholic knew well this rule of life, as well as all the others, and to a shrewd favour of this kind from her the Great Captain won his fame, and many others earned an undying name. By this great art she made great men.

cclxvi Do not become Bad from sheer Goodness.

That is, by never getting into a temper. Such men without feeling are scarcely to be considered men. It does not always arise from laziness, but from sheer inability. To feel strongly on occasion is something personal: birds soon mock at the mawkin. It is a sign of good taste to combine bitter and sweet. All sweets is diet for children and fools. It is very bad to sink into such insensibility out of very goodness.

[p. 161]

cclxvii Silken Words, sugared Manners.

Arrows pierce the body, insults the soul. Sweet pastry perfumes the breath. It is a great art in life to know how to sell wind. Most things are paid for in words, and by them you can remove impossibilities. Thus we deal in air, and a royal breath can produce courage and power. Always have your mouth full of sugar to sweeten your words, so that even your ill-wishers enjoy them. To please one must be peaceful.

cclxviii The Wise do at once what the Fool does at last.

Both do the same thing; the only difference lies in the time they do it: the one at the right time, the other at the wrong. Who starts out with his mind topsyturvy will so continue till the end. He catches by the foot what he ought to knock on the head, he turns right into left, and in all his acts is but a child. There is only one way to get him in the right way, and that is to force him to do what he might have done of his own accord. The wise man, on the other hand, sees at once what must be done sooner or later, so he does it willingly and gains honour thereby,

[p. 162]

cclxix Make use of the Novelty of your Position;

for men are valued while they are new. Novelty pleases all because it is uncommon, taste is refreshed, and a brand new mediocrity is thought more of than accustomed excellence. Ability wears away by use and becomes old. However, know that the glory of novelty is short-lived: after four days respect is gone. Accordingly, learn to utilise the first fruits of appreciation, and seize during the rapid passage of applause all that can be put to use. For once the heat of novelty over, the passion cools and the appreciation of novelty is exchanged for satiety at the customary: believe that all has its season, which soon passes.

 

cclxx Do not condemn alone that which pleases all.

There must be something good in a thing that pleases so many; even if it cannot be explained it is certainly enjoyed. Singularity is always hated, and, when in the wrong, laughed at. You simply destroy respect for your taste rather than do harm to the object of your blame, and are left alone, you and your bad taste. If you cannot find the good in a thing, hide your incapacity and do not damn it straightway. As a general rule bad

[p. 163]

taste springs from want of knowledge. What all say, is so, or will be so.

cclxxi In every Occupation if you know little stick to the safest.

If you are not respected as subtle, you will be regarded as sure. On the other hand, a man well trained can plunge in and act as he pleases. To know little and yet seek danger is nothing else than to seek ruin. In such a case take stand on the right hand, for what is done cannot be undone. Let little knowledge keep to the king's highway, and in every case, knowing or unknowing, security is shrewder than singularity.

cclxxii Sell Things by the Tariff of Courtesy.

You oblige people most that way. The bid of an interested buyer will never equal the return gift of an honourable recipient of a favour. Courtesy does not really make presents, but really lays men under obligation, and generosity is the great obligation. To a right-minded man nothing costs more dear that what is given him: you sell it him twice and for two prices: one for the value, one for the politeness. At the same time it is true that with vulgar souls generosity is gibberish,

[p. 164]

for they do not understand the language of good breeding.

cclxxiii Comprehend their Dispositions with whom you deal,

so as to know their intentions. Cause known, effect known, beforehand in the disposition and after in the motive. The melancholy man always foresees misfortunes, the backbiter scandals; having no conception of the good, evil offers itself to them. A man moved by passion always speaks of things differently from what they are; it is his passion speaks, not his reason. Thus each speaks as his feeling or his humour prompts him, and all far from the truth. Learn how to decipher faces and spell out the soul in the features. If a man laughs always, set him down as foolish; if never, as false. Beware of the gossip: he is either a babbler or a spy. Expect little good from the misshapen: they generally take revenge on Nature, and do little honour to her, as she has done little to them. Beauty and folly generally go hand in hand.

cclxxiv Be Attractive.

[p. 165]

magnet of your pleasant qualities more to obtain goodwill than good deeds, but apply it to all. Merit is not enough unless supported by grace, which is the sole thing that gives general acceptance, and the most practical means of rule over others. To be in vogue is a matter of luck, yet it can be encouraged by skill, for art can best take root on a soil favoured by nature. There goodwill grows and develops into universal favour.

cclxxv Join in the Game as far as Decency permits.

Do not always pose and be a bore: this is a maxim for gallant bearing. You may yield a touch of dignity to gain the general good-will: you may now and then go where most go, yet not beyond the bounds of decorum. He who makes a fool of himself in public will not be regarded as discreet in private life. One may lose more on a day of pleasure than has been gained during a whole life of labour. Still you must not always keep away: to be singular is to condemn all others. Still less act the prude--leave that to its appropriate sex: even religious prudery is ridiculous. Nothing so becomes a man as to be a man: a woman may

[p. 166]

affect a manly bearing as an excellence, but not vice versa.

cclxxvi Know how to renew your Character,

with the help both of Nature and of Art, Every seven years the disposition changes, they say. Let it be a change for the better and for the nobler in your taste. After the first seven comes reason, with each succeeding lustre let a new excellence be added. Observe this change so as to aid it, and hope also for betterment in others. Hence it arises that many change their behaviour when they change their position or their occupation. At times the change is not noticed till it reaches the height of maturity. At twenty Man is a Peacock, at thirty a Lion, at forty a Camel, at fifty a Serpent, at sixty a Dog, at seventy an Ape, at eighty nothing at all.

cclxxvii Display yourself.

'Tis the illumination of talents: for each there comes an appropriate moment; use it, for not every day comes a triumph. There are some dashing men who make much show with a little, a whole exhibition with much. If ability to display them is joined to versatile gifts, they are regarded as miraculous. There

[p. 167]

are whole nations given to display: the Spanish people take the highest rank in this. Light was the first thing to cause Creation to shine forth. Display fills up much, supplies much, and gives a second existence to things, especially when combined with real excellence. Heaven that grants perfection, provides also the means of display; for one without the other were abortive. Skill is however needed for display. Even excellence depends on circumstances and is not always opportune. Ostentation is out of place when it is out of time. More than any other quality it should be free of any affectation. This is its rock of offence, for it then borders on vanity and so on contempt: it must be moderate to avoid being vulgar, and any excess is despised by the wise. At times it consists in a sort of mute eloquence, a careless display of excellence, for a wise concealment is often the most effective boast, since the very withdrawal from view piques curiosity to the highest. 'Tis a fine subtlety too not to display one's excellence all at one time, but to grant stolen glances at it, more and more as time goes on. Each exploit should be the pledge of a greater, and applause at the first should only die away in expectation of its sequel.

[p. 168]

cclxxviii Avoid Notoriety in all Things.

Even excellences become defects if they become notorious. Notoriety arises from singularity, which is always blamed: he that is singular is left severely alone. Even beauty is discredited by coxcombry, which offends by the very notice it attracts. Still more does this apply to discreditable singularities. Yet among the wicked there are some that seek to be known for seeking novelties in vice so as to attain to the fame of infamy. Even in matters of the intellect want of moderation may degenerate into loquacity.

cclxxix Do not contradict the Contradicter.

You have to distinguish whether the contra-diction comes from cunning or from vulgarity. It is not always obstinacy, but may be artfulness. Notice this: for in the first case one may get into difficulties, in the other into danger. Caution is never more needed than against spies. There is no such countercheck to the picklock of the mind as to leave the key of caution in the lock.

cclxxx Be Trustworthy.

Honourable dealing is at an end: trusts are

[p. 169]

denied: few keep their word: the greater the service, the poorer the reward: that is the way with all the world nowadays. There are whole nations inclined to false dealing: with some treachery has always to be feared, with others breach of promise, with others deceit. Yet this bad behaviour of others should rather be a warning to us than an example. The fear is that the sight of such unworthy behaviour should override our integrity. But a man of honour should never forget what he is because he sees what others are.

cclxxxi Find Favour with Men of Sense.

The tepid Yes of a remarkable man is worth more than all the applause of the vulgar: you cannot make a meal off the smoke of chaff. The wise speak with understanding and their praise gives permanent satisfaction. The sage Antigonus reduced the theatre of his fame to Zeus alone, and Plato called Aristotle his whole school. Some strive to fill their stomach albeit only with the breath of the mob. Even monarchs have need of authors, and fear their pens more than ugly women the painter's pencil.

[p. 170]

cclxxxii Make use of Absence to make yourself more esteemed or valued.

If the accustomed presence diminishes fame, absence augments it. One that is regarded as a lion in his absence may be laughed at when present as the ridiculous result of the parturition of the mountains. Talents get soiled by use, for it is easier to see the exterior rind than the kernel of greatness it encloses. Imagination reaches farther than sight, and disillusion, which ordinarily comes through the ears, also goes out through the ears. He keeps his fame that keeps himself in the centre of public opinion. Even the Phoenix uses its retirement for new adornment and turns absence into desire.

cclxxxiii Have the Gift of Discovery.

It is a proof of the highest genius, yet when was genius without a touch of madness? If discovery be a gift of genius, choice of means is a mark of sound sense. Discovery comes by special grace and very seldom. For many can follow up a thing when found, but to find it first is the gift of the few, and those the first in excellence and in age. Novelty flatters, and if successful gives the possessor double

[p. 171]

credit. In matters of judgment novelties are dangerous because leading to paradox, in matters of genius they deserve all praise. Yet both equally deserve applause if successful.

cclxxxiv Do not be Importunate,

and so you will not be slighted. Respect yourself if you would have others respect you. Be sooner sparing than lavish with your presence. You will thus become desired and so well received. Never come unasked and only go when sent for. If you undertake a thing of your own accord you get all the blame if it fails, none of the thanks If it succeeds. The importunate is always the butt of blame; and because he thrusts himself in without shame he is thrust out with it.

cclxxxv Never die of another's Ill-luck.

Notice those who stick in the mud, and observe how they call others to their aid so as to console themselves with a companion in misfortune. They seek some one to help them to bear misfortune, and often those who turned the cold shoulder on them in prosperity give them now a helping hand. There is great

[p. 172]

caution needed in helping the drowning without danger to oneself.

cclxxxvi Do not become responsible for all or for every one,

otherwise you become a slave and the slave of all. Some are born more fortunate than others: they are born to do good as others to receive it. Freedom is more precious than any gifts for which you may be tempted to give it up. Lay less stress on making many dependent on you than on keeping yourself independent of any. The sole advantage of power is that you can do more good. Above all do not regard responsibility as a favour, for generally it is another's plan to make one dependent on him.

cclxxxvii Never act in a Passion.

If you do, all is lost. You cannot act for yourself if you are not yourself, and passion always drives out reason. In such cases inter-pose a prudent go-between who can only be prudent if he keeps cool. That is why lookers-on see most of the game, because they keep cool. As soon as you notice that you are losing your temper beat a wise retreat. For no sooner is

[p. 173]

the blood up than it is spilt, and in a few moments occasion may be given for many days' repentance for oneself and complaints of the other party.

cclxxxviii Live for the Moment.

Our acts and thoughts and all must be determined by circumstances. Will when you may, for time and tide wait for no man. Do not live by certain fixed rules, except those that relate to the cardinal virtues. Nor let your will subscribe fixed conditions, for you may have to drink the water to-morrow which you cast away to-day. There be some so absurdly paradoxical that they expect all the circumstances of an action should bend to their eccentric whims and not vice versa. The wise man knows that the very polestar of prudence lies in steering by the wind.

cclxxxix Nothing depreciates a Man more than to show he is a Man like other Men.

The day he is seen to be very human he ceases to be thought divine. Frivolity is the exact opposite of reputation. And as the re-served are held to be more than men, so the frivolous are held to be less. No failing causes

[p. 174]

such failure of respect. For frivolity is the exact opposite of solid seriousness. A man of levity cannot be a man of weight even when he is old, and age should oblige him to be prudent. Although this blemish is so common it is none the less despised.

ccxc 'Tis a piece of good Fortune to combine Men's Love and Respect.

Generally one dare not be liked if one would be respected. Love is more sensitive than hate. Love and honour do not go well together. So that one should aim neither to be much feared nor much loved. Love introduces confidence, and the further this advances, the more respect recedes. Prefer to be loved with respect rather than with passion, for that is a love suitable for many.

ccxci Know how to Test.

The care of the wise must guard against the snare of the wicked. Great judgment is needed to test that of another. It is more important to know the characteristics and properties of persons than those of vegetables and minerals. It is indeed one of the shrewdest things in life. You can tell metals by

[p. 175]

their ring and men by their voice. Words are proof of integrity, deeds still more. Here one requires extraordinary care, deep observation, subtle discernment, and judicious decision.

ccxcii Let your personal Qualities surpass those of your Office,

Let it not be the other way about. How-ever high the post, the person should be higher. An extensive capacity expands and dilates more and more as his office becomes higher. On the other hand, the narrow-minded will easily lose heart and come to grief with diminished responsibilities and reputation. The great Augustus thought more of being a great man than a great prince. Here a lofty mind finds fit place, and well-grounded confidence finds its opportunity.

ccxciii Maturity.

It is shown in the costume, still more in the customs. Material weight is the sign of a precious metal; moral, of a precious man. Maturity gives finish to his capacity and arouses respect. A composed bearing in a man forms a facade to his soul. It does not

[p. 176]

consist in the insensibility of fools, as frivolity would have it, but in a calm tone of authority. With men of this kind sentences are orations and acts are deeds. Maturity finishes a man off, for each is so far a complete man according as he possesses maturity. On ceasing to be a child a man begins to gain seriousness and authority.

ccxciv Be moderate in your Views.

Every one holds views according to his interest, and imagines he has abundant grounds for them. For with most men judgment has to give way to inclination. It may occur that two may meet with exactly opposite views and yet each thinks to have reason on his side, yet reason is always true to itself and never has two faces. In such a difficulty a prudent man will go to work with care, for his decision of his opponent's view may cast doubt on his own. Place yourself in such a case in the other man's place and then investigate the reasons for his opinion. You will not then condemn him or justify yourself in such a confusing way.

ccxcv Do not affect what you have not effected.

Many claim exploits without the slightest claim. 'With the greatest coolness they make

[p. 177]

a mystery of all. Chameleons of applause they afford others a surfeit of laughter. Vanity is always objectionable, here it is despicable. These ants of honour go crawling about filching scraps of exploits. The greater your exploits the less you need affect them: content yourself with doing, leave the talking to others. Give away your deeds but do not sell them. And do not hire venal pens to write down praises in the mud, to the derision of the knowing ones. Aspire rather to be a hero than merely to appear one.

ccxcvi Noble Qualities.

Noble qualities make noblemen: a single one of them is worth more than a multitude of mediocre ones. There was once a man who made all his belongings, even his household utensils, as great as possible. How much more ought a great man see that the qualities of his soul are as great as possible. In God all is eternal and infinite, so in a hero everything should be great and majestic, so that all his deeds, nay, all his words, should he pervaded by a transcendent majesty.

[p. 178]

ccxcvii Always act as if your Acts were seen.

He must see all round who sees that men see him or will see him. He knows that walls have ears and that ill deeds rebound back. Even when alone he acts as if the eyes of the whole world were upon him. For as he knows that sooner or later all will be known, so he considers those to be present as witnesses who must afterwards hear of the deed. He that wished the whole world might always see him did not mind that his neighbours could see him over their walls.

ccxcviii Three Things go to a Prodigy.

They are the choicest gifts of Heaven's prodigality--a fertile genius, a profound intellect, a pleasant and refined taste. To think well is good, to think right is better: 'tis the understanding of the good. It will not do for the judgment to reside in the backbone: it would be of more trouble than use. To think aright is the fruit of a reasonable nature. At twenty the will rules; at thirty the intellect; at forty the judgment. There are minds that shine in the dark like the eyes of the lynx, and are most clear where there is most darkness. Others are more adapted for the occasion: they always hit on that which suits the emergency:

[p. 179]

such a quality produces much and good; a sort of fecund felicity. In the meantime good taste seasons the whole of life.

ccxcix Leave off Hungry.

One ought to remove even the bowl of nectar from the lips. Demand is the measure of value. Even with regard to bodily thirst it is a mark of good taste to slake but not to quench it. Little and good is twice good. The second time comes a great falling off. Surfeit of pleasure was ever dangerous and brings down the ill-will of the Highest Powers. The only way to please is to revive the appetite by the hunger that is left. If you must excite desire, better do it by the impatience of want than by the repletion of enjoyment. Happiness earned gives double joy.

ccc In one word, be a Saint.

So is all said at once. Virtue is the link of all perfections, the centre of all the felicities. She it is that makes a man prudent, discreet, sagacious, cautious, wise, courageous, thoughtful, trustworthy, happy, honoured, truthful, and a universal Hero. Three HHH's make a man happy--Health, Holiness, and a Headpiece.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] Virtue is the sun of the microcosm, and has for hemisphere a good conscience. She is so beautiful that she finds favour with both God and man. Nothing is lovable but virtue, nothing detestable but vice. Virtue alone is serious, all else is but jest. A man's capacity and greatness are to be measured by his virtue and not by his fortune. She alone is all-sufficient. She makes men lovable in life, memorable after death.

    
The Art of Worldly Wisdom, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs, [1892], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181] [p. 182] [p. 183]

  

NOTES

ORIG. refers to the Spanish original, generally from the Barcelona edition of 1734, though I have occasionally referred to the Madrid edition of 1653, and at times used the text of the Biblioteca de autores epanoles. This may have occasioned some inconsistencies, especially with regard to accentuation. Schop. refers to Schopenhauer's translation; I have used Grisebach's edition in the Reclam series. M.G.D. is prefixed to quotations from Sir M. Grant Duff's renderings in Fort. Rev., March 1877; Eng. I. and II. refer to the English translations of 1694 and Savage's of 1902 respectively.

        Page

       Max.

        

     
      <page 1>

       ii

       character and intellect--Orig.   "Genio y ingenio"; Schop. "Herz und   Kopf"; Eng. I. "Wit and a Genius." The first section of El   Discreto has the same title.

two poles--Orig. "los dos   exes del lucimiento de prendas"; M.G.D. "The two axes of the   brilliance of our accomplishments."

     
      <page 2>

       iii

       when you explain; cf. ccliii.

the Divine way; cf. "It is the   glory of God to conceal a thing," Prov. xxv. 2.

     
       

        

       [p. 184]

     
      <page 3>

       v

       Not he that adorns--Orig.   "No hace el numen el que lo dora sino   el que lo adora"; Schop. "Den Gotzen macht nicht der Vergolder   sondern der Anbeter."

golden platter--Orig. "del oro al lodo"; lit. from the gold to the mire.

     
       

       vi

       A Man; from El Discreto.

     
      <page 5>

       ix

       strata--so Schop.   "Schichten"; Orig. "venas donde pasa."

     
      <page 7>

       xiii

       Second Thoughts--Orig. "intencion segunda." The   expression and idea is derived from scholastic logic. Terms of second   intention, i.e. logical technical   terms, are doubly abstract, being abstractions of terms of first intention.

warfare against malice--Orig.   "milicia . . . contra la malicia."

     
      <page 8>

       xiv

       accident--Orig.   "circumstancia"; again a scholastic term referring to the modes of   real being.

     
      <page 9>

        

       joy in life; cf. Emerson:   "Beautiful behaviour is the finest of the fine arts."

     
       

       xv

       make use of the wise--"Make   friends of the wise," said the Seven Sages, ap. Stobaeus, Flor.   iii. 80.

great thing to know--Orig.   "Ay mucho que saber y es poco el vivir"; Schop. takes it as a   variant of Hippocrates' maxim, "Art is long," etc., and renders   "Das Wissen ist lang, das Leben kurz." See, however, ccxlvii.

     
      <page 10>

       xvi

       Knowledge without sense--"Ciencia sin seso locura   doble"; cf. Span. prov. "Ciencia es Locura si buen seso no la   cura."

     
       

       xvii

       impulse--Orig. "intencion," a reference to xiii, where see Note.

     
       

        

       [p. 185]

     
      <page 11>

       xviii

       Application and Ability. Galton, Hereditary Genius, p. 38, adds zeal or   energy.

     
       

       xix

       Arouse, etc.; from El Heroe,  section 16.

     
      <page 12>

       xx

       The sage has one advantage. A   favourite maxim of Schopenhauer, quoted by him in his Wille in d. Natur, 1836, p. 34, and written on his own copy of Die Welt als Wille, obviously applying   it to himself. (See Grisebach, Edita   and Inedita, p. 104.)

     
      <page 14>

       xxiii

       soon finds out--Orig. "para luego y aun repara."

     
      <page 15>

       xxv

       Know how, etc.--Orig. "Been   entendedor"; from El Discreto.   Eng. I. "A good Pryer"; Eng. II. "A good Understanding."   The reference is to the Span. prov. "A buen entendedor pocas   palabras," Don Quixote, ii.   cc. 37, 60. Sly uses the later half in Taming   of Shrew Induction, "Therefore pocas   palabras, let the world slide, sessa!"

     
      <page 16>

       xxvii

       giants are real dwarfs; cf. Bacon's   apophthegm, "Nature did never put her jewels in garrets."

try the brawn. A slight embellishment.   Orig. "para exercitar antes los bracos que los ingenios."

     
       

       xxviii

       great and wise--Phocion; ap. Plutarch, Reg. et Imp. Apophthegm. Phocion, 4.

     
      <page 17>

        

       chameleons of popularity; cf. ccxcv.

     
       

       xxix

       Many praise it; cf. "Probitas   laudatur et alget," Juv. Sat.   i. 74.

     
      <page 18>

       xxxi

       Select the Lucky. Quoted by Addison in   Spectator, No. 293. The Rothschilds are said to act on this principle in   their business relations.

Never open; cf. ccliv.

     
      <page 19>

        

       win the odd trick--Orig. merely   "hallan con la ventura."

     
       

        

       [p. 186]

     
      <page 19>

       xxxii

       Those make friends; cf. xl, cxi.

 

     
       

       xxxiii

       One is not obliged; cf. cclx.

     
      <page 20>

       xxxv

       All fools; cf. Stevenson, Kidnapped,   c. xiv. as: "I have seen wicked men and fools, a great many of them; and   I believe they both got paid in the end; but the fools first."

     
      <page 21>

       xxxvi

       favours the bold; cf. Span. prov.   "Al hombre osado la Fortuna lada la mano."

     
      <page 22>

       xxxvii

       Keep a Store of Sarcasms, etc.--Eng.   I. and II. "To guess at the meaning of the little Hints that are given   us by the bye, and to know how to make the best of them."

     
      <page 24>

       xl

       From El Heroe,  section 12.

     
      <page 25>

       xliii

       From El Discreto, "Hombre   juizio."

     
      <page 26>

       xliv

       for mystery and for use--Orig.   "por lo culto y por lo ventojoso."

     
      <page 28>

       xlvii

       One affair--Orig. has a play upon   "empeno" and "despeno," which I have tried   to reproduce.

     
      <page 29>

       xlviii

       no use boring--Orig. "No ay   en estos donde parar o todo para."

     
       

       xlix

       From El Discreto, c. xviii.

     
      <page 30>

       li

       Know how, etc.; from El Discreto, c. ix.

     
      <page 31>

       liii

       From El Discreto, c. xx.

Festina lente--Orig.   "Correr a espacio." This is not   given in Dielitz' elaborate work on Wahl-und   Denkspruche, Gorlitz, 1884, so I suspect it was Gracian's version of   Augustus' motto, speude braxeus, generally translated Festina lente.

     
      <page 32>

       lv

       Wait; from El Discreto, c. iii, mainly from the end. It is called an Allegoria.

     
       

        

       [p. 187]

     
      <page 32>

       lv

       He spake. Charles V. according to El Discreto, I.e. Schop. attributes   the saying to Philip II.

     
      <page 33>

       lvi

       Have Presence of Mind; from El Discreto, c. xiv.

natures of Antiperistasis. The energy   aroused by opposition. Johnson gives example from Cowley (M.G.D.) It occurs   also in Bacon (Colours, vii.) and   Browne (Rel. Med. II. x.) Macaulay   also uses it in his essay on Bacon (Oxford Diet.)

work best in an emergency. So Galton, Hereditary Genius, p. 48, who speaks   of men "formed to shine under exceptional circumstances," as in the   Indian Mutiny.

     
       

       lvii

       Quickly done; cf. Herbert, Jacula Prudentum, "Good and   quickly seldom meet."

     
      <page 34>

       lix

       Finish off well; from El Discreto, c. xi.

think of the finish; cf. lxvi.

Few in life--Orig. "Que son raros los deseados."

     
      <page 35>

        

       warmly as--Orig. "lo que se muesta de cumplida con los que vienen de descortes   con los que van." M.G.D. "Seldom does fortune conduct a parting   guest to the threshold."

     
       

       lx

       by the helm of state. So Schop.   "Solche Leute verdienen am Staatsruder zu stehen, sei es zur Lenkung   oder zum Rath"; Orig. "Merecen estos la asistencia al gobernarle   o para exercicio o para consejo."

     
       

       lxi

       To Excel; from El Heroe, p. vi.

     
      <page 36>

       lxii

       Use good Instruments. Chap. iii. of   Sir H. Taylor's The Statesman is   entitled "A Statesman's most pregnant Function lies in the Choice and   Use of Instruments."

     
       

        

       [p. 188]

     
      <page 36>

       lxii

       all the blame; cf. Sir A. Helps's Essays in Intervals of Business   (Macmillan, 1890), p. 44: "You have to choose persons for whose faults   you are to be punished, to whom you are to be the whipping boy."

     
       

       lxiii

       To be the First; from El Heroe, primor vii.

     
      <page 37>

       lxv

       Elevated Taste; from El Heroe, primor v. Eng. II. "The   Fine Taste," and so quoted by Addison, Spectator, No. 40n.

     
      <page 38>

       lxvi

       See that Things end well; cf. lix.

A good end gilds. Here the Jesuit   speaks.

     
      <page 39>

       lxvii

       Prefer Callings "en Evidence";   from El Heroe, primor viii.

kings of Aragon. Gracian was himself   an Aragonese.

     
      <page 40>

       lxix

       Do not give way, etc.; from El Discreto, c. xiii.

     
      <page 45>

       lxxi

       Do not Vacillate; from El Discreto, c. vi.

     
      <page 45>

       lxxvi

       Do not always be Jesting; from El Discreto, c. ix.

A continual jest--Orig. "No   ay mayor desayre que el continuo donayre."

     
       

       lxxvii

       Be all Things to all Men. A touch of   Gracian's training as Jesuit.

     
      <page 46>

        

       universal genius--Orig. "varon universal de ingenio en noticias y de genio en   gustos" cf. ii.

     
       

       lxxix

       Join in the fun; cf. cclxxv.

     
      <page 48>

       lxxxi

       mediocrity   that's new; cf. cclxix.

Change the scene; cf. cxcviii.

     
       

       lxxxii

       A sage--Aristotle.

     
      <page 49>

       lxxxiii

       leave your cloak--an image taken   from the bull-fight, when the matador allows the bull to rush at his cloak   held sideways. Gracian uses the same image in El Criticon, i. 3.

lxxxiv blade which cuts; cf. ccxxiv.

     
       

        

       [p. 189]

     
      <page 50>

       lxxxv

       Manille. Schop. suggests that this is   the Manillio of Hombre, the second best trump (cf. Pope, Rape of Lock, iii. 51). But there is a game mentioned by   Littre s.v., which is   obviously the one referred to by Gracian. In this the nine of diamonds,   called Manille, can be made any value the player wishes. Manille thus means a   combination of a jack of all Trades and a universal drudge.

     
      <page 51>

       lxxxvii

       Culture and Elegance; from El Discreto, c. xvii.

     
      <page 53>

       xc

       The Secret; cf. Fuller, "He lives   long who lives well."

have not the will. So, it is said,   negroes and savages die in circumstances where Europeans keep alive simply   because they have "the will to live, the competence to be."

     
      <page 54>

       xcii

       an ounce of wisdom--Orig. "Mas vale un grano de cordura que arrobas de   sutileza."

     
      <page 55>

       xciv

       Keep the extent, etc.; from El Heroe, i.

     
       

       xcv

       single cast; cf. clxxxv.

     
       

       xcvi

       The highest Discretion--Orig.   "la gran sinderesis."

     
      <page 56>

       xcviii

       Write your Intentions in Cypher; from El Heroe, ii.

     
      <page 57>

        

       adopt the policy--Orig. "A linces de discurso gibias de interioridad," I have   omitted the lynxes, who have little to do with cuttle-fish (pl. of Sp. jibia).

     
       

       xcix

       Things pass, etc. A favourite   expression of Gracian's; cf. cxxx, cxlvi; cf. also the German proverb,   "Was scheint, das gilt."

     
      <page 58>

       ci

       What one pursues--Orig. "Lo que este sigue, el otro persigue."

     
      <page 59>

       cii

       find their proper place--Orig.   "No caben en si porque no cabe en ellos la   suerte."

     
       

        

       [p. 190]

     
      <page 60>

       cv

       gains by courtesy--Orig.   "gana por lo cortes lo que pierde por   lo corta."

     
      <page 63>

       cix

       prison--Orig. "galera," a sort of Bridewell.

     
      <page 64>

       cxi

       way to gain friendly feelings; cf.   xxxii, xl.

     
      <page 65>

       cxii

       Service Road--Orig. "Es grande el rodeo de solos los meritos sino se ayudan del   favor."

     
      <page 69>

       cxix

       to be esteemed--Orig.   "el que quiere hacer casa hace caso."

     
      <page 71>

       cxxii

       Distinction; from El Discreto, c. ii.

     
      <page 73>

       cxxvi

       wise try to hide; cf. Prov. xii. 16   "A fool's vexation is speedily known, but the prudent man concealeth   shame."

live chastely--Orig. "Si no   es uno casto, sea cauto"; Schop. turns neatly into Latin, caute nisi caste.

     
      <page 74>

        

       learn to forget; cf. cclxii.

     
       

       cxxvii

       Grace in Everything; from El Heroe, c. xiii.

     
      <page 75>

       cxxix

       Never complain. "I make it a   point never to complain," Mr. Disraeli once said in the House; cf. cxlv.

     
      <page 76>

       cxxx

       Even the Right; cf. xcix.

things are judged by their rackets--Orig.   merely "juzganse las cosas por fuera."

     
      <page 77>

       cxxxiii

       Better Mad, etc.; cf. "In action   wisdom goes by majorities," from "The Pilgrim's Scrip" in Richard Feverel.

     
      <page 78>

        

       the aphorism; from Aristotle, Pol. i. s; also Heraclitus; cf.   Grisebach, Schopenhauer's Inedita,   78. Also Bacon, Essays.

     
      <page 80>

       cxxxvii

       resembles the brute beast. See   preceding note.

     
      <page 88>

       cxlvii

       the sage said--Socrates.

     
      <page 90>

       cli

       The pillow is a silent; quoted by   Morley, Aphorisms.

     
       

        

       [p. 191]

     
      <page 90>

       clii

       The more he does--Orig. "Tanto por mas, quanta por   menos." Schop. takes it differently: "Sei es dadurch lass er   uber uns oder class er unter uns stehe."

the cunning Fabula--Martial,   Epigr. viii. 79.

     
      <page 91>

       cliii

       Beware of entering. The great Jewish   teacher Hillel gave braver advice: "'Where there is no man, dare to be a   man" (Ethics of the Fathers).

     
      <page 93>

       clv

       synteresis; defined in Doctor and   Student, Dial. I. ch. xiv., as: "The natural power of the soul set in   the highest part thereof, moving it and stirring it to good and abhorring   evil"; cf. Milton, Common-place   Book, ed. Horwood,  section 79; and cf. Saunder, transl. of Schopenhauer, Aphorismen zur Lebensweisheit, c. v.    section 34.

"wise on horseback"; cf.   "Nadie es cuerdo a caballo," Span. prov. quoted by Schop.

     
       

       clvi

       Only after, etc.--Orig. "Que lo han de ser a examen de la discretion y   a prueba de la fortuna, graduados no solo de la voluntad sino del   entendimiento."

Intelligence brings friends; cf.   Stevenson, Dr. Jekyll: "It is the mark of a modest man to accept his   friends ready made at the hands of opportunity."

     
      <page 95>

       clviii

       Being in general; the scholastic maxim   running "Quodlibet ens est unum, verum, bonum."

     
       

       clix

       to put up with things; anexesthai kai apexesthai, the great Epicurean   maxim.

     
      <page 96>

       clx

       Be careful in Speaking; cf. Prov.   xxix. 20. "Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words there is more   hope of a fool than of him."

     
       

        

       [p. 192]

     
      <page 97>

       clxii

       enough to despise them; cf. ccv.

who speaks well. "It's poor   foolishness," says Adam Bede, "to run down your enemies", cf.   Goethe.

     
      <page 98>

       clxiv

       Throw Straws--Orig. "Echar al ayre algunas cosas" merely refers to   feigned blows; cf. xiii.

     
      <page 99>

       clxv

       poisoned arrows; rather an   embellishment on the orig., which has merely "pero no mala   (guerra)."

     
      <page 100>

       clxvi

       polite deceit; cf. cxci.

     
      <page 104>

       clxxiii

       Motes offend them--Orig. "Ofendenla las motas que no son   menester ya notas."

the Amant is half adamant. This seems   the only way of retaining the "conceit" and jingle of the orig.:   "La condition del Amante tiene la mitad de diamante en el durar y en el   resistir."

     
      <page 105>

       clxxv

       Only Truth--profit; omitted by   Schop.

     
      <page 109>

       clxxxii

       A Grain of Boldness; cf. the opening   of Bacon's Essay "Of Boldnesse," and Mrs. Poyser's aphorism,   "It's them as take advantage that get advantage in this world, I   think."

     
      <page 112>

       clxxxvii

       it is the privilege; cf. cclxxxvi.

Have some one; cf. Bacon, "Of   Envy": "The wiser Sort of Great Persons bring in ever upon the   Stage some Body upon whom to derive the Envy that would come upon themselves."

     
      <page 115>

       cxc

       The unlucky thinks--Orig. has a   play upon the words "suerte" and "muerte."

     
       

       cxci

       Theirs is the Bank of Elegance. I have   no excuse for this. Orig. simply "Hacen precio con la honra."

     
       

       cxcii

       no greater perversity--Orig.   "No ay mayor desproposito que tomar lo todo de proposito."

     
       

        

       [p. 193]

     
      <page 116>

       cxciii

       Be intent--Orig. "Al intendido un buen entendedor."

their chestnuts--Orig. simply   "Sacar del fuego el provecho ageno."

     
      <page 117>

       cxcvi

       ruling Star. There are some grounds   for believing that great adventurers, like Napoleon, have a subjective star,   hallucinatory of course, which appears to them at moments of great   excitement; cf. Gallon, Human Faculty,   175-176.

     
      <page 119>

       cxcviii

       native land a stepmother; cf. contra Galton, Hered. Gen., 360 "As a rule the very ablest men are strongly   disinclined to emigrate," and Prov. xxvii. 8.

     
      <page 120>

       cc

       Leave Something; cf. lxxxii, ccxcix.

The body must respire--Orig.   "Espira el cuerpo y anhela el espiritu."

     
      <page 121>

       ccii

       Former are feminine; cf. Span. prov.   "Palabras hembras son hechos machos." Howell, Fam. Letters, quotes the saying as Italian; cf. my edition, p.   270 and n. Herbert also gives it in   his Jacula Prudentum.

Eminent deeds endure. Schop. has   characteristically expressed his dissent by annotating his own copy of the Oraculo at this point with a   pithy "vale el contrario."

     
      <page 122>

       cciv

       Attempt easy Tasks as if they were   difficult. Approved by Mr. Morley, Aphorisms.

     
      <page 133>

       ccxx

       If you cannot, etc. There may be here   a reference to Lysander's saying in Plutarch: "If the lion's skin [of   Hercules] is not long enough, we must stitch on to it a fox's skin.

     
       

        

       [p. 194]

     
      <page 133>

       ccxxi

       They are always on the point of some   stupidity--omitted by Schop.

     
      <page 134>

        

       meet with them easily--Orig.   "Encuentranse con gran facilidad y rompen con   infelicidad."

     
       

       ccxxii

       Reserve is proof; cf. clxxix.

     
      <page 135>

       ccxxiii

       more defects--so Orig. "Que   son mas defectos que diferencias."

     
       

       ccxxiv

       taken by the blade; cf. lxxxiv.

     
      <page 136>

       ccxxv

       Know your chief Fault; cf. xxxiv.

     
      <page 137>

       ccxxvii

       new casks; cf. the Span. prov. "A   la vasija nueva dura el resabio."

     
      <page 143>

       ccxxxvii

       share pears--Orig. "Pensara partir peras y   partira piedras." Schop. "Man glaubt Kirschen mit ihnen zu   essen, wird aber nur die steine erhalten."

     
      <page 144>

       ccxxxviii

       communicates his secret; cf. Span.   prov. "A quien dizes poridad a esse tu das la liberdad,"   neither tell secrets nor listen to them--Eng. I. puts it rather neatly:   "Tis a maxim for secrets Neither to hear them nor to tell them";   cf. the maxim of the Seven Sages, ap. Stobaeus, Flor. iii. 80: "Tell   none a secret."

     
       

       ccxxxviii

       something wanting; cf. xxxiv, ccxxv.

     
      <page 145>

       ccxl

       Speak to each; cf. Prov. xxvi. 5,   "Answer a fool according to his folly."

     
      <page 146>

       ccxlii

       Everything stops--Orig. "Todo para en parar."   Schop. omits.

     
      <page 149>

       ccxlvi

       To excuse oneself--Orig. "El   escusarse antes de ocasion es culparse"; cf.   Fr. prov. "Qui s'excuse s'accuse."

     
      <page 150>

       ccli

       Use human Means, etc.; cf. "Human   wit ought to be exhausted before we presume to invoke Divine   interposition" (B. Disraeli, Tancred).

     
       

        

       [p. 195]

     
      <page 152>

       cclii

       berth and burthen--Orig. "Renuncie el cargo con la carga." The story goes that   an old woman met Hadrian with a petition. He repulsed her, saying he had no   time. "Then give up your berth," retorted the beldam. Hadrian   recognised the justice of the rebuke and decided the petition on the spot.

slaves of all; cf. "Men in great   Place are thrice servants" (Bacon, Essay "Of Great Place").   There is something like this in El   Criticon, i. 7.

     
       

       ccliii

       Do not Explain overmuch; cf. "Let   the wise be warned against too great readiness of explanation" (G.   Eliot, Middlemarch).

do not esteem what they understand;   cf.--

       "Was   man nicht weiss, das eben brauchte man,
          Und was man weiss kann man nicht   brauchen."
                                  GOETHE,   Faust, Th. I.

     
      <page 153>

        

       venerate the unknown; cf. "Omne   ignotum pro magnifico."

     
       

       ccliv

       they never come alone; cf. Span. prov.   ap. Don Quixote, i. 28, "Un mal llama a otro," and   Shakespeare, "When sorrows come, they come not single spies, But in   battalions," Hamlet, iv. 5.

Do not wake Misfortune; cf. Span.   prov. "Quando la mala Fortuna se duerme, nadie la despierte."

One slip is a little thing; cf.   Stevenson, Dr. Jekyll.

     
      <page 158>

       cclxii

       The things we remember best are those   better forgotten.--quoted by Mr. Morley in Aphorisms.

     
      <page 159>

       cclxiv

       Have no careless Days.   D'Artagnan acts on this principle in keeping always on guard over the   king during journeys. Vicomte de   Bragelonne, c. xii.

     
       

        

       [p. 196]

     
      <page 160>

       cclxv

       The Great Captain--Orig. "El   gran Capitan," a reference to Gonsalvo de   Cordova (1443-1515), who commanded the Spanish land forces against Chas.   VIII. in Italy, and received his title "el gran Capitan" July 1496.

     
      <page 161>

       cclxvii

       Silken Words. Parysatis, mother of the   younger Cyrus, advised one who was about to have an audience with a king to   use words wrapped in fine linen; cf. Paley, Greek Wit, i. No. 152.

mouth full of sugar; cf. contra Spurgeon's John Ploughman's Talk, "Do not be all sugar, or the world   will suck you down."

     
       

       cclxviii

       Wise does at once; cf. Span. prov.   "Lo que hace el loco a la postre, hace sabio al principio (quoted   by Trench, Proverbs5,   116).

     
      <page 163>

       cclxxi

       Let little knowledge--Orig.   "A poco saber camino real."

     
      <page 164>

       cclxxiii

       If a man laughs always--Orig.   "Conosca al que siempre rie por falto y al que   nunca por falso."

     
      <page 166>

       cclxxvi

       At twenty; cf. the ages in Ethics of the Jewish Fathers, ed. C.   Taylor, p. 111; L. Low, Die   Lebensalter, p. 22 and n.; and   Shakespeare in As You Like It.

     
       

       cclxxvii

       From El Discreto, c. xii.

     
      <page 168>

       cclxxix

       comes from cunning; cf. ccxiii.

     
      <page 169>

       cclxxxi

       you cannot make a meal--Orig.   "Porque regueldos de   aristas no alientan." Schop. omits.

     
      <page 170>

       cclxxxii

       

result--Orig. "Ridiculo parto de los   mantes," a reference to Horace's "Parturiunt montes, nascetur   ridiculus mus."

     
       

        

       [p. 197]

     
      <page 171>

       cclxxxv

       Never die--Schop.   adds to his copy "y mucho menos de necedad y ruindad agena."

     
      <page 172>

       cclxxxvi

       you can do more good; cf. clxxxvii;   cf. "Power to doe good is the true and lawfull end of Aspiring"   (Bacon, "Of Great Place").

     
      <page 173>

       cclxxxviii

       steering by the wind. The derangement   of metaphors is mine; orig. has simply "En portarse a la   ocasion."

     
      <page 174>

       ccxci

       The care of the wise, etc.--Orig.   "Compita la atencion del juyzioso can la   detencion del recatado."

     
      <page 176>

       ccxcv

       From El Discreto, c. xix.

     
      <page 177>

       ccxcvi

       Noble qualities make noblemen--Orig.   "Las primeras hazen los primeros   hombres."

     
      <page 179>

       ccc

       Three HHH's--Orig.   "Tres eses hazen   dichoso, Santo, Sano y Sabio." Schop. "Drei Dinge die in Spanischen   mit einem S anfangen machen glucklich --Heiligkeit,   Gesundheit, and Weisheit." M.G.D. "Three SSS render a man happy,   Sanctity, Soundness of body, and Sageness."

     
 THE END

 

 

 

Printed in Great Britain by R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, Edinburgh.

 

 

    


===== BOOK: balt.txt =====


    
The Baltimore Catchecism, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

  

 Baltimore Catechism No. 1 

 

LESSON FIRST: ON THE END OF MAN

 

 

1. Q. Who made the world?
   A. God made the world. 

 

 

2. Q. Who is God?
   A. God is the Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things. 

 

3. Q. What is man?
   A. Man is a creature composed of body and soul, and made to the image and    likeness of God.

 

6. Q. Why did God make you?
   A. God made me to know Him, to love Him, and to serve Him in this world,    and to be happy with Him for ever in heaven. 

 

9. Q. What must we do to save our souls?
   A. To save our souls, we must worship God by faith, hope, and charity; that    is, we must believe in Him, hope in
   Him, and love Him with all our heart. 

 

10. Q. How shall we know the things which we are to believe?
   A. We shall know the things which we are to believe from the Catholic Church,    through which God speaks to us.

 

11. Q. Where shall we find the chief truths which the Church teaches?
   A. We shall find the chief truths which the Church teaches in the Apostles'    Creed. 

 

12. Q. Say the Apostles' Creed.

 

 

LESSON SECOND: ON GOD AND HIS PERFECTIONS

 

13. Q. What is God?
   A. God is a spirit infinitely perfect.

 

14. Q. Had God a beginning
   A. God had no beginning; He always was and He always will be.

 

15. Q. Where is God?
   A. God is everywhere.

 

16. Q. If God is everywhere, why do we not see Him?
   A. We do not see God, because He is a pure spirit and cannot be seen with    bodily eyes.

 

17. Q. Does God see us?
   A. God sees us and watches over us. 

 

18. Q. Does God know all things?
   A. God knows all things, even our most secret thoughts, words, and actions.

 

19. Q. Can God do all things?
   A. God can do all things, and nothing is hard or impossible to Him.

 

20. Q. Is God just, holy, and merciful?
   A. God is all just, all holy, all merciful, as He is infinitely perfect.  

 

 

LESSON THIRD: ON THE UNITY AND TRINITY OF GOD

 

21. Q. Is there but one God?
   A. Yes; there is but one God. 

 

22. Q. Why can there be but one God?
   A. There can be but one God, because God, being supreme and infinite, cannot    have an equal.

 

23. Q. How many Persons are there in God?
   A. In God there are three Divine Persons, really distinct, and equal in    all things-the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

 

24. Q. Is the Father God?
   A. The Father is God and the first Person of the Blessed Trinity. 

 

25. Q. Is the Son God?
   A. The Son is God and the second Person of the Blessed Trinity. 

 

26. Q. Is the Holy Ghost God?
   A. The Holy Ghost is God and the third Person of the Blessed Trinity.

 

27. Q. What is the Blessed Trinity?
   A. The Blessed Trinity is one God in three Divine Persons. 

 

29. Q. Are the three Divine Persons one and the same God?
   A. The three Divine Persons are one and the same God, having one and the    same Divine nature. 

 

 

LESSON FOURTH: ON THE ANGELS AND OUR FIRST PARENTS

 

34. Q. Which are the chief creatures of God?
   A. The chief creatures of God are men and angels.

 

35. Q. What are angels?
   A. Angels are bodiless spirits created to adore and enjoy God in heaven.

 

39. Q. Who were the first man and woman?
   A. The first man and woman were Adam and Eve.

 

40. Q. Were Adam and Eve innocent and holy when they came from the hand    of God?
   A. Adam and Eve were innocent and holy when they came from the hand of God.  

 

43. Q. Did Adam and Eve remain faithful to God?
   A. Adam and Eve did not remain faithful to God; but broke His command by    eating the forbidden fruit.

 

44. Q. What befell Adam and Eve on account of their sin?
   A. Adam and Eve on account of their sin lost innocence and holiness, and    were doomed to misery and death.

 

45. Q. What evil befell us through the disobedience of our first parents?
   A. Through the disobedience of our first parents we all inherit their sin    and punishment, as we should have shared in their happiness if they had remained    faithful.

 

47. Q. What is the sin called which we inherit from our first parents?
   A. The sin which we inherit from our first parents is called original sin.

 

50. Q. Was any one ever preserved from original sin?
   A. The Blessed Virgin Mary, through the merit of her Divine Son, was preserved    free from the guilt of original sin, and this privilege is called her Immaculate    Conception.

 

 

LESSON FIFTH: ON SIN AND ITS KINDS

 

51. Q. Is original sin the only kind of sin?
   A. Original sin is not the only kind of sin; there is another kind of sin,    which we commit ourselves, called actual sin. 

 

52. Q. What is actual sin?
   A. Actual sin is any willful thought, word, deed or omission contrary to    the law of God.

 

53. Q. How many kinds of actual sin are there?
   A. There are two kinds of actual sin-mortal and venial.

 

54. Q. What is mortal sin?
   A. Mortal sin is a grievous offense against the law of God.

 

57. Q. What is venial sin?

A. Venial sin is a slight offense against the law of God in matters of less    importance; or in matters of great importance it is an offence committed with    out sufficient reflection or full consent of the will. 

 

59. Q. Which are the chief sources of sin?
   A. The chief sources of sin are seven: Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Anger,    Gluttony, Envy, and Sloth; and they are commonly called capital sins.

 

 

 

LESSON SIXTH: ON THE INCARNATION AND REDEMPTION

 

60. Q. Did God abandon man after he fell into sin?
   A. God did not abandon man after he fell into sin, but promised him a Redeemer,    who was to satisfy for man's sin and reopen to him the gates of heaven.

 

61. Q. Who is the Redeemer?
   A. Our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of mankind.

 

62. Q. What do you believe of Jesus Christ?
   A. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the second Person of the    Blessed Trinity, true God and true man. 

 

69. Q. What do you mean by the Incarnation?
   A. By the Incarnation I mean that the Son of God was made man. 

 

70. Q. How was the Son of God made man?
   A. The Son of God was conceived and made man by the power of the Holy Ghost,    in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

 

74. Q. On what day was the Son of God conceived and made man?
   A. The Son of God was conceived and made man on Annunciation day-the day    on which the angel Gabriel announced to the Blessed Virgin Mary that she was    to be the Mother of God. 

 

 

75. Q. On what day was Christ born?
   A. Christ was born on Christmas day in a stable at Bethlehem, over nineteen    hundred years ago.

 

 

LESSON SEVENTH: ON OUR LORD'S PASSION, DEATH, RESURRECTION,    AND ASCENSION

 

78. Q. What did Jesus Christ Suffer?
   A. Jesus Christ suffered a bloody sweat, a cruel scourging, was crowned    with thorns, and was crucified.

 

79. Q. On what clay did Christ die?
   A. Christ died on Good Friday. 

 

83. Q. Why did Christ suffer and die?
   A. Christ suffered and died for our sins

 

89. Q. On what day did Christ rise from the dead?
   A. Christ rose from the dead, glorious and immortal, on Easter Sunday, the    third day after His death.

 

91. Q. After Christ had remained forty days on earth, whither did He go?
   A. After forty days Christ ascended into heaven, and the day on which He    ascended into heaven is called Ascension day.

 

 

LESSON EIGHTH: ON THE HOLY GHOST AND HIS DESCENT UPON    THE APOSTLES

 

    De-scent', the act of coming down.    En-a'ble, to make able.    En-light'en, to make them understand better.    Pen'te-cost, the fiftieth day after Easter.    Preach, declare publicly, spread by word of mouth.    Sanc'ti-fy, to make holy.    Strength'en, make strong.    Whit'sun-day, white Sunday.   

94. Q. Who is the Holy Ghost?
   A. The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the Blessed Trinity. 

 

97. Q. On what day did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?
   A. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles ten days after the Ascension    of our Lord; and the day on which He came down upon the Apostles is called Whitsunday,    or Pentecost. 

 

 99. Q. Who sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles?
   A. Our Lord Jesus Christ sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. 

 

100. Q. Why did Christ send the Holy Ghost?
   A. Christ sent the Holy Ghost to sanctify His Church, to enlighten and strengthen    the Apostles, and to enable them to preach the Gospel.

 

     
The Baltimore Catchecism, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

CATECHISM 2

 

LESSON FIRST: ON THE END OF MAN

 

1. Q. Who made the world?

A. God made the world. 

 

2. Q. Who is God?

A. God is the Creator of heaven and earth, and of all    things. 

 

3. Q. What is man?

A. Man is a creature composed of body and soul, and made to the    image and likeness of God. 

 

4. Q. Is this likeness in the body or in the soul?

A. This likeness is chiefly in the soul. 

 

5. Q. How is the soul like to God?

A. The soul is like God because it is a spirit that will never die,    and has understanding and free will. 

 

6. Q. Why did God make you?

A. God made me to know Him, to love Him, and to serve Him in this world, and    to be happy with Him forever in the next. 

 

7. Q. Of which must we take more care, our soul or our body?

A. We must take more care of our soul than of our body. 

 

 

8. Q. Why must we take more care of our soul than of our body?

A. We must take more care of our soul than of our body, because in losing our    soul we lose God and everlasting happiness. 

 

 

9. Q. What must we do to save our souls?

A. To save our souls we must worship God by faith, hope, and charity;    that is, we must believe in Him, hope in Him, and love    Him with all our heart. 

 

10. Q. How shall we know the things which we are to believe?

A. We shall know the things which we are to believe from the Catholic    Church, through which God speaks to us. 

 

11. Q. Where shall we find the chief truths which the Church teaches?

A. We shall find the chief truths which the Church teaches    in the Apostles' Creed. 

 

12. Q. Say the Apostles' Creed.

    I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth; and      in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,      born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified; died,      and was buried. He descended into hell: the third day He arose again from      the dead: He ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God, the      Father Almighty; from thence He shall come to judge the living and the dead.      I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints,      the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.      Amen. 

 

LESSON SECOND: ON GOD AND HIS PERFECTIONS

 

 

 

13. Q. What is God?

A. God is a spirit infinitely perfect. 

 

14. Q. Had God a beginning

A. God had no beginning; He always was and He always will be. 

 

15. Q. Where is God?

A. God is everywhere. 

 

16. Q. If God is everywhere, why do we not see Him?

A. We do not see God, because He is a pure spirit and cannot be seen    with bodily eyes. 

 

17. Q. Does God see us?

A. God sees us and watches over us. 

 

18. Q. Does God know all things?

A. God knows all things, even our most secret thoughts, words, and actions.  

 

19. Q. Can God do all things?

A. God can do all things, and nothing is hard or impossible to Him.  

 

20. Q. Is God just, holy, and merciful?

    God is all just, all holy, all merciful, as He is infinitely perfect. 

 

LESSON THIRD: ON THE UNITY AND TRINITY OF GOD

 

 

 

21. Q. Is there but one God?

A. Yes; there is but one God. 

 

22. Q. Why can there be but one God?

A. There can be but one God, because God, being supreme and infinite,    cannot have an equal. 

 

23. Q. How many Persons are there in God?
   A. In God there are three Divine Persons, really distinct, and equal in all    things-the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 

 

24. Q. Is the Father God?

A. The Father is God and the first Person of the Blessed Trinity. 

 

25. Q. Is the Son God?

A. The Son is God and the second Person of the Blessed Trinity. 

 

26. Q. Is the Holy Ghost God?

A. The Holy Ghost is God and the third Person of the Blessed Trinity.  

 

27. Q. What do you mean by the Blessed Trinity?

A. By the Blessed Trinity I mean one God in three Divine Persons. 

 

28. Q. Are the three Divine Persons equal in all things?

A. The three Divine Persons are equal in all things. 

 

29. Q. Are the three Divine Persons one and the same God?

A. The three Divine Persons are one and the same God, having one and    the same Divine nature and substance. 

 

30. Q. Can we fully understand how the three Divine Persons are one and the    same God?

A. We cannot fully understand how the three Divine Persons are one and the    same God, because this is a mystery. 

 

31. Q. What is a mystery?

A. A mystery is a truth which we cannot fully understand. 

 

 

 

LESSON FOURTH: ON CREATION

 

 

 

32. Q. Who created heaven and earth, and all things?

A. God created heaven and earth, and all things. 

 

33. Q. How did God create heaven and earth?

A. God created heaven and earth from nothing by His word only; that is, by    a single act of His all-powerful will. 

 

34. Q. Which are the chief creatures of God?

A. The chief creatures of God are angels and men. 

 

33. Q. What are angels?

A. Angels are pure spirits without a body, created to adore and enjoy    God in heaven. 

 

36. Q. Were the angels created for any other purpose?

A. The angels were also created to assist before the throne of God and    to minister unto Him; they have often been sent as messengers from God to man;    and are also appointed our guardians. 

 

37. Q. Were the angels, as God created them, good and happy?

A. The angels, as God created them, were good and happy. 

 

38. Q. Did all the angels remain good and happy?

A. All the angels did not remain good and happy; many of them sinned and were    cast into hell, and these are called devils or bad angels. 

 

 

LESSON FIFTH: ON OUR FIRST PARENTS AND THE FALL

 

39. Q. Who were the first man and woman?

A. The first man and woman were Adam and Eve. 

 

40. Q. Were Adam and Eve innocent and holy when they came from the hand of    God?

A. Adam and Eve were innocent and holy when they came from the hand    of God. 

 

41. Q. Did God give any command to Adam and Eve?

A. To try their obedience God commanded Adam and Eve not to eat of a    certain fruit which grew in the garden of Paradise. 

 

42. Q. Which were the chief blessings intended for Adam and Eve had they remained    faithful to God?

A. The chief blessings intended for Adam and Eve, had they remained    faithful to God, were a constant state of happiness in this life and everlasting    glory in the next. 

 

43. Q. Did Adam and Eve remain faithful to God?

A. Adam and Eve did not remain faithful to God; but broke His command    by eating the forbidden fruit. 

 

44. Q. What befell Adam and Eve on account of their sin?

A. Adam and Eve, on account of their sin, lost innocence and holiness,    and were doomed to sickness and death. 

 

45. Q. What evil befell us on account of the disobedience of our first parents?

A. On account of the disobedience of our first parents, we all share    in their sin and punishment, as we should have shared in their happiness if    they had remained faithful. 

 

46. Q. What other effects followed from the sin of our first parents?

A. Our nature was corrupted by the sin of our first parents, which darkened    our understanding, weakened our will, and left in us a strong inclination to    evil. 

 

47. Q. What is the sin called which we inherit from our first parents?

A. The sin which we inherit from our first parents is called original    sin. 

 

48. Q. Why is this sin called original?

A. This sin is called original because it comes down to us from our    first parents, and we are brought into the world with its guilt on our soul.  

 

49. Q. Does this corruption of our nature remain in us after original sin    is forgiven?

A. This corruption of our nature and other punishments remain in us    after original sin is forgiven. 

 

 

 

50. Q. Was any one ever preserved from original sin?

A. The Blessed Virgin Mary, through the merits of her Divine Son, was preserved    free from the guilt of original sin, and this privilege is called her Immaculate    Conception. 

 

 

 

LESSON SIXTH: ON SIN AND ITS KINDS

 

51. Q. Is original sin the only kind of sin?

A. Original sin is not the only kind of sin; there is another kind of    sin, which we commit ourselves, called actual sin. 

 

 

 

52. Q. What is actual sin?

A. Actual sin is any willful thought, word, deed, or omission contrary    to the law of God. 

 

 

 

53. Q. How many kinds of actual sin are there?

A. There are two kinds of actual sin-mortal and venial. 

 

54. Q. What is mortal sin?

A. Mortal sin is a grievous offense against the law of God. 

 

55. Q. Why is this sin called mortal?

A. This sin is called mortal because it deprives us of spiritual life,    which is sanctifying grace, and brings everlasting death and damnation on the    soul. 

 

56. Q. How many things are necessary to make a sin mortal?

A. To make a sin mortal three things are necessary: a grievous matter,    sufficient reflection, and full consent of the will. 

 

57. Q. What is venial sin?

A. Venial sin is a slight offense against the law of God in matters of less    importance, or in matters of great importance it is an offense committed without    sufficient reflection or full consent of the will. 

 

58. Q. Which are the effects of venial sin?

A. The effects of venial sin are the lessening of the love of God in    our heart, the making us less worthy of His help, and the weakening of the power    to resist mortal sin. 

 

59. Q. Which are the chief sources of sin?

A. The chief sources of sin are seven: Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Anger, Gluttony,    Envy, and Sloth; and they are commonly called capital sins. 

 

 

 

LESSON SEVENTH: ON THE INCARNATION AND REDEMPTION

 

60. Q. Did God abandon man after he fell into sin?

A. God did not abandon man after he fell into sin, but promised him    a Redeemer, who was to satisfy for man's sin and reopen to him the gates of    heaven. 

 

 

 

61. Q. Who is the Redeemer?

A. Our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of mankind.  

 

 

 

62. Q. What do you believe of Jesus Christ?

A. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the second Person of the    Blessed Trinity, true God and true man. 

 

63. Q. Why is Jesus Christ true God?

A. Jesus Christ is true God because He is the true and only Son of God    the Father. 

 

64. Q. Why is Jesus Christ true man?

A. Jesus Christ is true man because He is the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary    and has a body and soul like ours. 

 

65. Q. How many natures are there in Jesus Christ?

A. In Jesus Christ there are two natures, the nature of God and the nature    of man. 

 

66. Q. Is Jesus Christ more than one person?

A. No, Jesus Christ is but one Divine Person. 

 

67. Q. Was Jesus Christ always God?

A. Jesus Christ was always God, as He is the second Person of the Blessed Trinity,    equal to His Father from all eternity. 

 

68. Q. Was Jesus Christ always man?

A. Jesus Christ was not always man, but became man at the time of His Incarnation.  

 

69. Q. What do you mean by the Incarnation?

A. By the Incarnation I mean that the Son of God was made man. 

 

70. Q. How was the Son of God made man?

A. The Son of God was conceived and made man by the power of the Holy Ghost,    in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 

 

 

 

71. Q. Is the Blessed Virgin Mary truly the Mother of God?

A. The Blessed Virgin Mary is truly the Mother of God, because the same Divine    Person who is the Son of God is also the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 

 

 

72. Q. Did the Son of God become man immediately after the sin of our first    parents?

A. The Son of God did not become man immediately after the sin of our first    parents, but was promised to them as a Redeemer. 

 

73. Q. How could they be saved who lived before the Son    of God became man?

A. They who lived before the Son of God became man could be saved by believing    in a Redeemer to come, and by keeping the commandments. 

 

74. Q. On what day was the Son of God conceived and made    man?

A. The Son of God was conceived and made man on Annunciation day-the day on    which the Angel Gabriel announced to the Blessed Virgin Mary that she was to    be the Mother of God. 

 

75. Q. On what day was Christ born?

A. Christ was born on Christmas day in a stable at Bethlehem, over nineteen    hundred years ago. 

 

76. Q. How long did Christ live on earth?

A. Christ lived on earth about thirty-three years, and led a most holy    life in poverty and suffering. 

 

77. Q. Why did Christ live so long on earth?

    Christ lived so long on earth to show us the way to heaven by His teachings      and example.   

 

LESSON EIGHTH: ON OUR LORD'S PASSION, DEATH, RESURRECTION, AND ASCENSION

 

78. Q. What did Jesus Christ suffer?

A. Jesus Christ suffered a bloody sweat, a cruel scourging, was crowned with    thorns, and was crucified. 

 

79. Q. On what day did Christ die?

A. Christ died on Good Friday. 

 

80. Q. Why do you call that day "good" on which Christ died so sorrowful a    death?

A. We call that day "good" on which Christ died because by His death He showed    His great love for man, and purchased for him every blessing. 

 

81. Q. Where did Christ die?

A. Christ died on Mount Calvary. 

 

82. Q. How did Christ die?

A. Christ was nailed to the Cross and died on it between two    thieves. 

 

83. Q. Why did Christ suffer and die?

A. Christ suffered and died for our sins. 

 

84. Q. What lessons do we learn from the sufferings and death of Christ?

A. From the sufferings and death of Christ we learn the great evil of    sin, the hatred God bears to it, and the necessity of satisfying for it. 

 

85. Q. Where did Christ's soul go after His death?

A. After Christ's death His soul descended into hell. 

 

86. Q. Did Christ's soul descend into the hell of the damned?

A. The hell into which Christ's soul descended was not the hell of the damned,    but a place or state of rest called Limbo, where the souls of the just were    waiting for Him. 

 

87. Q. Why did Christ descend into Limbo?

A. Christ descended into Limbo to preach to the souls who were    in prison-that is, to announce to them the joyful tidings of their redemption.  

 

88. Q. Where was Christ's body while His soul was in Limbo?

A. While Christ's soul was in Limbo His body was in the holy sepulchre.  

 

89. Q. On what day did Christ rise from the dead?

A. Christ rose from the dead, glorious and immortal, on Easter Sunday,    the third day after His death. 

 

90. Q. How long did Christ stay on earth after His resurrection?

A. Christ stayed on earth forty days after His resurrection to show    that He was truly risen from the dead, and to instruct His Apostles. 

 

91. Q. After Christ had remained forty days on earth whither did He go?

A. After forty days Christ ascended into heaven, and the day on which    He ascended into heaven is called Ascension day. 

 

92. Q. Where is Christ in heaven?

A. In heaven Christ sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.  

 

93. Q. What do you mean by saying that Christ sits at the right hand Of God?

A. When I say that Christ sits at the right hand of God I mean that    Christ as God is equal to His Father in all things, and that as man He is in    the highest place in heaven next to God. 

 

 

LESSON NINTH: ON THE HOLY GHOST AND HIS DESCENT UPON THE APOSTLES

 

94. Q. Who is the Holy Ghost?

A. The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the Blessed Trinity. 

 

95. Q. From whom does the Holy Ghost proceed?

A. The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. 

 

96. Q. Is the Holy Ghost equal to the Father and the Son?

A. The Holy Ghost is equal to the Father and the Son, being the same    Lord and God as They are. 

 

97. Q. On what day did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?

A. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles ten days after the Ascension    of our Lord; and the day on which He came down upon the Apostles is called Whitsunday,    or Pentecost. 

 

98. Q. How did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?

A. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles in the form of tongues    of fire. 

 

99. Q. Who sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles?

A. Our Lord Jesus Christ sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. 

 

100. Q. Why did Christ send the Holy Ghost?

A. Christ sent the Holy Ghost to sanctify His Church, to enlighten and    strengthen the Apostles, and to enable them to preach the Gospel. 

 

101. Q. Will the Holy Ghost abide with the Church forever?

A. The Holy Ghost will abide with the Church forever, and guide it in    the way of holiness and truth. 

 

 

LESSON TENTH: ON THE EFFECTS OF THE REDEMPTION

 

102. Q. Which are the chief effects of the Redemption?

A. The chief effects of the Redemption are two: The satisfaction of God's '    justice by Christ's sufferings and death, and the gaining of grace for men.  

 

103. Q. What do you mean by grace?

A. By grace I mean a supernatural gift of God bestowed on us, through the merits    of Jesus Christ, for our salvation. 

 

104. Q. How many kinds of grace are there?

A. There are two kinds of grace, sanctifying grace and actual grace. 

 

105. Q. What is sanctifying grace?

A. Sanctifying grace is that grace which makes the soul holy and pleasing to    God. 

 

106. Q. What do you call those graces or gifts of God by which we believe    in Him, hope in Him, and love Him?

A. Those graces or gifts of God by which we believe in Him, and hope in Him,    and love Him, are called the Divine virtues of Faith, Hope, and Charity. 

 

107. Q. What is Faith?

A. Faith is a Divine virtue by which we firmly believe the truths which God    has revealed. 

 

108. Q. What is Hope?

A. Hope is a Divine virtue by which we firmly trust that God will give us eternal    life and the means to obtain it. 

 

109. Q. What is Charity?

A. Charity is a Divine virtue by which we love God above all things for His    own sake, and our neighbor as ourselves for the love of God. 

 

110. Q. What is actual grace?

A. Actual grace is that help of God which enlightens our mind and moves our    will to shun evil and do good. 

 

111. Q. Is grace necessary to salvation?

A. Grace is necessary to salvation, because without grace we can do nothing    to merit heaven. 

 

112. Q. Can we resist the grace of God?

A. We can and unfortunately often do resist the grace of God. 

 

113. Q. What is the grace of perseverance?

A. The grace of perseverance is a particular gift of God which enables us to    continue in the state of grace till death. 

 

 

LESSON ELEVENTH: ON THE CHURCH

 

114. Q. Which are the means instituted by our Lord to enable men at all times    to share in the fruits of the Redemption?

A. The means instituted by our Lord to enable men at all times to share    in the fruits of His Redemption are the Church and the Sacraments. 

 

115. Q. What is the Church?

A. The Church is the congregation of all those who profess the faith of Christ,    partake of the same Sacraments, and are governed by their lawful pastors under    one visible head. 

 

116. Q. Who is the invisible Head of the Church?

A. Jesus Christ is the invisible Head of the Church. 

 

117. Q. Who is the visible Head of the Church?

A. Our Holy Father the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, is the Vicar of Christ    on earth and the visible Head of the Church. 

 

118. Q. Why is the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, the visible Head of the Church?

A. The Pope, the Bishop of Rome, is the visible Head of the Church because    lie is the successor of St. Peter, whom Christ made the chief of the Apostles    and the visible Head of the Church. 

 

119. Q. Who are the successors of the other Apostles?

A. The successors of the other Apostles are the bishops of the Holy Catholic    Church. 

 

120. Q. Why did Christ found the Church?

A. Christ founded the Church to teach, govern, sanctify, and save all    men. 

 

121. Q. Are all bound to belong to the Church?

A. All are bound to belong to the Church, and he who knows the Church    to be the true Church and remains out of it cannot be saved. 

 

 

LESSON TWELFTH: ON THE ATTRIBUTES AND MARKS OF THE CHURCH

 

122. Q. Which are the attributes of the Church?

A. The attributes of the Church are three: authority infallibility, and indefectibility.  

 

123. Q. What do you mean by the authority of the Church?

A. By the authority of the Church I mean the right and power which the Pope    and the bishops, as the successors of the Apostles, have to teach and to govern    the faithful. 

 

124. Q. What do you mean by the infallibility of the Church?

A. By the infallibility of the Church I mean that the Church cannot err when    it teaches a doctrine of faith or morals. 

 

125. Q. When does the Church teach infallibly?

A. The Church teaches infallibly when it speaks through the Pope and the bishops,    united in general council, or through the Pope alone when he proclaims to all    the faithful a doctrine of faith or morals. 

 

126. Q. What o you mean by the indefectibility of the Church?

A. By the indefectibility of the Church I mean that the Church, as Christ founded    it, will last till the end of time. 

 

127. Q. In whom are these attributes found in their fullness?

A. These attributes are found in their fullness in the Pope, the visible Head    of the Church, whose infallible authority to teach bishops, priests, and people    in matters of faith or morals will last till the end of the world. 

 

128. Q. Has the Church any marks by which it may be known?

A. The Church has four marks by which it may be known: it is One; it is Holy;    it is Catholic; it is Apostolic. 

 

129. Q. How is the Church One?

A. The Church is One because all its members agree in one faith, are all in    one communion, and are all under one Head. 

 

130. Q. How is the Church Holy?

A. The Church is Holy because its founder, Jesus Christ, is holy; because it    teaches a holy doctrine; invites all to a holy life; and because of the eminent    holiness of so many thousands of its children. 

 

131. Q. How is the Church Catholic or universal?

A. The Church is Catholic or universal because it subsists in all ages, teaches    all nations, and maintains all truth. 

 

132. Q. How is the Church Apostolic?

A. The Church is Apostolic because it was founded by Christ on His Apostles,    and is governed by their lawful successors, and because it has never ceased,    and never will cease, to teach their doctrine. 

 

133. Q. In which Church are these attributes and marks found?

A. These attributes and marks are found in the Holy Roman Catholic Church alone.  

 

134. Q. From whom does the Church derive its undying life and infallible authority?

A. The Church derives its undying life and infallible authority from the Holy    Ghost, the spirit of truth, who abides with it forever. 

 

135. Q. By whom is the Church made and kept One, Holy, and Catholic?

A. The Church is made and kept One, Holy, and Catholic by the Holy Ghost, the    spirit of love and holiness, who unites and sanctifies its members throughout    the world. 

 

 

LESSON THIRTEENTH: ON THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL

 

136. Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an outward sign instituted by Christ to give grace.  

 

137. Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. There are seven Sacraments: Baptism, Confirmation, Holy Eucharist,    Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony. 

 

138. Q. Whence have the Sacraments the power of giving grace?

A. The Sacraments have the power of giving grace from the merits of    Jesus Christ. 

 

139. Q. What grace do the Sacraments give?

A. Some of the Sacraments give sanctifying grace, and others increase    it in our souls. 

 

140. Q. Which are the Sacraments that give sanctifying grace?

A. The Sacraments that give sanctifying grace are Baptism and Penance; and    they are called Sacraments of the dead. 

 

141. Q. Why are Baptism and Penance called Sacraments of the dead?

A. Baptism and Penance are called Sacraments of the dead, because they take    away sin, which is the death of the soul, and give grace, which is its life.  

 

142. Q. Which are the Sacraments that increase sanctifying grace in our soul?

A. The Sacraments that increase sanctifying grace in our soul are: Confirmation,    Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony; and they are called    Sacraments of the living. 

 

143. Q. Why are Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders,    and Matrimony called Sacraments of the living?

A. Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony    are called Sacraments of the living, because those who receive them worthily    are already living the life of grace. 

 

144. Q. What sin does he commit who receives the Sacraments of the living    in mortal sin?

A. He who receives the Sacraments of the living in mortal sin commits    a sacrilege, which is a great sin, because it is an abuse of a sacred thing.  

 

145. Q. Besides sanctifying grace do the Sacraments give any other grace?

A. Besides sanctifying grace the Sacraments give another grace, called    sacramental. 

 

146. Q. What is sacramental grace?

A. Sacramental grace is a special help which God gives, to attain the    end for which He instituted each Sacrament. 

 

147. Q. Do the Sacraments always give grace?

A. The Sacraments always give grace, if we receive them with the right    dispositions. 

 

148. Q. Can we receive the Sacraments more than once?

A. We can receive the Sacraments more than once, except Baptism. Confirmation,    and Holy Orders. 

 

149. Q. Why can we not receive Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders more    than once?

A. We cannot receive Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders more than    once, because they imprint a character in the soul. 

 

150. Q. What is the character which these Sacraments imprint in the soul?

A. The character which these Sacraments imprint in the soul is a spiritual    mark which remains forever. 

 

151. Q. Does this character remain in the soul even after death?

A. This character remains in the soul even after death: for the honor    and glory of those who are saved; for the shame and punishment of those who    are lost. 

 

 

LESSON FOURTEENTH: ON BAPTISM

 

152. Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament which cleanses us from original sin, makes    us Christians, children of God, and heirs of heaven. 

 

153. Q Are actual sins ever remitted by Baptism?

A. Actual sins and all the punishment due to them are remitted by Baptism,    if the person baptized be guilty of any. 

 

154. Q. Is Baptism necessary to salvation?

A. Baptism is necessary to salvation, because without it we cannot enter    into the kingdom of heaven. 

 

155. Q. Who can administer Baptism?

A. The priest is the ordinary minister of Baptism; but in case of necessity    any one who has the use of reason may baptize. 

 

156. Q. How is Baptism given?

A. Whoever baptizes should pour water on the head of the person to be    baptized, and say, while pouring the water: I baptize thee in the name of    the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 

 

157. Q. How many kinds of Baptism are there?

A. There are three kinds of Baptism: Baptism of water, of desire, and    of blood. 

 

158. Q. What is Baptism of water?

A. Baptism of water is that which is given by pouring water on the head    of the person to be baptized, and saying at the same time: I baptize thee    in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 

 

159. Q. What is Baptism of desire?

A. Baptism of desire is an ardent wish to receive Baptism, and to do    all that God has ordained for our salvation. 

 

160. Q. What is Baptism of blood?

A. Baptism of blood is the shedding of one's blood for the faith of Christ.  

 

161. Q. Is Baptism of desire or of blood sufficient to produce the effects    of Baptism of water?

A. Baptism of desire or of blood is sufficient to produce the effects    of the Baptism of water, if it is impossible to receive the Baptism of water.  

 

162. Q. What do we promise in Baptism?

A. In Baptism we promise to renounce the devil with all his works and    pomps. 

 

163. Q. Why is the name of a saint given in Baptism?

A. The name of a saint is given in Baptism in order that the person    baptized may imitate his virtues and have him for a protector. 

 

164. Q. Why are godfathers and godmothers given in Baptism?

A. Godfathers and godmothers are given in Baptism in order that they    may promise, in the name of the child, what the child itself would promise if    it had the use of reason. 

 

165. Q. What is the obligation of a godfather and a godmother?

A. The obligation of a godfather and a godmother is to instruct the    child in its religious duties, if the parents neglect to do so or die. 

 

 

 LESSON FIFTEENTH: ON CONFIRMATION

 

166. Q. What is Confirmation?

A. Confirmation is a Sacrament through which we receive the Holy Ghost to make    us strong and perfect Christians and soldiers of Jesus Christ. 

 

167. Q. Who administers Confirmation?

A. The bishop is the ordinary minister of Confirmation. 

 

168. Q. How does the bishop give Confirmation?

A. The bishop extends his hands over those who are to be confirmed,    prays that they may receive the Holy Ghost, and anoints the forehead of each    with holy chrism in the form of a cross. 

 

169. Q. What is holy chrism?

A. Holy chrism is a mixture of olive-oil and balm, consecrated by the    bishop. 

 

170. Q. What does the bishop say in anointing the person he confirms?

A. In anointing the person he confirms the bishop says: I sign thee    with the sign of the cross, and I confirm thee with the chrism of salvation,    in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 

 

171. Q. What is meant by anointing the forehead with chrism in the form of    a cross?

A. By anointing the forehead with chrism in the form of a cross is meant,    that the Christian who is confirmed must openly profess and practice his faith,    never be ashamed of it, and rather die than deny it. 

 

172. Q. Why does the bishop give the person he confirms a slight blow on the    cheek?

A. The bishop gives the person he confirms a slight blow on the cheek,    to put him in mind that he must be ready to suffer everything, even death, for    the sake of Christ. 

 

173. Q. To receive Confirmation worthily is it necessary to be in the state    of grace?

A. To receive Confirmation worthily it is necessary to be in the state    of grace. 

 

174. Q. What special preparation should be made to receive Confirmation?

A. Persons of an age to learn should know the chief mysteries of faith    and the duties of a Christian, and be instructed in the nature and effects of    this Sacrament. 

 

175. Q. Is it a sin to neglect Confirmation?

A. It is a sin to neglect Confirmation, especially in these evil days    when faith and morals are exposed to so many and such violent temptations. 

 

 

LESSON SIXTEENTH: ON THE GIFTS AND FRUITS OF THE HOLY GHOST

 

176. Q. Which are the effects of Confirmation?

A. The effects of Confirmation are an increase of sanctifying grace,    the strengthening of our faith, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost. 

 

177. Q. Which are the gifts of the Holy Ghost?

A. The gifts of the Holy Ghost are Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude,    Knowledge, Piety and Fear of the Lord. 

 

178. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Fear of the Lord?

A. We receive the gift of Fear of the Lord to fill us with a dread of    sin. 

 

179. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Piety?

A. We receive the gift of Piety to make us love God as a Father and    obey Him because we love Him. 

 

180. Q. Why do we receive the gift of KnowIedge?

A. We receive the gift of Knowledge to enable us to discover the will    of God in all things. 

 

181. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Fortitude?

A. We receive the gift of Fortitude to strengthen us to do the will    of God in all things. 

 

182. Q Why do we receive the gift of Counsel?

A. We receive the gift of Counsel to warn us of the deceits of the devil,    and of the dangers to salvation. 

 

183. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Understanding?

A. We receive the gift of Understanding to enable us to know more clearly    the mysteries of faith. 

 

184. Q. Why do we receive the gift of Wisdom?

A. We receive the gift of Wisdom to give us a relish for the things    of God, and to direct our whole life and all our actions to His honor and glory.  

 

185. Q. Which are the Beatitudes?

A. The Beatitudes are: 

    Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.    Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the land.    Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.    Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall be      filled.    Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.    Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God.    Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.       Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice sake, for theirs is      the kingdom of heaven.   

186. Q. Which are the twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost?

A. The twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost are Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience, Benignity,    Goodness, Long-suffering, Mildness, Faith, Modesty, Continency, and Chastity.  

 

 

 

LESSON SEVENTEENTH: ON THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE

 

187. Q. What is the Sacrament of Penance?

A. Penance is a Sacrament in which the sins committed after Baptism are forgiven.  

 

188. Q. How does the Sacrament of Penance remit sin, and restore to the soul    the friendship of God?

A. The Sacrament of Penance remits sins and restores the friendship of God    to the soul by means of the absolution of the priest. 

 

189. Q. How do you know that the priest has the power of absolving from the    sins committed after Baptism?

A. I know that the priest has the power of absolving from the sins committed    after Baptism, because Jesus Christ granted that power to the priests of His    Church when He said: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose sins you shall forgive,    they are forgiven them; whose sins you shall retain, they are retained."  

 

190. Q. How do the priests of the Church exercise the power of forgiving sins?

A. The priests of the Church exercise the power of forgiving sins by hearing    the confession of sins, and granting pardon for them as ministers of God and    in His name. 

 

191. Q. What must we do to receive the Sacrament of Penance worthily?

A. To receive the Sacrament of Penance worthily we must do five things: 

    We must examine our conscience.    We must have sorrow for our sins.    We must make a firm resolution never more to offend God.    We must confess our sins to the priest.    We must accept the penance which the priest gives us.   

192. Q. What is the examination of conscience?

A. The examination of conscience is an earnest effort to recall to mind all    the sins we have committed since our last worthy confession. 

 

193. Q. How can we make a good examination of conscience?

A. We can make a good examination of conscience by calling to memory the commandments    of God, the precepts of the Church, the seven capital sins, and the particular    duties of our state in life, to find out the sins we have committed. 

 

194. Q. What should we do before beginning the examination of conscience?

A. Before beginning the examination of conscience we should pray to God to    give us light to know our sins and grace to detest them. 

 

 

 

LESSON EIGHTEENTH: ON CONTRITION

 

 

 

195. Q. What is Contrition, or sorrow for sin?

A. Contrition, or sorrow for sin, is a hatred of sin and a true grief    of the soul for having offended God, with a firm purpose of sinning no more.  

 

196. Q. What kind of sorrow should we have for our sins?

A. The sorrow we should have for our sins should be interior, supernatural,    universal, and sovereign. 

 

197. Q. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be interior?

A. When I say that our sorrow should be interior, I mean that it should    come from the heart, and not merely from the lips. 

 

198. Q. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be supernatural?

A. When I say that our sorrow should be supernatural, I mean that it    should be prompted by the grace of God, and excited by motives which spring    from faith, and not by merely natural motives. 

 

199. Q. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be universal?

A. When I say that our sorrow should be universal, I mean that we should    be sorry for all our mortal sins without exception. 

 

200. Q. What do you mean when you say that our sorrow should be sovereign?

A. When I say that our sorrow should be sovereign, I mean that we should    grieve more for having offended God than for any other evil that can befall    us. 

 

201. Q. Why should we be sorry for our sins?

A. We should be sorry for our sins, because sin is the greatest of evils    and an offense against God our Creator, Preserver, and Redeemer, and because    it shuts us out of heaven and condemns us to the eternal pains of hell. 

 

202. Q. How many ]kinds of contrition are there?

A. There are two kinds of contrition: perfect contrition and imperfect contrition.  

 

203. Q. What is perfect contrition?

A. Perfect contrition is that which fills us with sorrow and hatred    for sin, because it offends God, who is infinitely good in Himself and worthy    of all love. 

 

204. Q. What is imperfect contrition?

A. Imperfect contrition is that by which we hate what offends God, because    by it we lose heaven and deserve hell; or because sin is so hateful in itself.  

 

205. Q. Is imperfect contrition sufficient for a worthy confession?

A. Imperfect contrition is sufficient for a worthy confession, but we    should endeavor to have perfect contrition. 

 

206. Q. What do you mean by a firm purpose of sinning no more?

A. By a firm purpose of sinning no more I mean a fixed resolve not only    to avoid all mortal sin, but also its near occasions. 

 

207. Q. What do you mean by the near occasions of sin?

A. By the near occasions of sin I mean all the persons, places, and    things that may easily lead us into sin. 

 

 

LESSON NINETEENTH: ON CONFESSION

 

208. Q. What is Confession?

A. Confession is the telling of our sins to a duly authorized priest,    for the purpose of obtaining forgiveness. 

 

209. Q. What sins are we bound to confess?

A. We are bound to confess all our mortal sins. but it is well also    to confess our venial sins. 

 

210. Q. Which are the chief qualities of a good Confession?

A. The chief qualities of a good Confession are three: it must be humble,    sincere, and entire. 

 

211. Q. When is our Confession humble?

A. Our Confession is humble, when we accuse our selves of our sins,    with a deep sense of shame and sorrow for having offended God. 

 

212. Q. When is our Confession sincere?

A. Our Confession is sincere, when we tell our sins honestly and truthfully,    neither exaggerating nor excusing them. 

 

213. Q. When is our Confession entire?

A. Our Confession is entire, when we tell the number and kinds of our    sins and the circumstances which change their nature. 

 

214. Q. What should we do if we cannot remember the number of our sins?

A. If we cannot remember the number of our sins, we should tell the    number as nearly as possible, and say how often we may have sinned in a day,    a week, or a month, and how long the habit or practice has lasted. 

 

215. Q. Is our Confession worthy if, without our fault, we forget to confess    a mortal sin?

A. If without our fault we forget to confess a mortal sin, Tour Confession    is worthy, and the sin is forgiven; but it must be told in Confession if it    again comes to our mind. 

 

216. Q. Is it a grievous offense willfully to conceal a mortal sin in Confession?

A. It is a grievous offense willfully to conceal a mortal sin in Confession,    because we thereby tell a lie to the Holy Ghost, and make our Confession worthless.  

 

217. Q. What must he do who has willfully concealed a mortal sin in Confession?

A. He who has willfully concealed a mortal sin in Confession must not    only confess it, but must also repeat all the sins he has committed since his    last worthy Confession. 

 

218. Q. Why does the priest give us a penance after Confession?

A. The priest gives us a penance after Confession, that we may satisfy    God for the temporal punishment due to our sins. 

 

219. Q. Does not the Sacrament of Penance remit all punishment duo to sin?

A. The Sacrament of Penance remits the eternal punishment due to sin,    but it does not always remit the temporal punishment which God requires as satisfaction    for our sins. 

 

220. Q. Why does God require a temporal punishment as a satisfaction for sin?

A. God requires a temporal punishment as a satisfaction for sin, to    teach us the great evil of sin and to prevent us from falling again. 

 

221. Q. Which are the chief means by which we satisfy God for the temporal    punishment due to sin?

A. The chief means by which we satisfy God for the temporal punishment    due to sin are: Prayer, Fasting, Almsgiving, all spiritual and corporal works    of mercy, and the patient suffering of the ills of life. 

 

222. Q. Which are the chief spiritual works of mercy?

A. The chief spiritual works of mercy are seven: To admonish the sinner,    to instruct the ignorant, to counsel the doubtful, to comfort the sorrowful,    to bear wrongs patiently, to forgive all injuries, and to pray for the living    and the dead. 

 

223. Q. Which are the chief corporal works of mercy?

A. The chief corporal works of mercy are seven: To feed the hungry, to give    drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, to ransom the captive, to harbor    the harborless, to visit the sick, and to bury the dead. 

 

 

LESSON TWENTIETH: ON THE MANNER OF MAKING A GOOD CONFESSION

 

224. Q. What should we do on entering the confessional?

A. On entering the confessional we should kneel, make the sign of the    Cross, and say to the priest, Bless me, Father; then add, I confess to Almighty    God and to you, Father, that I have sinned. 

 

225. Q. Which are the first things we should tell. the priest in Confession?

A. The first things we should tell the priest in Confession are the    time of our last Confession, and whether we said the penance and went to Holy    Communion. 

 

226. Q. After telling the time of our last Confession and Communion what should    we do?

A. After telling the time of our last Confession and Communion we should    confess all the mortal sins we have since committed, and all the venial sins    we may wish to mention. 

 

227. Q. What must we do when the confessor asks us questions?

A. When the confessor asks us questions we must answer them truthfully    and clearly. 

 

228. Q. What should we do after telling our sins?

A. After telling our sins we should listen with attention to the advice    which the confessor may think proper to give. 

 

229. Q. How should we and our Confession?

A. We should end our Confession by saying, I also accuse myself of    all the sins of my past life, telling, if we choose, one or several of our    past sins. 

 

230. Q. What should we do while the priest is giving us absolution?

A. While the priest is giving us absolution we should from our heart    renew the Act of Contrition. 

 

 

LESSON TWENTY-FIRST: ON INDULGENCES

 

231. Q. What is an Indulgence?

A. An Indulgence is the remission in whole or in part of the temporal    punishment due to sin. 

 

232. Q. Is an Indulgence a pardon of sin, or a license to commit sin?

A. An Indulgence is not a pardon of sin, nor a license to commit sin,    and one who is in a state of mortal sin cannot gain an Indulgence. 

 

233. Q. How many kinds of Indulgences are there?

A. There are two kinds of Indulgences-Plenary and Partial. 

 

234. Q. What is a Plenary Indulgence?

A. A Plenary Indulgence is the full remission of the temporal punishment    due to sin. 

 

235. Q. What is a Partial Indulgence?

A. A Partial Indulgence is the remission of a part of the temporal punishment    due to sin. 

 

236. Q. How does the Church by means of Indulgences remit the temporal punishment    due to sin?

A. The Church by means of Indulgences remits the temporal punishment    due to sin by applying to us the merits of Jesus Christ, and the superabundant    satisfactions of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the saints; which merits and    satisfactions are its spiritual treasury. 

 

237. Q. What must we do to gain an Indulgence?

A. To gain an Indulgence we must be in the state of grace and perform    the works enjoined. 

 

 

 

LESSON TWENTY-SECOND: ON THE HOLY EUCHARIST

 

238. Q. What is the Holy Eucharist?

A. The Holy Eucharist is the Sacrament which contains the body and blood,    soul and divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ under the appearances of bread and    wine. 

 

239. Q. When did Christ institute the Holy Eucharist?

A. Christ instituted the Holy Eucharist at the Last Supper, the night    before He died. 

 

240. Q. Who were present when our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist?

A. When our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist the twelve Apostles were    present. 

 

241. Q. How did our Lord institute the Holy Eucharist?

A. Our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist by taking bread, blessing,    breaking, and giving to His Apostles, saying: Take ye and eat. This is My    body; and then by taking the cup of wine, blessing and giving it,    saying to them: Drink ye all of this. This is My blood which shall be shed    for the remission of Sins. Do this for a commemoration of Me. 

 

242. Q. What happened when our Lord said, This is My body; this is My blood?

A. When our Lord said, This is My body, the substance of the    bread was changed into the substance of His body; when He said, This is    My blood, the substance of the wine was changed into the substance of    His blood. 

 

243. Q. Is Jesus Christ whole and entire both under the form of bread and    under the form of wine?

A. Jesus Christ is whole and entire both under the form of bread and    Under the form of wine. 

 

244. Q. Did anything remain of the bread and wine after their substance had    been changed into the substance of the body and blood of our Lord?

A. After the substance of the bread and wine had been changed into the    substance of the body and blood of our Lord there remained only the appearances    of bread and wine. 

 

245. Q. What do you mean by the appearances of bread and wine?

A. By the appearances of bread and wine I mean the figure, the color,    the taste, and whatever appears to the senses. 

 

246. Q. What is this change of the bread and wine into the body and blood    of our Lord called?

A. This change of the bread and wine into the body and blood of our    Lord is called Transubstantiation. 

 

247. Q. How was the substance of the bread and wine changed into the substance    of the body and blood of Christ?

A. The substance of the bread and wine was changed into the substance    of the body and blood of Christ by His almighty power. 

 

248. Q. Does this change of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ    continue to be made in the Church?

A. This change of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ continues    to be made in the Church by Jesus Christ through the ministry of His priests.  

 

249. Q. When did Christ give His priests the power to change bread and wine    into His body and blood?

A. Christ gave His priests the power to change bread and wine into His    body and blood when He said to the Apostles, Do this in commemoration of    Me. 

 

250. Q. How do the priests exercise this power of changing broad and wine    into the body and blood of Christ?

A. The priests exercise this power of changing bread and wine into the    body and blood of Christ through the words of consecration in the Mass, which    are the words of Christ: This is My body; this is My blood. 

 

 

LESSON TWENTY-THIRD: ON THE ENDS FOR WHICH THE HOLY EUCHARIST WAS INSTITUTED

 

251. Q. Why did Christ institute the Holy Eucharist?

A. Christ instituted the Holy Eucharist: 

    To unite us to Himself and to nourish our soul with His divine life.    To increase sanctifying grace and all virtues in our soul.    To lessen our evil inclinations.    To be a pledge of everlasting life.    To fit our bodies for a glorious resurrection.    To continue the sacrifice of the Cross in His Church.  

252. Q. How are we united to Jesus Christ in the Holy Eucharist?

A. We are united to Jesus Christ in the Holy Eucharist by means of Holy    Communion. 

 

 

 

253. Q. What is Holy Communion?

A. Holy Communion is the receiving of the body and blood of Christ.  

 

 

 

254. Q. What is necessary to make a good Communion?

A. To make a good Communion it is necessary to be in the state of sanctifying    grace, to have a right intention, and to obey the laws of fasting. (See Q. 257.)  

 

 

 

255. Q. Does he who receives Communion in mortal sin receive the body and    blood of Christ?

A. He who receives Communion in mortal sin receives the body and blood    of Christ, but does not receive His grace, and he commits a great sacrilege.  

 

 

 

256. Q. Is it enough to be free from mortal sin to receive Plentifully the    graces of Holy Communion?

    To receive plentifully the graces of Holy Communion it is not enough to      be free from mortal sin, but we should be free from all affection to venial      sin, and should make acts of faith, hope, and love. 

 

257. Q. What is the fast necessary for Holy Communion?

A. The fast necessary for Holy Communion is to abstain from all food,    beverages, and alcoholic drinks for one hour before Holy Communion. Water may    be taken at any time. The sick may take food, non-alcoholic drinks, and any    medicine up to Communion time. * 

* This answer has been changed in the 1977 printing to bring it        up to date with the current rules. 

     

258. Q. Is any one ever allowed to receive Holy Communion when not fasting?

A. Any one in danger of death is allowed to receive Holy Communion when    not fasting or when it is necessary to save the Blessed Sacrament from insult    or injury. 

 

259. Q. When are we bound to receive Holy Communion?

A. We are bound to receive Holy Communion, under pain of mortal sin,    during the Easter time and when in danger of death. 

 

260. Q. Is it well to receive Holy Communion often?

A. It is well to receive Holy Communion often, as nothing is a greater    aid to a holy life than often to receive the Author of all grace and the Source    of all good. 

 

261. Q. What should we do after Holy Communion?

A. After Holy Communion we should spend some time in adoring our Lord,    in thanking Him for the grace we have received, and in asking Him for the blessings    we need. 

 

     

LESSON TWENTY-FOURTH: ON THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS

 

262. Q. When and where are the bread and wine changed into the body and blood    of Christ?

A. The bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ    at the Consecration in the Mass. 

 

263. Q. What is the Mass?

A. The Mass is the unbloody sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ.  

 

264. Q. What is a sacrifice?

A. A sacrifice is the offering of an object by a priest to God alone,    and the consuming of it to acknowledge that He is the Creator and Lord of all    things. 

 

265. Q. Is the Mass the same sacrifice as that of the Cross?

A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the Cross. 

 

266. Q. How is the Mass the same sacrifice as that of the Cross?

A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the Cross because the offering    and the priest are the same-Christ our Blessed Lord; and the ends for which    the sacrifice of the Mass is offered are the same as those of the sacrifice    of the Cross. 

 

267. Q. What were the ends for which the sacrifice of the Cross was offered?

A. The ends for which the sacrifice of the Cross was offered were: 

         To honor and glorify God;      To thank Him for all the graces bestowed on the whole world;      To satisfy God's justice for the sins of men;      To obtain all graces and blessings.      

268. Q. Is there any difference between the sacrifice of the Cross and        the sacrifice of the Mass?

A. Yes; the manner in which the sacrifice is offered is different.        On the Cross Christ really shed His blood and was really slain; in the Mass        there is no real shedding of blood nor real death, because Christ can die        no more; but the sacrifice of the Mass, through the separate consecration        of the bread and the wine, represents His death on the Cross. 

     

269. Q. How should we assist at Mass?

A. We should assist at Mass with great interior recollection and        piety and with every outward mark of respect and devotion. 

     

270. Q. Which is the best manner of hearing Mass?

A. The best manner of hearing Mass is to offer it to God with the priest        for the same purpose for which it is said, to meditate on Christ's sufferings        and death, and to go to Holy Communion. 

 

 

     

LESSON TWENTY-FIFTH: ON EXTREME UNCTION AND HOLY ORDERS

     

271. Q. What is the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?

A. Extreme Unction is the Sacrament which, through the anointing        and prayer of the priest, gives health and strength to the soul, and sometimes        to the body, when we are in danger of death from sickness. 

     

272. Q. When should we receive Extreme Unction?

A. We should receive Extreme Unction when we are in danger of death        from sickness, or from a wound or accident. 

     

273. Q. Should we wait until we are in extreme danger before we receive        Extreme Unction?

A. We should not wait until we are in extreme danger before we receive        Extreme Unction, but if possible we should receive it whilst we have the        use of our senses. 

     

274. Q. Which are the effects of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?

A. The effects of Extreme Unction are: 

     To comfort us in the pains of sickness and to strengthen us against        temptation;      To remit venial sins and to cleanse our soul from the remains of sin;           To restore us to health, when God sees fit.     

275. Q. What do you mean by the remains of sin?

A. By the remains of sin I mean the inclination to evil and the weakness    of the will which are the result of our sins, and which remain after our sins    have been forgiven. 

 

276. Q. How should we receive the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?

A. We should receive the Sacrament of Extreme Unction in the state of    grace, and with lively faith and resignation to the will of God. 

 

277. Q. Who is the minister of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?

 

A. The priest is the minister of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.

 

278. Q. What is the Sacrament of Holy Orders?

A. Holy Orders is a Sacrament by which bishops, priests, and other ministers    of the Church are ordained and receive the power and grace to perform their    sacred duties. 

 

279. Q. What is necessary to receive Holy orders worthily?

A. To receive Holy Orders worthily it is necessary to be in the state    of grace, to have the necessary knowledge and a divine call to this sacred office.  

 

280. Q. How should Christians look upon the priests of the Church?

A. Christians should look upon the priests of the Church as the messengers    of God and the dispensers of His mysteries. 

 

281. Q. Who can confer the Sacrament of Holy Orders?

A. Bishops can confer the Sacrament of Holy Orders. 

 

     

LESSON TWENTY-SIXTH: ON MATRIMONY

 

 

 

282. Q. What is the Sacrament of Matrimony?

A. The Sacrament of Matrimony is the Sacrament which unites a Christian    man and woman in lawful marriage. 

 

283. Q. Can a Christian man and woman be united in lawful marriage in any    other way than by the Sacrament of Matrimony?

A. A Christian man and woman cannot be united in lawful marriage in    any other way than by the Sacrament of Matrimony, because Christ raised marriage    to the dignity of a Sacrament. 

 

 

 

284. Q. Can the bond of Christian marriage be dissolved by any human power?

A. The bond of Christian marriage cannot be dissolved by any human power.  

 

 

 

285. Q. Which are the effects of the Sacrament of Matrimony?

A. The effects of the Sacrament of Matrimony are: 

        To sanctify the love of husband and wife;    To give them grace to bear with each other's weaknesses;    To enable them to bring up their children in the fear and love of God.  

 

 

286. Q. To receive the Sacrament of matrimony worthily is it necessary to    be in the state of grace?

A. To receive the Sacrament of Matrimony worthily it is necessary to    be in the state of grace, and it is necessary also to comply with the laws of    the Church. 

 

287. Q. Who has the right to make laws concerning the Sacrament of marriage?

A. The Church alone has the right to make laws concerning the Sacrament of    marriage, though the state also has the right to make laws concerning the civil    effects of the marriage contract. 

 

288. Q. Does the Church forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons who    have a different religion or no religion at all?

A. The Church does forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons who    have a different religion or no religion at all. 

 

289. Q. Why does the Church forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons    who have a different religion or no religion at all?

     The Church forbids the marriage of Catholics with persons who have a different      religion or no religion at all, because such marriages generally lead to indifference,      loss of faith, and to the neglect of the religious education of the children.  

290. Q. Why do many marriages prove unhappy?

A. Many marriages prove unhappy because they are entered into hastily    and without worthy motives. 

 

291. Q. How should Christians prepare for a holy and happy marriage?

A. Christians should prepare for a holy and happy marriage by receiving    the Sacraments of Penance and Holy Eucharist; by begging God to grant them a    pure intention and to direct their choice; and by seeking the advice of their    parents and the blessing of their pastors. 

 

     

 

     

LESSON TWENTY-SEVENTH: ON THE SACRAMENTALS

 

 

 

292. Q. What is a sacramental?

A. A sacramental is anything set apart or blessed by the Church to excite    good thoughts and to increase devotion, and through these movements of the heart    to remit venial sin. 

 

293. Q. What is the difference between the Sacraments and the sacramentals?

A. The difference between the Sacraments and the sacramentals is:      

             The Sacraments were instituted by Jesus Christ and the sacramentals were        instituted by the Church;      The Sacraments give grace of themselves when we place no obstacle in the        way; the sacramentals excite in us pious dispositions, by means of which        we may obtain grace.      

294. Q. Which is the chief sacramental used in the Church?

A. The chief sacramental used in the Church is the sign of the Cross.      

     

295. Q. How do we make the sign of the Cross?

A. We make the sign of the Cross by putting the right hand to the        forehead, then on the breast, and then to the left and right shoulders,        saying, In the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.        Amen. 

     

296. Q. Why do we make the sign of the Cross?

A. We make the sign of the Cross to show that we are Christians        and to profess our belief in the chief mysteries of our religion. 

     

297. Q. How is the sign of the Cross a profession of faith in the chief        mysteries of our religion?

A. The sign of the Cross is a profession of faith in the chief mysteries        of our religion because it expresses the mysteries of the Unity and Trinity        of God and of the Incarnation and death of our Lord. 

     

298. Q. How does the sign of the Cross express the mystery of the Unity        and Trinity of God?

A. The words, In the name, express the Unity of God; the        words that follow, of the Father, and of the Son, and of        the Holy Ghost, express the mystery of the Trinity. 

     

299. Q. How does the sign of the Cross express the mystery of the Incarnation        and death of our Lord?

A. The sign of the Cross expresses the mystery of the Incarnation        by reminding us that the Son of God, having become man, suffered death on        the cross. 

     

300. Q. What other sacramental is in very frequent use?

A. Another sacramental in very frequent use is holy water. 

     

301. Q. What is holy water?

A. Holy water is water blessed by the priest with solemn prayer        to beg God's blessing on those who use it, and protection from the powers        of darkness. 

     

302. Q. Are there other sacramentals besides the sign of the Cross and        holy water?

A. Besides the sign of the Cross and holy water there are many other        sacramentals, such as blessed candles, ashes, palms, crucifixes, images        of the Blessed Virgin and of the saints, rosaries, and scapulars. 

 

     

LESSON TWENTY-EIGHTH: ON PRAYER

     

 

     

303. Q. Is there any other means of obtaining God's grace than the Sacraments?

A. There is another means of obtaining God's grace, and it is prayer.      

     

304. Q. What is prayer?

A. Prayer is the lifting up of our minds and hearts to God to adore        Him, to thankHim for His benefits, to ask His forgiveness, and to beg of        Him all the graces we need whether for soul or body. 

     

305. Q. Is prayer necessary to salvation?

A. Prayer is necessary to salvation, and without it no one having        the use of reason can be saved. 

     

306. Q. At what particular times should we pray?

A. We should pray particularly on Sundays and holydays, every morning        and night, in all dangers, temptations, and afflictions. 

     

307. Q. How should we pray?

A. We should pray: 

     With attention;      With a sense of our own helplessness and dependence upon God;      With a great desire for the graces we beg of God;      With trust in God's goodness;      With perseverance.     

308. Q. Which are the prayers most recommended to Us?

A. The prayers most recommended to us are the Lord's Prayer, the        Hail Mary, the Apostles' Creed, the Confiteor, and the Acts of Faith, Hope,        Love, and Contrition. 

     

309. Q. Are prayers said with distractions of any avail?

A. Prayers said with willful distractions are of no avail. 

 

     

LESSON TWENTY-NINTH: ON THE COMMANDMENTS OF GOD

     

 

     

310. Q. is it enough to belong to God's Church in order to be saved?

A. It is not enough to belong to the Church in order to be saved,        but we must also keep the Commandments of God and of the Church. 

     

311. Q. Which are the Commandments that contain the whole law of God?

A. The Commandments which contain the whole law of God are these        two: 

     Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, with thy        whole soul, with thy whole strength, and with thy whole mind;      Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.     

 

 

312. Q. Why do these two Commandments of the love of God and of our neighbor    contain the whole law of God?

A. These two Commandments of the love of God and of our neighbor contain the    whole law of God because all the other Commandments are given either to help    us to keep these two, or to direct us how to shun what is opposed to them. 

 

313. Q. Which are the Commandments of God?

A. The Commandments of God are these ten. 

    I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of      the house of bondage. Thou shalt not have strange gods before Me. Thou shalt      not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likeness of anything that is in      heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor of those things that are in the      waters under the earth. Thou shalt not adore them, nor serve them.    Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.    Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.    Honor thy father and thy mother.    Thou shalt not kill.    Thou shalt not commit adultery.    Thou shalt not steal.    Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.    Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife.    Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods.  

314. Q. Who gave the Ten Commandments?

A. God Himself gave the Ten Commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai. and    Christ our Lord confirmed them. 

 

 

 

 

 LESSON THIRTIETH: ON THE FIRST COMMANDMENT

 

315. Q. What is the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment is: I am the Lord thy God: thou shalt not have    strange gods before Me. 

 

316. Q. How does the first Commandment help us to keep the great Commandment    of the love of God?

A. The first Commandment helps us to keep the great Commandment of the    love of God because it commands us to adore God alone. 

 

317. Q. How do we adore God?

A. We adore God by faith, hope, and charity, by prayer and sacrifice.  

 

318. Q. How may the first Commandment be broken?

A. The first Commandment may be broken by giving to a creature the honor    which belongs to God alone; by false worship; and by attributing to a creature    a perfection which belongs to God alone. 

 

319. Q. Do those who make use of spells and charms, or who believe in dreams,    in mediums, spiritists, fortune-tellers, and the like, sin against the first    Commandment?

A. Those who make use of spells and charms, or who believe in dreams,    in mediums, spiritists, fortunetellers and the like, sin against the first Commandment,    because they attribute to creatures perfections which belong to God alone. 

 

320. Q. Are sins against faith, hope and charity also sins against the first    Commandment?

A. Sins against faith, hope, and charity are also sins against the first    Commandment. 

 

321. Q. How does a person sin against faith?

A. A person sins against faith: 

         by not trying to know what God has taught;      by refusing to believe all that God has taught;      by neglecting to profess his belief in what God has taught.     

322. Q. How do we fail to try to know what God has taught?

A. We fail to try to know what God has taught by neglecting to learn    the Christian doctrine. 

 

323. Q. Who are they who do not believe all that God has taught?

A. They who do not believe all that God has taught are the heretics    and infidels. 

 

324. Q. Who are they who neglect to profess their belief in what-God has taught?

A. They who neglect to profess their belief in what God has taught are    all those who fail to acknowledge the true Church in which they really believe.  

 

325. Q. Can they who fail to profess their faith in the true Church in which    they believe expect to be saved while in that state?

A. They who fail to profess their faith in the true Church in which    they believe cannot expect to be saved while in that state, for Christ has said:    " Whoever shall deny Me before men, I will also deny him before My Father who    is in heaven." 

 

326. Q. Are we obliged to make open profession of our faith?

A. We are obliged to make open profession of our faith as often as God's    honor, our neighbor's spiritual good, or our own requires it. "Whosoever," says    Christ, "shall confess Me before men, I will also confess him before My Father    who is in heaven." 

 

327. Q. Which are the sins against hope?

A. The sins against hope are presumption and despair. 

 

328. Q. What is presumption?

A. Presumption is a rash expectation of salvation without making proper    use of the necessary means to obtain it. 

 

329. Q. What is despair?

A. Despair is the loss of hope in God's mercy. 

 

330. Q. How do we sin against the love of God?

A. We sin against the love of God by all sin, but particularly by mortal    sin. 

 

 

     

LESSON THIRTY-FIRST: THE FIRST COMMANDMENT--ON THE HONOR AND INVOCATION OF    SAINTS

 

 

 

331. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid the honoring of the saints?

A. The first Commandment does not forbid the honoring of the saints,    but rather approves of it; because by honoring the saints, who are the chosen    friends of God, we honor God Himself. 

 

332. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid us to pray to the saints?

A. The first Commandment does not forbid us to pray to the saints. 

 

333. Q. What do we mean by praying to the saints?

A. By praying to the saints we mean the asking of their help and prayers.  

 

334. Q. How do we know that the saints hear us?

A. We know that the saints hear us, because they are with God, who makes    our prayers known to them. 

 

335. Q. Why do we believe that the saints will help us?

A. We believe that the saints will help us because both they and we    are members of the same Church. and they love us as their brethren. 

 

336. Q. How are the saints and we members of the same Church?

A. The saints and we are members of the same Church, because the Church    in heaven and the Church on earth are one and the same Church, and all its members    are in communion with one another. 

 

337. Q. What is the communion of the members of the Church called?

A. The communion of the members of the Church is called the communion    of saints. 

 

338. Q. What does the communion of saints mean?

A. The communion of saints means the union which exists between    the members of the Church on earth with one another, and with the blessed in    heaven and with the suffering souls in purgatory. 

 

339. Q. What benefits are derived from the communion of saints?

A. The following benefits are derived from the communion of saints:--the    faithful on earth assist one another by their prayers and good works, and they    are aided by the intercession of the saints in heaven, while both the saints    in heaven and the faithful on earth help the souls in purgatory. 

 

340. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid us. to honor relics?

A. The first Commandment does not forbid us to honor relics, because    relics are the bodies of the saints, or objects directly connected with them    or with our Lord. 

 

341. Q. Does the first Commandment forbid the making of images?

A. The first Commandment does forbid the making of images if they are    made to be adored as gods, but it does not forbid the making of them to put    us in mind of Jesus Christ, His Blessed Mother, and the saints. 

 

342. Q. Is it right to show respect to the pictures and images of Christ and    His saints?

A. It is right to show respect to the pictures and images of Christ    and His saints, because they are the representations and memorials of them.  

 

343. Q. Is it allowed to pray to the crucifix or to the images and relics    of the saints?

A. It is not allowed to pray to the crucifix or images and relics of    the saints, for they have no life, nor power to help us, nor sense to hear us.  

 

344. Q. Why do we pray before the crucifix and the images and relics of the    saints?

A. We pray before the crucifix and images and relics of the saints because    they enliven our devotion by exciting pious affections and desires, and by reminding    us of Christ and of the saints, that we may imitate their virtues. 

 

     

LESSON THIRTY-SECOND: FROM THE SECOND TO THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT

 

 

 

345. Q. What is the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment is: Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord    thy God in vain. 

 

346. Q. What are we commanded by the second Commandment?

A. We are commanded by the second Commandment to speak with reverence    of God and of the saints, and of all holy things, and to keep our lawful oaths    and vows. 

 

347. Q. What is an oath?

A. An oath is the calling upon God to witness the truth of what we say.  

 

348. Q. When may we take an oath?

A. We may take an oath when it is ordered by lawful authority or required    for God's honor or for our own or our neighbor's good. 

 

349. Q. What is necessary to make an oath lawful?

A. To make an oath lawful it is necessary that what we swear to, be    true, and that there be a sufficient cause for taking an oath. 

 

350. Q. What is a vow?

A. A vow is a deliberate promise made to God to do something that is    pleasing to Him. 

 

351. Q. Is it a sin not to fulfill our vows?

A. Not to fulfill our vows is a sin, mortal or venial, according to    the nature of the vow and the intention we had in making it. 

 

352. Q. What is forbidden by the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment forbids all false, rash, unjust, and unnecessary    oaths, blasphemy, cursing, and profane words. 

 

353. Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment is: Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.  

 

354. Q. What are we commanded by the third Commandment?

A. By the third Commandment we are commanded to keep holy the Lord's    day and the holydays of obligation, on which we are to give our time to the    service and worship of God. 

 

355. Q. How are we to worship God on Sundays and holydays of obligation?

A. We are to worship God on Sundays and holydays of obligation by hearing    Mass, by prayer, and by other good works. 

 

356. Q. Are the Sabbath day and the Sunday the same?

A. The Sabbath day and the Sunday are not the same. The Sabbath is the    seventh day of the week, and is the day which was kept holy in the Old Law;    the Sunday is the first day of the week, and is tile day which is kept holy    in the New Law. 

 

357. Q. Why does the Church command us to keep the Sunday holy instead of    the Sabbath?

A. The Church commands us to keep the Sunday holy instead of the Sabbath    because on Sunday Christ rose from the dead, and on Sunday He sent the Holy    Ghost upon the Apostles. 

 

358. Q. What is forbidden by the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment forbids all unnecessary servile work and whatever    else may hinder the due observance of the Lord's day. 

 

359. Q. What are servile works?

A. Servile works are those which require labor rather of body than of    mind. 

 

360. Q. Are servile works on Sunday ever lawful?

A. Servile works are lawful on Sunday when the honor of God, the good    of our neighbor, or necessity requires them. 

 

     

LESSON THIRTY-THIRD: FROM THE FOURTH TO THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT

 

 

 

361. Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment is: Honor thy father and thy mother. 

 

362. Q. What are we commanded by the fourth Commandment?

A. We are commanded by the fourth Commandment to honor, love, and obey    our parents in all that is not sin. 

 

363. Q. Are we bound to honor and obey others than our parents?

A. We are also bound to honor and obey our bishops, pastors, magistrates,    teachers, and other lawful superiors. 

 

364. Q. Have parents and superiors any duties towards those who are under    their charge?

A. It is the duty of parents and superiors to take good care of all    under their charge and give them proper direction and example. 

 

365. Q. What is forbidden by the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment forbids all disobedience, contempt, and stubbornness    towards our parents or lawful superiors. 

 

366. Q. What is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is: Thou shalt not kill. 

 

367. Q. What are we commanded by the fifth Commandment?

A. We are commanded by the fifth Commandment to live in peace and union    with our neighbor, to respect his rights, to seek his spiritual and bodily welfare,    and to take proper care of our own life and health. 

 

368. Q. What is forbidden by the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment forbids all willful murder, fighting, anger,    hatred, revenge, and bad example. 

 

369. Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment is: Thou shalt not commit adultery. 

 

370. Q. What are we commanded by the sixth Commandment?

A. We are commanded by the sixth Commandment to be pure in thought and    modest in all our looks, words, and actions. 

 

371. Q. What is forbidden by the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth commandment forbids all unchaste freedom with anothers    wife or husband; also all immodesty with ourselves or others in looks, dress,    words, or actions. 

 

372. Q. Does the sixth Commandment forbid the reading of bad and immodest    books and newspapers?

A. The sixth Commandment does forbid the reading of bad and immodest    books and newspapers. 

 

     

 

     

LESSON THIRTY-FOURTH: FROM THE SEVENTH TO THE END OF THE TENTH COMMANDMENT

 

 

 

373. Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment is: Thou shalt not steal. 

 

374. Q. What are we commanded by the seventh Commandment?

A. By the seventh Commandment we are commanded to give to all men what    belongs to them and to respect their property. 

 

375. Q. What is forbidden by the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unjust taking or keeping what    belongs to another. 

 

376. Q. Are we bound to restore ill-gotten goods?

A. We are bound to restore ill-gotten goods, or the value of them, as far as    we are able; otherwise we can. not be forgiven. 

 

377. Q. Are we obliged to repair the damage we have unjustly caused?

    We are bound to repair the damage we have unjustly caused.   

378. Q. What is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment is: Thou shalt not bear false witness against    thy neighbor. 

 

379. Q. What are we commanded by the eighth Commandment?

A. We are commanded by the eighth Commandment to speak the truth in    all things and to be careful of the honor and reputation of every one. 

 

380. Q. What is forbidden by the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids all rash judgments, backbiting, slanders,    and lies. 

 

381. Q. What must they do who have lied about their neighbor and seriously    injured his character?

A. They who have lied about their neighbor and seriously injured his    character must repair the injury done as far as they are able, otherwise they    will not be forgiven. 

 

382. Q. What is the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment is: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife.  

 

383. Q. What are we commanded by the ninth Commandment?

A. We are commanded by the ninth Commandment to keep ourselves pure    in thought and desire. 

 

384. Q. What is forbidden by the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment forbids unchaste thoughts, desires of anothers    wife or husband, and all other unlawful impure thoughts and desires. 

 

385. Q. Are impure thoughts and desires always sins?

A. Impure thoughts and desires are always sins, unless they displease    us and we try to banish them. 

 

386. Q. What is the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment is: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods.  

 

387. Q. What are we commanded by the tenth Commandment?

A. By the tenth Commandment we are commanded to be content with what    we have. and to rejoice in our neighbor's welfare. 

 

389. Q. What is forbidden by the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment forbids all desires to take or keep wrongfully    what belongs to another. 

 

 

     

LESSON THIRTY-FIFTH: ON THE FIRST AND SECOND COMMANDMENTS OF THE CHURCH

 

 

 

389. Q. Which are the chief commandments of the Church?

A. The chief commandments of the Church are six: 

         To hear Mass on Sundays and holydays of obligation.      To fast and abstain on the days appointed.      To confess at least once a year.      To receive the Holy Eucharist during the Easter time.      To contribute to the support of our pastors. 	     Not to marry persons who are not Catholics, or who are related to us within        the third degree of kindred, nor privately without witnesses, nor to solemnize        marriage at forbidden times.      

 

 

390. Q. Is it a mortal sin not to hear Mass on a Sunday or a holyday of obligation?

A. It is a mortal sin not to hear Mass on a Sunday or a holyday of obligation,    unless we are excused for a serious reason. They also commit a mortal sin who,    having others under their charge, hinder them from hearing Mass, without a sufficient    reason. 

 

391. Q. Why were holydays instituted by the Church?

A. Holydays were instituted by the Church to recall to our minds the    great mysteries of religion and the virtues and rewards of the saints. 

 

392. Q. How should we keep the holydays of obligation?

A. We should keep the holydays of obligation as we should keep the Sunday.  

 

393. Q. What do you mean by fast-days?

A. By fast-days I mean days on which we are allowed but one full meal.  

 

394. Q. What do you mean by days of abstinence?

A. By days of abstinence I mean days on which we are forbidden to eat    flesh-meat, but are allowed the usual number of meals. 

 

395. Q. Why does the Church command us to fast and abstain?

A. The Church commands us to fast and abstain, in order that we may    mortify our passions and satisfy for our sins. 

 

396. Q. Why does the Church command us to abstain from flesh-meat on Fridays?

A. The Church commands us to abstain from flesh-meat on Fridays, in    honor of the day on which our Saviour died. 

 

 

LESSON THIRTY-SIXTH: ON THE THIRD, FOURTH, FIFTH AND SIXTH COMMANDMENTS OF    THE CHURCH

 

397. Q. What is meant by the command of confessing at least once a year?

A. By the command of confessing at least once a year is meant that we    are obliged, under pain of mortal sin, to go to confession within the year.  

 

398. Q. Should we confess only once a year?

A. We should confess frequently, if we wish to lead a good life. 

 

399. Q. Should children go to Confession?

A. Children should go to Confession when they are old enough to commit    sin, which is commonly about the age of seven years. 

 

400. Q. What sin does he commit who neglects to receive Communion during the    Easter time?

A. He who neglects to receive Communion during the Easter time commits    a mortal sin. 

 

401. Q. What is the Easter time?

A. The Easter time is, in this country, the time between the first Sunday    of Lent and Trinity Sunday. 

 

402. Q. Are we obliged to contribute to the support of our pastors?

A. We are obliged to contribute to the support of our pastors, and to    bear our share in the expenses of the church and school. 

 

403. Q. What is the meaning of the commandment not to marry within the third    degree of kindred?

A. The meaning of the commandment not to marry within the third degree    of kindred is that no one is allowed to marry another within the third degree    of blood relationship. 

 

404. Q. What is the meaning of the command not to marry privately?

A. The command not to marry privately means that none should marry without    the blessing of God's priests or without witnesses. 

 

405. Q. What is the meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at forbidden    times?

A. The meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at forbidden    times is that during Lent and Advent the marriage ceremony should not be performed    with pomp or a nuptial Mass. 

 

406. Q. What is the nuptial Mass?

A. A nuptial Mass is a Mass appointed by the Church to invoke a special    blessing upon the married couple. 

 

407. Q. Should Catholics be married at a nuptial Mass?

A. Catholics should be married at a nuptial Mass, because they thereby    show greater reverence for the holy Sacrament and bring richer blessings upon    their wedded life. 

 

 

 

LESSON THIRTY-SEVENTH: ON THE LAST JUDGMENT AND THE RESURRECTION, HELL, PURGATORY,    AND HEAVEN

 

408. Q. When will Christ judge us?

A. Christ will judge us immediately after our death, and on the last    day. 

 

409. Q. What is the judgment called which we have to undergo immediately after    death?

A. The judgment we have to undergo immediately after death is called    the Particular Judgment. 

 

410. Q. What is the judgment called which all men have to undergo on the last    day?

A. The judgment which all men have to undergo on the last day is called    the General Judgment. 

 

411. Q. Why does Christ judge men immediately after death?

A. Christ judges men immediately after death to reward or punish them    according to their deeds. 

 

412. Q. What are the rewards or punishments appointed for men's souls after    the Particular Judgment?

A. The rewards or punishments appointed for men's souls after the Particular    Judgment are Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell. 

 

413. Q. What is Hell?

A. Hell is a state to which the wicked are condemned, and in which they    are deprived of the sight of God for all eternity, and are in dreadful torments.  

 

414. Q. What is Purgatory?

A. Purgatory is a state in which those suffer for a time who die guilty    of venial sins, or without having satisfied for the punishment due to their    sins. 

 

415. Q. Can the faithful on earth help the souls in Purgatory?

A. The faithful on earth can help the souls in Purgatory by their prayers,    fasts, alms-deeds; by indulgences, and by having Masses said for them. 

 

416. Q. If every one is judged immediately after death, what need is there    of a General Judgment?

A. There is need of a General Judgment, though every one is judged immediately    after death, that the providence of God, which, on earth, often permits the    good to suffer and the wicked to prosper, may in the end appear just before    all men. 

 

 

 

417. Q. Will our bodies share in the reward or punishment of our souls?

A. Our bodies will share in the reward or punishment of our souls, because    through the resurrection they will again be united to them. 

 

 

 

418. Q. In what state will the bodies of the just rise?

A. The bodies of the just will rise glorious and immortal. 

 

 

 

419. Q. Will the bodies of the damned also rise?

A. The bodies of the damned will also rise, but they will be    condemned to eternal punishment. 

 

 

 

420. Q. What is Heaven?

A. Heaven is the state of everlasting life in which we see God face    to face, are made like unto Him in glory. and enjoy eternal happiness. 

 

 

 

421. Q. What words should we bear always in mind?

A. We should bear always in mind these words of our Lord and Saviour Jesus    Christ: "What doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world and suffer    the loss of his own soul, or what exchange shall a man give for his soul? For    the Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels; and then    will He render to every man according to his works."  

    
The Baltimore Catchecism, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

   Prayers

    1. The Lord's Prayer. 

   2. The Angelical Salutation. 

   3. The Apostles' Creed. 

   4. The Confiteor. 

   5. An Act of Faith. 

   6. An Act of Hope. 

   7. An Act of Love. 

   8. An Act of Contrition. 

   9. The Blessing before Meals. 

  10.Grace after Meals.

 

 The Lessons of the Catechism

    1. Lesson 1 On the end of Man 

   2. Lesson 2 On God and His Perfections 

   3. Lesson 3 On the Unity and Trinity of God 

   4. Lesson 4 On Creation 

   5. Lesson 5 On Our First Parents and the Fall 

   6. Lesson 6 On Sin and Its Kinds 

   7. Lesson 7 On the Incarnation and Redemption 

   8. Lesson 8 On Our Lord's Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension 

   9. Lesson 9 On the Holy Gost and His Descent Upon the Apostles 

  10. Lesson 10 On the Effects of the Redemption 

  11. Lesson 11 On the Church 

  12. Lesson 12 On the Attributes and Marks of the Church 

  13. Lesson 13 On the Sacraments in General 

  14. Lesson 14 On Baptism 

  15. Lesson 15 On Confirmation 

  16. Lesson 16 On the Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Ghost 

  17. Lesson 17 On the Sacrament of Penance 

  18. Lesson 18 On Contrition 

  19. Lesson 19 On Confession 

  20. Lesson 20 On the Manner of Making a Good Confession 

  21. Lesson 21 On Indulgences 

  22. Lesson 22 On the Holy Eucharist 

  23. Lesson 23 On the Ends for which the Holy Eucharist was Instituted 

  24. Lesson 24 On the Sacrifice of the Mass 

  25. Lesson 25 On Extreme Unction and Holy Orders 

  26. Lesson 26 On Matrimony 

  27. Lesson 27 On the Sacramentals 

  28. Lesson 28 On Prayer 

  29. Lesson 29 On the Commandments of God 

  30. Lesson 30 On the First Commandment 

  31. Lesson 31 The First Commandment -- On the Honor and Invocation of the Saints 

  32. Lesson 32 From the Second to the Fourth Commandment 

  33. Lesson 33 From the Fourth to the Seventh Commandment 

  34. Lesson 34 From the Seventh to the Tenth Commandment 

  35. Lesson 35 On the First and Second Commandments of the Church 

  36. Lesson 36 On the Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Commandments of the Church 

  37. Lesson 37 On the Last Judgment and Resurrection, Hell, Purgatory and Heaven

 

 

 Prayers:

  The Lord's Prayer.

 Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come; Thy will be

done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our

trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation,

but deliver us from evil. Amen. 

  The Angelical Salutation.

 Hail Mary, full of grace! the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou amongst women, and

blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners,

now and at the hour of our death. Amen. 

  The Apostles' Creed.

 I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth; and in Jesus Christ,

His only Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,

suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified; died, and was buried. He descended into

hell; the third day He arose again from the dead; He ascended into heaven, sitteth at the

right hand of God, the Father Almighty; from thence He shall come to judge the living and

the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost the Holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints,

the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen. 

  The Confiteor.

 I confess to Almighty God, to blessed Mary, ever Virgin, to blessed Michael the

Archangel, to blessed John the Baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and to all the

Saints, that I have sinned exceedingly in thought, word and deed, through, my fault,

through my fault, through my most grievous fault. Therefore, I beseech blessed Mary, ever

Virgin, blessed Michael the Archangel, blessed John the Baptist, the holy Apostles Peter

and Paul, and all the Saints, to pray to the Lord our God for me. 

May the Almighty God have mercy on me, and forgive me my sins, and bring me to

everlasting life. Amen. 

May the Almighty and merciful Lord grant me pardon, absolution, and remission of all my

sins. Amen. 

  An Act of Faith.

 0 my God! I firmly believe that Thou art one God in three Divine persons, Father, Son,

and Holy Ghost; I believe that Thy Divine Son became man, and died for our sins, and

that he will come to, judge the living and the dead. I believe these and all the truths which

the Holy Catholic Church teaches, because Thou hast revealed them, who canst neither

deceive nor be deceived 

  An Act of Hope.

 0 my God! relying on Thy infinite goodness and promises, I hope to obtain pardon of my

sins, the help of Thy grace, and life everlasting, through the merits of Jesus Christ, my

Lord and Redeemer. 

  An Act of Love.

 0 my God! I love Thee above all things, with my whole heart and soul, because Thou art

all-good and worthy of all love. I love my neighbor as myself for the love of Thee. I

forgive all who have injured me, and ask pardon of all whom I have injured. 

  An Act of Contrition.

 0 my God! I am heartily sorry for having offended Thee, and I detest all my sins, because

I dread the loss of heaven and the pains of hell; but most of all because they offend Thee,

my God, who art all-good and deserving of all my love. I firmly resolve, with the help of

Thy grace, to confess my sins, to do penance, and to amend my life. 

  The Blessing before Meals.

 + Bless us, 0 Lord! and these Thy gifts, which we are about to receive from Thy bounty,

through Christ our Lord. Amen. 

  Grace after Meals.

 + We give Thee thanks for all Thy benefits, 0 Almighty God, who livest and reignest for

ever; and may the souls of the faithful departed, through the mercy of God, rest in peace.

Amen. 

The Manner in which a Lay Person is to Baptize in Case of Necessity:

Pour common water on the head or face of the person to be baptized say while pouring it:

"I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." 

N.B. Any person of either sex who has reached the use of reason can baptize in case of

necessity. 

 

 

 LESSON FIRST: On the End of Man. 

  Q. 126. What do we mean by the "end of man"? 

 A. By the "end of man" we mean the purpose for which he was created: namely, to know,

love, and serve God.

 

 Q. 127. How do you know that man was created for God alone? 

 A. I know that man was created for God alone because everything in the world was

created for something more perfect than itself: but there is nothing in the world more

perfect than man; therefore, he was created for something outside this world, and since he

was not created for the Angels, he must have been created for God.

  Q. 128. In what respect are all men equal? 

 A. All men are equal in whatever is necessary for their nature and end. They are all

composed of a body and soul; they are all created to the image and likeness of God; they

are all gifted with understanding and free will; and they have all been created for the same

end -- God.

 

 Q. 129. Do not men differ in many things? 

 A. Men differ in many things, such as learning, wealth, power, etc.; but these things belong

to the world and not man's nature. He came into this world without them and he will leave

it without them. Only the consequences of good or evil done in this world will accompany

men to the next.

 

 Q. 130. Who made the world? 

 A. God made the world.

 

 Q. 131. What does "world" mean in this question? 

 A. In this question "world" means the universe; that is, the whole creation; all that we now

see or may hereafter see.

 

 Q. 132. Who is God? 

 A. God is the Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things.

 

 Q. 133. What is man? 

 A. Man is a creature composed of body and soul, and made to the image and likeness of

God.

 

 Q. 134. Does "man" in the Catechism mean all human beings? 

 A. "Man" in the Catechism means all human beings, either men or women, boys, girls, or

children.

 

 Q. 135. What is a creature? 

 A. A creature is anything created, whether it has life or not; body or no body. Every

being, person, or thing except God Himself may be called a creature.

 

 Q. 136. Is this likeness in the body or in the soul? 

 A. This likeness is chiefly in the soul.

 

 Q. 137. How is the soul like to God?

 A. The soul is like to God because it is a spirit that will never die, and has understanding

and free will.

 

 Q. 138. Is every invisible thing a spirit? 

 A. Every spirit is invisible -- which means can not be seen; but every invisible thing is not a

spirit. The wind is invisible, and it is not a spirit.

 

 Q. 139. Has a spirit any other quality? 

 A. A spirit is also indivisible; that is, it can not be divided into parts, as we divide material

things.

 

 Q. 140. What do the words "will never die" mean? 

 A. By the words "will never die" we mean that the soul, when once created, will never

cease to exist, whatever be its condition in the next world. Hence we say the soul is

immortal or gifted with immortality.

  Q. 141. Why then do we say a soul is dead while in a state of mortal sin? 

 A. We say a soul is dead while in a state of mortal sin, because in that state it is as

helpless as a dead body, and can merit nothing for itself.

 

 Q. 142. What does our "understanding" mean? 

 A. Our "understanding" means the "gift of reason," by which man is distinguished from all

other animals, and by which he is enabled to think and thus acquire knowledge and

regulate his actions.

 

 Q. 143. Can we learn all truths by our reason alone? 

 A. We can not learn all truths by our reason alone, for some truths are beyond the power

of our reason and must be taught to us by God.

 

 Q. 144. What do we call the truths God teaches us? 

 A. Taken together, we call the truths God teaches us revelation, and we call the manner

by which He teaches them also revelation.

 

 Q. 145. What is "Free Will"? 

 A. "Free Will" is that gift of God by which we are enabled to choose between one thing

and another; and to do good or evil in spite of reward or punishment.

 

 Q. 146. Have brute animals "understanding" and "free will"? 

 A. Brute animals have not "understanding" and "free will." They have not "understanding"

because they never change their habits or better their condition. They have not "free will"

because they never show it in their actions.

 

 Q. 147. What gift in animals supplies the place of reason? 

 A. In animals the gift of "instinct" supplies the place of reason in guiding their actions.

 

 Q. 148. What is instinct? 

 A. "Instinct" is a gift by which all animals are impelled to follow the laws and habits that

God has given to their nature.

 

 Q. 149. Have men as well as brutes "instinct"? 

 A. Men have "instinct," and they show it when placed in sudden danger, when they have

not time to use their reason. A falling man instantly grasps for something to support him.

 

 Q. 150. Why did God make you? 

 A. God made me to know Him, to love Him, and to serve Him in this world, and to be

happy with Him forever in the next.

  Q. 151. Why is it necessary to know God? 

 A. It is necessary to know God because without knowing Him we cannot love Him; and

without loving Him we cannot be saved. We should know Him because He is infinitely

true; love Him because He is infinitely beautiful; and serve Him because He is infinitely

good.

 

 Q. 152. Of which must we take more care, our soul or our body? 

 A. We must take more care of our soul than of our body.

 

 Q. 153. Why must we take more care of our soul than of our body? 

 A. We must take more care of our soul than of our body, because in losing our soul we

lose God and everlasting happiness.

 

 Q. 154. What must we do to save our souls? 

 A. To save our souls, we must worship God by faith, hope, and charity; that is, we must

believe in Him, hope in Him, and love Him with all our heart.

 

 Q. 155. What does "worship" mean? 

 A. "Worship" means to give divine honor by acts such as the offering of prayer or

sacrifice.

 

 Q. 156. How shall we know the things which we are to believe? 

 A. We shall know the things which we are to believe from the Catholic Church, through

which God speaks to us.

 

 Q. 157. What do we mean by the "Church, through which God speaks to us"? 

 A. By the "Church, through which God speaks to us," we mean the "teaching Church";

that is, the Pope, Bishops, and priests, whose duty it is to instruct us in the truths and

practices of our religion.

 

 Q. 158. Where shall we find the chief truths which the Church teaches? 

 A. We shall find the chief truths which the Church teaches in the Apostles' Creed.

 

 Q. 159. If we shall find only the "chief truths" in the Apostles' Creed, where shall

we find the remaining truths? 

 A. We shall find the remaining truths of our Faith in the religious writings and preachings

that have been sanctioned by the authority of the Church.

 

 Q. 160. Name some sacred truths not mentioned in the Apostles' Creed. 

 A. In the Apostles' Creed there is no mention of the Real Presence of Our Lord in the

Holy Eucharist, nor of the Infallibility of the Pope, nor of the Immaculate Conception of

the Blessed Virgin Mary, nor of some other truths that we are bound to believe.

  Q. 161. Say the Apostles' Creed. 

 A. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth; and in Jesus

Christ, His only Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin

Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified; died, and was buried. He descended

into hell: the third day He arose again from the dead: He ascended into heaven, sitteth at

the right hand of God, the Father Almighty: from thence He shall come to judge the living

and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the communion of

Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

 

 

 LESSON SECOND: On God and His Perfections 

  Q. 162. What is a perfection? 

 A. A perfection is any good quality a thing should have. A thing is perfect when it has all the good qualities it should have.

 

 Q. 163. What is God? 

 A. God is a spirit infinitely perfect.

 

 Q. 164. What do we mean when we say God is "infinitely perfect"? 

 A. When we say God is "infinitely perfect" we mean there is no limit or bounds to His perfection; for He possesses all good qualities in the highest possible degree and He alone is "infinitely perfect."

 

 Q. 165. Had God a beginning? 

 A. God had no beginning; He always was and He always will be.

 

 Q. 166. Where is God? 

 A. God is everywhere.

 

 Q. 167. How is God everywhere? 

 A. God is everywhere whole and entire as He is in any one place. This is true and we must believe it, though we

cannot understand it.

  

Q. 168. If God is everywhere, why do we not see Him? 

 A. We do not see God, because He is a pure spirit and cannot be seen with bodily eyes.

 

 Q. 169. Why do we call God a "pure spirit'? 

 A. We call God a pure spirit because He has no body. Our soul is a spirit, but not a "pure" spirit, because it was

created for union with our body.

 

 Q. 170. Why can we not see God with the eyes of our body? 

 A. We cannot see God with the eyes of our body because they are created to see only material things, and God is

not material but spiritual.

 

 Q 171. Does God see us? 

 A. God sees us and watches over us.

 

 Q. 172. Is it necessary for God to watch over us? 

 A. It is necessary for God to watch over us, for without His constant care we could not exist.

 

 Q. 173. Does God know all things? 

 A. God knows all things, even our most secret thoughts, words, and actions.

 

 Q. 174. Can God do all things? 

 A. God can do all things, and nothing is hard or impossible to Him.

 

 Q. 175. When is a thing said to be "impossible"? 

 A. A thing is said to be "impossible" when it cannot be done. Many things that are impossible for creatures are

possible for God.

 

 Q. 176. Is God just, holy, and merciful? 

 A. God is all just, all holy, all merciful, as He is infinitely perfect.

 

 Q. 177. Why must God be "just" as well as "merciful"? 

 A. God must be just as well as merciful because He must fulfill His promise to punish those who merit punishment, and because He cannot be infinite in one perfection without being infinite in all.

 

 Q. 178. Into what sins will the forgetfulness of God's justice lead us? 

 A. The forgetfulness of God's justice will lead us into sins of presumption.

 

 Q 179. Into what sins will the forgetfulness of God's mercy lead us? 

 A. The forgetfulness of God's mercy will lead us into sins of despair.

 

 

 LESSON THIRD: On the Unity and Trinity of God 

  Q. 180. What does "unity," and what does "trinity" mean? 

 A. "Unity" means being one, and "trinity" means three-fold or three in one.

 

 Q. 181. Can we find an example to fully illustrate the mystery of the Blessed Trinity? 

 A. We cannot find an example to fully illustrate the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, because the mysteries of our

holy religion are beyond comparison.

 

 Q. 182. Is there but one God? 

 A. Yes; there is but one God.

 

 Q. 183. Why can there be but one God? 

 A. There can be but one God because God, being supreme and infinite, cannot have an equal.

 

 Q. 184. What does "supreme" mean? 

 A. "Supreme" means the highest in authority; also the most excellent or greatest possible in anything. Thus in all

things God is supreme, and in the Church the Pope is supreme.

 

 Q. 185. When are two persons said to be equal? 

 A. Two persons are said to be equal when one is in no way greater than or inferior to the other.

 

 Q. 186. How many persons are there in God? 

 A. In God there are three Divine persons, really distinct, and equal in all things --the Father, the Son, and the Holy

Ghost.

 

 Q. 187. What do "divine" and "distinct" mean? 

 A. "Divine" means pertaining to God, and "distinct" means separate; that is, not confounded or mixed with any

other thing.

 

 Q. 188. Is the Father God? 

 A. The Father is God and the first Person of the Blessed Trinity.

 

 Q. 189. Is the Son God? 

 A. The Son is God and the second Person of the Blessed Trinity.

 

 Q. 190. Is the Holy Ghost God? 

 A. The Holy Ghost is God and the third Person of the Blessed Trinity.

 

 Q. 191. Do "first," "second," and "third" with regard to the persons of the Blessed Trinity mean that one

person existed before the other or that one is greater than the other? 

 A. "First," "second," and "third" with regard to the persons of the Blessed Trinity do not mean that one person was before the other or that one is greater than the other; for all the persons of the Trinity are eternal and equal in every respect. These numbers are used to mark the distinction between the persons, and they show the order in which the one proceeded from the other.

 

 Q. 192. What do you mean by the Blessed Trinity? 

 A. By the Blessed Trinity I mean one God in three Divine Persons.

 

 Q. 193. Are the three Divine Persons equal in all things? 

 A. The three Divine Persons are equal in all things.

   

Q. 194. Are the three Divine Persons one and the same God? 

 A. The three Divine Persons are one and the same God, having one and the same Divine nature and substance.

 

 Q. 195. What do we mean by the "nature" and "substance" of a thing? 

 A. By the "nature" of a thing we mean the combination of all the qualities that make the thing what it is. By the

"substance" of a thing we mean the part that never changes, and which cannot be changed without destroying the

nature of the thing.

 

 Q. 196. Can we fully understand how the three Divine Persons are one and the same God? 

 A. We cannot fully understand how the three Divine Persons are one and the same God, because this is a mystery.

 

 Q. 197. What is a mystery? 

 A. A mystery is a truth which we cannot fully understand.

 

 Q. 198. Is every truth which we cannot understand a mystery? 

 A. Every truth which we cannot understand is not a mystery; but every revealed truth which no one can understand is a mystery.

   

Q. 199. Should we believe truths which we cannot understand? 

 A. We should and often do believe truths which we cannot understand when we have proof of their existence.

   

Q. 200. Give an example of truths which all believe, though many do not understand them. 

 A. All believe that the earth is round and moving, though many do not understand it. All believe that a seed planted in the ground will produce a flower or tree often with more than a thousand other seeds equal to itself, though many cannot understand how this is done.

 

 Q. 201. Why must a divine religion have mysteries? 

 A. A divine religion must have mysteries because it must have supernatural truths and God Himself must teach

them. A religion that has only natural truths, such as man can know by reason alone, fully understand and teach, is only a human religion.

  Q. 202. Why does God require us to believe mysteries? 

 A. God requires us to believe mysteries that we may submit our understanding to Him.

 

 Q. 203. By what form of prayer do we praise the Holy Trinity? 

 A. We praise the Holy Trinity by a form of prayer called the Doxology, which has come down to us almost from

the time of the Apostles.

 

 Q. 204. Say the Doxology. 

 A. The Doxology is: "Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is

now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen."

 

 Q. 205. Is there any other form of the Doxology? 

 A. There is another form of the Doxology, which is said in the celebration of the Mass. It is called the "Gloria in

excelsis" or "Glory be to God on high," etc., the words sung by the Angels at the birth of Our Lord.

 

 

 

 LESSON FOURTH: On Creation 

  Q. 206. What is the difference between making and creating? 

 A. "Making" means bringing forth or forming out of some material already existing, as workmen do. "Creating"

means bringing forth out of nothing, as God alone can do.

 

 Q. 207. Has everything that exists been created? 

 A. Everything that exists except God Himself has been created.

 

 Q. 208. Who created heaven and earth, and all things? 

 A. God created heaven and earth, and all things.

 

 Q. 209. From what do we learn that God created heaven and earth and all things? 

 A. We learn that God created heaven and earth and all things from the Bible or Holy Scripture, in which the

account of the Creation is given.

 

 Q. 210. Why did God create all things? 

 A. God created all things for His own glory and for their or our good.

 

 Q. 211. Did God leave all things to themselves after He had created them? 

 A. God did not leave all things to themselves after He had created them; He continues to preserve and govern

them.

 

 Q. 212. What do we call the care by which God preserves and governs the world and all it contains? 

 A. We call the care by which God preserves and governs the world and all it contains His providence.

 

 Q. 213. How did God create heaven and earth? 

 A. God created heaven and earth from nothing by His word only; that is, by a single act of His all-powerful will.

 

 Q. 214. Which are the chief creatures of God? 

 A. The chief creatures of God are angels and men.

 

 Q. 215. How may God's creatures on earth be divided? 

 A. God's creatures on earth may be divided into four classes:

   1.(1) Things that exist, as air; 

   2.(2) Things that exist, grow and live, as plants and trees; 

   3.(3) Things that exist, grow, live and feel, as animals; 

   4.(4) Things that exist, grow, live, feel and understand, as man.

 

 Q. 216. What are angels? 

 A. Angels are pure spirits without a body, created to adore and enjoy God in heaven.

   

Q. 217. If Angels have no bodies, how could they appear? 

 A. Angels could appear by taking bodies to render themselves visible for a time; just as the Holy Ghost took the

form of a dove and the devil took the form of a serpent.

 

 Q. 218. Name some persons to whom Angels appeared. 

 A. Angels appeared to the Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph; also to Abraham, Lot, Jacob, Tobias and others.

 

 Q. 219. Were the angels created for any other purpose? 

 A. The angels were also created to assist before the throne of God and to minister unto Him; they have often been

sent as messengers from God to man; and are also appointed our guardians.

 

 Q. 220. Are all the Angels equal in dignity? 

 A. All the Angels are not equal in dignity. There are nine choirs or classes mentioned in the Holy Scripture. The

highest are called Seraphim and the lowest simply Angels. The Archangels are one class higher than ordinary Angels.

 

 Q. 221. Mention some Archangels and tell what they did. 

 A. The Archangel Michael drove Satan out of heaven; the Archangel Gabriel announced to the Blessed Virgin that she was to become the Mother of God. The Archangel Raphael guided and protected Tobias.

 

 Q. 222. Were Angels ever sent to punish men? 

 A. Angels were sometimes sent to punish men. An Angel killed 185,000 men in the army of a wicked king who

had blasphemed God; an Angel also slew the first-born in the families of the Egyptians who had persecuted God's

people.

   

Q. 223. What do our guardian Angels do for us? 

 A. Our guardian Angels pray for us, protect and guide us, and offer our prayers, good works and desires to God.

 

 Q. 224. How do we know that Angels offer our prayers and good works to God? 

 A. We know that Angels offer our prayers and good works to God because it is so stated in Holy Scripture, and

Holy Scripture is the Word of God.

 

 Q. 225. Why did God appoint guardian Angels if He watches over us Himself? 

 A. God appointed guardian Angels to secure for us their help and prayers, and also to show His great love for us

in giving us these special servants and faithful friends.

 

 Q. 226. Were the angels, as God created them, good and happy? 

 A. The angels, as God created them, were good and happy.

 

 Q. 227. Did all the angels remain good and happy? 

 A. All the angels did not remain good and happy; many of them sinned and were cast into hell, and these are called devils or bad angels.

 

 Q. 228. Do we know the number of good and bad Angels? 

 A. We do not know the number of the good or bad Angels, but we know it is very great.

 

 Q. 229. What was the devil's name before he fell, and why was he cast out of heaven? 

 A. Before he fell, Satan, or the devil, was called Lucifer, or light-bearer, a name which indicates great beauty. He

was cast out of heaven because through pride he rebelled against God.

 

 Q. 230. How do the bad Angels act toward us? 

 A. The bad Angels try by every means to lead us into sin. The efforts they make are called temptations of the devil.

 

 Q. 231. Why does the devil tempt us? 

 A. The devil tempts us because he hates goodness, and does not wish us to enjoy the happiness which he himself

has lost.

 

 Q. 232. Can we by our own power overcome the temptations of the devil? 

 A. We cannot by our own power overcome the temptations of the devil, because the devil is wiser than we are;

for, being an Angel, he is more intelligent, and he did not lose his intelligence by falling into sin any more than we do now. Therefore, to overcome his temptations we need the help of God.

 

 

 

 

 LESSON FIFTH: On our First Parents and the Fall 

  Q. 233. Who were the first man and woman? 

 A. The first man and woman were Adam and Eve.

 

 Q. 234. Are there any persons in the world who are not the descendants of Adam and Eve? 

 A. There are no persons in the world now, and there never have been any, who are not the descendants of Adam

and Eve, because the whole human race had but one origin.

 

 Q. 235. Do not the differences in color, figure, etc., which we find in distinct races indicate a difference in

first parents? 

 A. The differences in color, figure, etc., which we find in distinct races do not indicate a difference in first parents, for these differences have been brought about in the lapse of time by other causes, such as climate, habits, etc.

 

 Q. 236. Were Adam and Eve innocent and holy when they came from the hand of God? 

 A. Adam and Eve were innocent and holy when they came from the hand of God.

 

 Q. 237. What do we mean by saying Adam and Eve "were innocent" when they came from the hand of

God? 

 A. When we say Adam and Eve "were innocent" when they came from the hand of God we mean they were in the

state of original justice; that is, they were gifted with every virtue and free from every sin.

 

 Q. 238. How was Adam's body formed? 

 A. God formed Adam's body out of the clay of the earth and then breathed into it a living soul.

 

 Q. 239. How was Eve's body formed? 

 A. Eve's body was formed from a rib taken from Adam's side during a deep sleep which God caused to come

upon him.

 

 Q. 240. Why did God make Eve from one of Adam's ribs? 

 A. God made Eve from one of Adam's ribs to show the close relationship existing between husband and wife in

their marriage union which God then instituted.

 

 Q. 241. Could man's body be developed from the body of an inferior animal? 

 A. Man's body could be developed from the body of an inferior animal if God so willed; but science does not

prove that man's body was thus formed, while revelation teaches that it was formed directly by God from the clay

of the earth.

 

 Q. 242. Could man's soul and intelligence be formed by the development of animal life and instinct? 

 A. Man's soul could not be formed by the development of animal instinct; for, being entirely spiritual, it must be

created by God, and it is united to the body as soon as the body is prepared to receive it.

 

 Q. 243. Did God give any command to Adam and Eve? 

 A. To try their obedience, God commanded Adam and Eve not to eat of a certain fruit which grew in the garden of Paradise.

 

 Q. 244. What was the Garden of Paradise? 

 A. The Garden of Paradise was a large and beautiful place prepared for man's habitation upon earth. It was

supplied with every species of plant and animal and with everything that could contribute to man's happiness.

 

 Q. 245. Where was the Garden of Paradise situated? 

 A. The exact place in which the Garden of Paradise -- called also the Garden of Eden -- was situated is not

known, for the deluge may have so changed the surface of the earth that old landmarks were wiped out. It was

probably some place in Asia, not far from the river Euphrates.

 

 Q. 246. What was the tree bearing the forbidden fruit called? 

 A. The tree bearing the forbidden fruit was called "the tree of knowledge of good and evil."

 

 Q. 247. Do we know the name of any other tree in the garden? 

 A. We know the name of another tree in the Garden called the "tree of life." Its fruit kept the bodies of our first

parents in a state of perfect health.

 

 Q. 248. Which were the chief blessings intended for Adam and Eve had they remained faithful to God? 

 A. The chief blessings intended for Adam and Eve, had they remained faithful to God, were a constant state of

happiness in this life and everlasting glory in the next.

 

 Q. 249. Did Adam and Eve remain faithful to God? 

 A. Adam and Eve did not remain faithful to God, but broke His command by eating the forbidden fruit.

 

 Q. 250. Who was the first to disobey God? 

 A. Eve was the first to disobey God, and she induced Adam to do likewise.

 

 Q. 251. How was Eve tempted to sin? 

 A. Eve was tempted to sin by the devil, who came in the form of a serpent and persuaded her to break God's

command.

 

 Q. 252. Which were the chief causes that led Eve into sin? 

 A. The chief causes that led Eve into sin were:

   1.(1) She went into the danger of sinning by admiring what was forbidden, instead of avoiding it. 

   2.(2) She did not fly from the temptation at once, but debated about yielding to it.

Similar conduct on our part will lead us also into sin.

 

 Q. 253. What befell Adam and Eve on account of their sin? 

 A. Adam and Eve, on account of their sin, lost innocence and holiness, and were doomed to sickness and death.

 

 Q. 254. What other evils befell Adam and Eve on account of their sin? 

 A. Many other evils befell Adam and Eve on account of their sin. They were driven out of Paradise and

condemned to toil. God also ordained that henceforth the earth should yield no crops without cultivation, and that

the beasts, man's former friends, should become his savage enemies.

 

 Q. 255. Were we to remain in the Garden of Paradise forever if Adam had not sinned? 

 A. We were not to remain in the Garden of Paradise forever even if Adam had not sinned, but after passing

through the years of our probation or trial upon earth we were to be taken, body and soul, into heaven without

suffering death.

 

 Q. 256. What evil befell us on account of the disobedience of our first parents? 

 A. On account of the disobedience of our first parents, we all share in their sin and punishment, as we should have

shared in their happiness if they had remained faithful.

 

 Q. 257. Is it not unjust to punish us for the sin of our first parents? 

 A. It is not unjust to punish us for the sin of our first parents, because their punishment consisted in being deprived of a free gift of God; that is, of the gift of original justice to which they had no strict right and which they willfully forfeited by their act of disobedience.

 

 Q. 258. But how did the loss of the gift of original justice leave our first parents and us in mortal sin? 

 A. The loss of the gift of original justice left our first parents and us in mortal sin because it deprived them of the

Grace of God, and to be without this gift of Grace which they should have had was to be in mortal sin. As all their

children are deprived of the same gift, they, too, come into the world in a state of mortal sin.

 

 Q. 259. What other effects followed from the sin of our first parents? 

 A. Our nature was corrupted by the sin of our first parents, which darkened our understanding, weakened our will,

and left in us a strong inclination to evil.

 

 Q. 260. What do we mean by "our nature was corrupted"? 

 A. When we say "our nature was corrupted" we mean that our whole being, body and soul, was injured in all its

parts and powers.

 

 Q. 261. Why do we say our understanding was darkened? 

 A. We say our understanding was darkened because even with much learning we have not the clear knowledge,

quick perception and retentive memory that Adam had before his fall from grace.

 

 Q. 262. Why do we say our will was weakened? 

 A. We say our will was weakened to show that our free will was not entirely taken away by Adam's sin, and that

we have it still in our power to use our free will in doing good or evil.

 

 Q. 263. In what does the strong inclination to evil that is left in us consist? 

 A. This strong inclination to evil that is left in us consists in the continual efforts our senses and appetites make to

lead our souls into sin. The body is inclined to rebel against the soul, and the soul itself to rebel against God.

 

 Q. 264. What is this strong inclination to evil called, and why did God permit it to remain in us? 

 A. This strong inclination to evil is called concupiscence, and God permits it to remain in us that by His grace we

may resist it and thus increase our merits.

 

 Q. 265. What is the sin called which we inherit from our first parents? 

 A. The sin which we inherit from our first parents is called original sin.

 

 Q. 266. Why is this sin called original? 

 A. This sin is called original because it comes down to us from our first parents, and we are brought into the world with its guilt on our soul.

 

 Q. 267. Does this corruption of our nature remain in us after original sin is forgiven? 

 A. This corruption of our nature and other punishments remain in us after original sin is forgiven.

 

 Q. 268. Was any one ever preserved from original sin? 

 A. The Blessed Virgin Mary, through the merits of her Divine Son, was preserved free from the guilt of original sin, and this privilege is called her Immaculate Conception.

 

 Q. 269. Why was the Blessed Virgin preserved from original sin? 

 A. The Blessed Virgin was preserved from original sin because it would not be consistent with the dignity of the

Son of God to have His Mother, even for an instant, in the power of the devil and an enemy of God.

 

 Q. 270. How could the Blessed Virgin be preserved from sin by her Divine Son, before her Son was born?

 A. The Blessed Virgin could be preserved from sin by her Divine Son before He was born as man, for He always

existed as God and foresaw His own future merits and the dignity of His Mother. He therefore by His future merits provided for her privilege of exemption from original sin.

 

 Q. 271. What does the "Immaculate Conception" mean? 

 A. The Immaculate Conception means the Blessed Virgin's own exclusive privilege of coming into existence,

through the merits of Jesus Christ, without the stain of original sin. It does not mean, therefore, her sinless life,

perpetual virginity or the miraculous conception of Our Divine Lord by the power of the Holy Ghost.

 

 Q. 272. What has always been the belief of the Church concerning this truth? 

 A. The Church has always believed in the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin and to place this truth

beyond doubt has declared it an Article of Faith.

 

 Q. 273. To what should the thoughts of the Immaculate Conception lead us? 

 A. The thoughts of the Immaculate Conception should lead us to a great love of purity and to a desire of imitating

the Blessed Virgin in the practice of that holy virtue.

 

 

 

 

 LESSON SIXTH: On Sin and Its Kinds  ON SIN AND ITS KINDS. 

  Q. 274. How is sin divided? 

 A. 

   1.(1) Sin is divided into the sin we inherit called original sin, and the sin we commit ourselves, called actual sin.

   2.(2) Actual sin is sub-divided into greater sins, called mortal, and lesser sins, called venial.

  Q. 275. In how many ways may actual sin be committed? 

 A. Actual sin may be committed in two ways: namely, by willfully doing things forbidden, or by willfully neglecting things commanded.

  Q. 276. What is our sin called when we neglect things commanded? 

 A. When we neglect things commanded our sin is called a sin of omission. Such sins as willfully neglecting to hear Mass on Sundays, or neglecting to go to Confession at least once a year, are sins of omission.

  Q. 277. Is original sin the only kind of sin? 

 A. Original sin is not the only kind of sin; there is another kind of sin, which we commit ourselves, called actual sin.

 

 Q. 278. What is actual sin? 

 A. Actual sin is any willful thought, word, deed, or omission contrary to the law of God.

 

 Q. 279. How many kinds of actual sin are there? 

 A. There are two kinds of actual sin -- mortal and venial.

 

 Q. 280. What is mortal sin? 

 A. Mortal sin is a grievous offense against the law of God.

 

 Q. 281. Why is this sin called mortal? 

 A. This sin is called mortal because it deprives us of spiritual life, which is sanctifying grace, and brings everlasting death and damnation on the soul.

 

 Q. 282. How many things are necessary to make a sin mortal? 

 A. To make a sin mortal, three things are necessary:

   1.a grievous matter, sufficient reflection, and full consent of the will.

 

 Q. 283. What do we mean by "grievous matter" with regard to sin? 

 A. By "grievous matter" with regard to sin we mean that the thought, word or deed by which mortal sin is

committed must be either very bad in itself or severely prohibited, and therefore sufficient to make a mortal sin if

we deliberately yield to it.

 

 Q. 284. What does "sufficient reflection and full consent of the will" mean? 

 A. "Sufficient reflection" means that we must know the thought, word or deed to be sinful at the time we are guilty of it; and "full consent of the will" means that we must fully and willfully yield to it.

 

 Q. 285. What are sins committed without reflection or consent called? 

 A. Sins committed without reflection or consent are called material sins; that is, they would be formal or real sins if we knew their sinfulness at the time we committed them. Thus to eat flesh meat on a day of abstinence without

knowing it to be a day of abstinence or without thinking of the prohibition, would be a material sin.

  Q. 286. Do past material sins become real sins as soon as we discover their sinfulness? 

 A. Past material sins do not become real sins as soon as we discover their sinfulness, unless we again repeat them

with full knowledge and consent.

 

 Q. 287. How can we know what sins are considered mortal? 

 A. We can know what sins are considered mortal from Holy Scripture; from the teaching of the Church, and from

the writings of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church.

 

 Q. 288. Why is it wrong to judge others guilty of sin? 

 A. It is wrong to judge others guilty of sin because we cannot know for certain that their sinful act was committed

with sufficient reflection and full consent of the will.

 

 Q. 289. What sin does he commit who without sufficient reason believes another guilty of sin? 

 A. He who without sufficient reason believes another guilty of sin commits a sin of rash judgment.

 

 Q. 290. What is venial sin? 

 A. Venial sin is a slight offense against the law of God in matters of less importance, or in matters of great

importance it is an offense committed without sufficient reflection or full consent of the will.

 

 Q. 291. Can we always distinguish venial from mortal sin? 

 A. We cannot always distinguish venial from mortal sin, and in such cases we must leave the decision to our

confessor.

 

 Q. 292. Can slight offenses ever become mortal sins? 

 A. Slight offenses can become mortal sins if we commit them through defiant contempt for God or His law; and

also when they are followed by very evil consequences, which we foresee in committing them.

 

 Q. 293. Which are the effects of venial sin? 

 A. The effects of venial sin are the lessening of the love of God in our heart, the making us less worthy of His help,  	and the weakening of the power to resist mortal sin.

 

 Q. 294. How can we know a thought, word or deed to be sinful? 

 A. We can know a thought, word or deed to be sinful if it, or the neglect of it, is forbidden by any law of God or of His Church, or if it is opposed to any supernatural virtue.

 

 Q. 295. Which are the chief sources of sin? 

 A. The chief sources of sin are seven:

   1.Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Anger, Gluttony, Envy, and Sloth,

and they are commonly called capital sins.

 

 Q. 296. What is pride? 

 A. Pride is an excessive love of our own ability; so that we would rather sinfully disobey than humble ourselves.

 

 Q. 297. What effect has pride on our souls? 

 A. Pride begets in our souls sinful ambition, vainglory, presumption and hypocrisy.

 

 Q. 298. What is covetousness? 

 A. Covetousness is an excessive desire for worldly things.

 

 Q. 299. What effect has covetousness on our souls? 

 A. Covetousness begets in our souls unkindness, dishonesty, deceit and want of charity.

 

 Q. 300. What is lust? 

 A. Lust is an excessive desire for the sinful pleasures forbidden by the Sixth Commandment.

 

 Q. 301. What effect has lust on our souls? 

 A. Lust begets in our souls a distaste for holy things, a perverted conscience, a hatred for God, and it very

frequently leads to a complete loss of faith.

 

 Q. 302. What is anger? 

 A. Anger is an excessive emotion of the mind excited against any person or thing, or it is an excessive desire for

revenge.

 

 Q. 303. What effect has anger on our soul? 

 A. Anger begets in our souls impatience, hatred, irreverence, and too often the habit of cursing.

 

 Q. 304. What is gluttony? 

 A. Gluttony is an excessive desire for food or drink.

 

 Q. 305. What kind of a sin is drunkenness? 

 A. Drunkenness is a sin of gluttony by which a person deprives himself of the use of his reason by the excessive

taking of intoxicating drink.

 

 Q. 306. Is drunkenness always a mortal sin? 

 A. Deliberate drunkenness is always a mortal sin if the person be completely deprived of the use of reason by it,

but drunkenness that is not intended or desired may be excused from mortal sin.

 

 Q. 307. What are the chief effects of habitual drunkenness? 

 A. Habitual drunkenness injures the body, weakens the mind, leads its victim into many vices and exposes him to

the danger of dying in a state of mortal sin.

 

 Q. 308. What three sins seem to cause most evil in the world? 

 A. Drunkenness, dishonesty and impurity seem to cause most evil in the world, and they are therefore to be

carefully avoided at all times.

 

 Q. 309. What is envy? 

 A. Envy is a feeling of sorrow at another's good fortune and joy at the evil which befalls him; as if we ourselves

were injured by the good and benefited by the evil that comes to him.

 

 Q. 310. What effect has envy on the soul? 

 A. Envy begets in the soul a want of charity for our neighbor and produces a spirit of detraction, back-biting and

slander.

 

 Q. 311. What is sloth? 

 A. Sloth is a laziness of the mind and body, through which we neglect our duties on account of the labor they

require.

 

 Q. 312. What effect has sloth upon the soul? 

 A. Sloth begets in the soul a spirit of indifference in our spiritual duties and a disgust for prayer.

 

 Q. 313. Why are the seven sources of sin called capital sins? 

 A. The seven sources of sin are called capital sins because they rule over our other sins and are the causes of them.

 

 Q. 314. What do we mean by our predominant sin or ruling passion? 

 A. By our predominant sin, or ruling passion, we mean the sin into which we fall most frequently and which we find it hardest to resist.

 

 Q. 315. How can we best overcome our sins? 

 A. We can best overcome our sins by guarding against our predominant or ruling sin.

 

 Q. 316. Should we give up trying to be good when we seem not to succeed in overcoming our faults? 

 A. We should not give up trying to be good when we seem not to succeed in overcoming our faults, because our

efforts to be good will keep us from becoming worse than we are.

 

 Q. 317. What virtues are opposed to the seven capital sins? 

 A. Humility is opposed to pride; generosity to covetousness; chastity to lust; meekness to anger; temperance to

gluttony; brotherly love to envy, and diligence to sloth.

 

 

 

 

LESSON SEVENTH: On the Incarnation and Redemption 

  Q. 318. What does "incarnation" mean, and what does "redemption" mean? 

 A. "Incarnation" means the act of clothing with flesh. Thus Our Lord clothed His divinity with a human body.

"Redemption" means to buy back again.

 

 Q. 319. Did God abandon man after he fell into sin? 

 A. God did not abandon man after he fell into sin, but promised him a Redeemer, who was to satisfy for man's sin

and reopen to him the gates of heaven.

 

 Q. 320. What do we mean by the "gates of heaven"? 

 A. By the "gates of heaven" we mean the divine power by which God keeps us out of heaven or admits us into it,

at His pleasure.

 

 Q. 321. Who is the Redeemer? 

 A. Our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of mankind.

 

 Q. 322. What does the name "Jesus" signify and how was this name given to Our Lord? 

 A. The name "Jesus" signifies Saviour or Redeemer, and this name was given to Our Lord by an Angel who

appeared to Joseph and said: "Mary shall bring forth a Son; and thou shalt call His name Jesus."

 

 Q. 323. What does the name "Christ" signify? 

 A. The name "Christ" means the same as Messias, and signifies Anointed; because, as in the Old Law, Prophets,

High Priests and Kings were anointed with oil; so Jesus, the Great Prophet, High Priest and King of the New Law, was anointed as man with the fullness of divine power.

 

 Q. 324. How did Christ show and prove His divine power? 

 A. Christ showed and proved His divine power chiefly by His miracles, which are extraordinary works that can be

performed only by power received from God, and which have, therefore, His sanction and authority.

 

 Q. 325. What, then, did the miracles of Jesus Christ prove? 

 A. The miracles of Jesus Christ proved that whatever He said was true, and that when He declared Himself to be

the Son of God He really was what He claimed to be.

   

Q. 326. Could not men have been deceived in the miracles of Christ? 

 A. Men could not have been deceived in the miracles of Christ because they were performed in the most open

manner and usually in the presence of great multitudes of people, among whom were many of Christ's enemies,

ever ready to expose any deceit. And if Christ performed no real miracles, how, then, could He have converted

the world and have persuaded sinful men to give up what they loved and do the difficult things that the Christian

religion imposes?

 

 Q. 327. Could not false accounts of these miracles have been written after the death of Our Lord? 

 A. False accounts of these miracles could not have been written after the death of Our Lord; for then neither His

friends nor His enemies would have believed them without proof. Moreover, the enemies of Christ did not deny the miracles, but tried to explain them by attributing them to the power of the devil or other causes. Again, the

Apostles and the Evangelists who wrote the accounts suffered death to testify their belief in the words and works

of Our Lord.

   

Q. 328. Did Jesus Christ die to redeem all men of every age and race without exception? 

 A. Jesus Christ died to redeem all men of every age and race without exception; and every person born into the

world should share in His merits, without which no one can be saved.

   

Q. 329. How are the merits of Jesus Christ applied to our souls? 

 A. The merits of Jesus Christ are applied to our souls through the Sacraments, and especially through Baptism and Penance, which restore us to the friendship of God.

 

 Q. 330. What do you believe of Jesus Christ? 

 A. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the second Person of the Blessed Trinity, true God and true man.

 

 Q. 331. Cannot we also be called the Children of God, and therefore His sons and daughters? 

 A. We can be called the Children of God because He has adopted us by His grace or because He is the Father

who has created us; but we are not, therefore, His real Children; whereas, Jesus Christ, His only real and true Son,

was neither adopted nor created, but was begotten of His Father from all eternity.

 

 Q. 332. Why is Jesus Christ true God? 

 A. Jesus Christ is true God because He is the true and only Son of God the Father.

 

 Q. 333. Why is Jesus Christ true man? 

 A. Jesus Christ is true man because He is the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary and has a body and soul like ours.

 

 Q. 334. Who was the foster father or guardian of Our Lord while on earth? 

 A. St. Joseph, the husband of the Blessed Virgin, was the foster-father or guardian of Our Lord while on earth.

 

 Q. 335. Is Jesus Christ in heaven as God or as man? 

 A. Since His Ascension Jesus Christ is in heaven both as God and as man.

 

 Q. 336. How many natures are there in Jesus Christ? 

 A. In Jesus Christ there are two natures, the nature of God and the nature of man.

 

 Q. 337. Is Jesus Christ more than one person? 

 A. No. Jesus Christ is but one Divine Person.

 

 Q. 338. From what do we learn that Jesus Christ is but one person? 

 A. We learn that Jesus Christ is but one person from Holy Scripture and from the constant teaching of the Church,

which has condemned all those who teach the contrary.

 

 Q. 339. Was Jesus Christ always God? 

 A. Jesus Christ was always God, as He is the second person of the Blessed Trinity, equal to His Father from all

eternity.

 

 Q. 340. Was Jesus Christ always man? 

 A. Jesus Christ was not always man, but became man at the time of His Incarnation.

 

 Q. 341. What do you mean by the Incarnation? 

 A. By the Incarnation I mean that the Son of God was made man.

   

Q. 342. How was the Son of God made man? 

 A. The Son of God was conceived and made man by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Blessed

Virgin Mary.

   

Q. 343. Is the Blessed Virgin Mary truly the Mother of God? 

 A. The Blessed Virgin Mary is truly the Mother of God, because the same Divine Person who is the Son of God is

also the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

   

Q. 344. Did the Son of God become man immediately after the sin of our first parents? 

 A. The Son of God did not become man immediately after the sin of our first parents, but was promised to them as a Redeemer.

   

Q. 345. How many years passed from the time Adam sinned till the time the Redeemer came? 

 A. About 4,000 years passed from the time Adam sinned till the time the Redeemer came.

 

 Q. 346. What was the moral condition of the world just before the coming of Our Lord? 

 A. Just before the coming of Our Lord the moral condition of the world was very bad. Idolatry, injustice, cruelty,

immorality and horrid vices were common almost everywhere.

 

 Q. 347. Why was the coming of the Redeemer so long delayed? 

 A. The coming of the Redeemer was so long delayed that the world -- suffering from every misery -- might learn

the great evil of sin and know that God alone could help fallen man.

 

 Q. 348. When was the Redeemer promised to mankind? 

 A. The Redeemer was first promised to mankind in the Garden of Paradise, and often afterward through Abraham

and his descendants, the patriarchs, and through numerous prophets.

 

 Q. 349. Who were the prophets? 

 A. The prophets were inspired men to whom God revealed the future, that they might with absolute certainty make it known to the people.

 

 Q. 350. What did the prophets foretell concerning the Redeemer? 

 A. The prophets, taken together, foretold so accurately all the circumstances of the birth, life, death, resurrection

and glory of the Redeemer that no one who carefully studied their writings could fail to recognize Him when He came.

 

 Q. 351. Have all these prophecies concerning the Redeemer been fulfilled? 

 A. All the prophecies concerning the Redeemer have been fulfilled in every point by the circumstances of Christ's

birth, life, death, resurrection and glory; and He is, therefore, the Redeemer promised to mankind from the time of

Adam.

   

Q. 352. Where shall we find these prophecies concerning the Redeemer? 

 A. We shall find these prophecies concerning the Redeemer in the prophetic books of the Bible or Holy Scripture.

 

 Q. 353. If the Redeemer's coming was so clearly foretold, why did not all recognize Him when He came? 

 A. All did not recognize the Redeemer when He came, because many knew only part of the prophecies; and

taking those concerning His glory and omitting those concerning His suffering, they could not understand His life.

   

Q. 354. How could they be saved who lived before the Son of God became man? 

 A. They who lived before the Son of God became man could be saved by believing in a Redeemer to come, and

by keeping the Commandments.

   

Q. 355. On what day was the Son of God conceived and made man? 

 A. The Son of God was conceived and made man on Annunciation Day -- the day on which the Angel Gabriel

announced to the Blessed Virgin Mary that she was to be the Mother of God.

   

Q. 356. On what day was Christ born? 

 A. Christ was born on Christmas Day, in a stable at Bethlehem, over nineteen hundred years ago.

   

Q. 357. Why did the Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph go to Bethlehem just before the birth of Our Lord? 

 A. The Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph went to Bethlehem in obedience to the Roman Emperor, who ordered all his

subjects to register their names in the towns or cities of their ancestors. Bethlehem was the City of David, the royal ancestor of Mary and Joseph, hence they had to register there. All this was done by the Will of God, that the

prophecies concerning the birth of His Divine Son might be fulfilled.

   

Q. 358. Why was Christ born in a stable? 

 A. Christ was born in a stable because Joseph and Mary were poor and strangers in Bethlehem, and without

money they could find no other shelter. This was permitted by Our Lord that we might learn a lesson from His

great humility.

 

 Q. 359. In giving the ancestors or forefathers of Our Lord, why do the Gospels give the ancestors of

Joseph, who was only Christ's foster-father, and not the ancestors of Mary, who was Christ's real parent? 

 A. In giving the ancestors of Our Lord, the Gospels give the ancestors of Joseph:

   1.(1) Because the ancestors of women were not usually recorded by the Jews; and 

   2.(2) Because Mary and Joseph were members of the same tribe, and had, therefore, the same ancestors; so

     that, in giving the ancestors of Joseph, the Gospels give also those of Mary; and this was understood by

     those for whom the Gospels were intended.

 

 Q. 360. Had Our Lord any brothers or sisters ? 

 A. Our Lord had no brothers or sisters. When the Gospels speak of His brethren they mean only His near

relations. His Blessed Mother Mary was always a Virgin as well before and at His birth as after it.

   

Q. 361. Who were among the first to adore the Infant Jesus? 

 A. The shepherds of Bethlehem, to whom His birth was announced by Angels; and the Magi or three wise men,

who were guided to His crib by a miraculous star, were among the first to adore the Infant Jesus. We recall the

adoration of the Magi on the feast of the Epiphany, which means appearance or manifestation, namely, of Our

Saviour.

 

 Q. 362. Who sought to kill the Infant Jesus? 

 A. Herod sought to kill the Infant Jesus because he thought the influence of Christ -- the new-born King -- would

deprive him of his throne.

 

 Q. 363. How was the Holy Infant rescued from the power of Herod? 

 A. The Holy Infant was rescued from the power of Herod by the flight into Egypt, when St. Joseph -- warned by

an Angel -- fled hastily into that country with Jesus and Mary.

 

 Q. 364. How did Herod hope to accomplish his wicked designs? 

 A. Herod hoped to accomplish his wicked designs by murdering all the infants in and near Bethlehem. The day on

which we commemorate the death of these first little martyrs, who shed their blood for Christ's sake, is called the

feast of Holy Innocents.

 

 Q. 365. How may the years of Christ's life be divided? 

 A. The years of Christ's life may be divided into three parts:

   1.(1) His childhood, extending from His birth to His twelfth year, when He went with his parents to worship in

     the Temple of Jerusalem. 

   2.(2) His hidden life, which extends from His twelfth to His thirtieth year, during which time He dwelt with His

     parents at Nazareth. 

   3.(3) His public life, extending from His thirtieth year -- or from His baptism by St. John the Baptist to His

     death; during which time He taught His doctrines and established His Church.

 

 Q. 366. Why is Christ's life thus divided? 

 A. Christ's life is thus divided to show that all classes find in Him their model. In childhood He gave an example to the young; in His hidden life an example to those who consecrate themselves to the service of God in a religious state; and in His public life an example to all Christians without exception.

 

 Q. 367. How long did Christ live on earth? 

 A. Christ lived on earth about thirty-three years, and led a most holy life in poverty and suffering.

 

 

 Q. 368. Why did Christ live so long on earth? 

 A. Christ lived so long on earth to show us the way to heaven by His teachings and example.

 

 

 LESSON EIGHTH: On Our Lord's Passion, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension 

  

 Q. 369. What do we mean by Our Lord's Passion? 

 A. By Our Lord's Passion we mean His dreadful sufferings from His agony in the garden till the moment of His

death.

 

 Q. 370. What did Jesus Christ suffer? 

 A. Jesus Christ suffered a bloody sweat, a cruel scourging, was crowned with thorns, and was crucified.

 

 Q. 371. When did Our Lord suffer the "bloody sweat"? 

 A. Our Lord suffered the "bloody sweat" while drops of blood came forth from every pore of His body, during His agony in the Garden of Olives, near Jerusalem, where He went to pray on the night His Passion began.

 

 Q. 372. Who accompanied Our Lord to the Garden of Olives on the night of His Agony? 

 A. The Apostles Peter, James and John, the same who had witnessed His transfiguration on the mount,

accompanied Our Lord to the Garden of Olives, to watch and pray with Him on the night of His agony.

 

 Q. 373. What do we mean by the transfiguration of Our Lord? 

 A. By the transfiguration of Our Lord we mean the supernatural change in His appearance when He showed

Himself to His Apostles in great glory and brilliancy in which "His face did shine as the sun and His garments

became white as snow."

 

 Q. 374. Who were present at the transfiguration? 

 A. There were present at the transfiguration -- besides the Apostles Peter, James and John, who witnessed it --

the two great and holy men of the Old Law, Moses and Elias, talking with Our Lord.

 

 Q. 375. What caused Our Lord's agony in the garden? 

 A It is believed Our Lord's agony in the garden was caused:

   1.(1) By his clear knowledge of all He was soon to endure; 

   2.(2) By the sight of the many offenses committed against His Father by the sins of the whole world; 

   3.(3) By His knowledge of men's ingratitude for the blessings of redemption.

 

 Q. 376. Why was Christ cruelly scourged? 

 A. Christ was cruelly scourged by Pilate's orders, that the sight of His bleeding body might move His enemies to

spare His life.

   

Q. 377. Why was Christ crowned with thorns? 

 A. Christ was crowned with thorns in mockery because He had said He was a King.

 

 Q. 378. Could Christ, if He pleased, have escaped the tortures of His Passion? 

 A. Christ could, if He pleased, have escaped the tortures of His Passion, because He foresaw them and had it in

His power to overcome His enemies.

 

 Q. 379. Was it necessary for Christ to suffer so much in order to redeem us? 

 A. It was not necessary for Christ to suffer so much in order to redeem us, for the least of His sufferings was more

than sufficient to atone for all the sins of mankind. By suffering so much He showed His great love for us.

 

 Q. 380. Who betrayed Our Lord? 

 A. Judas, one of His Apostles, betrayed Our Lord, and from His sin we may learn that even the good may become

very wicked by the abuse of their free will.

 

 Q. 381. How was Christ condemned to death? 

 A. Through the influence of those who hated Him, Christ was condemned to death, after an unjust trial, at which

false witnesses were induced to testify against Him.

 

 Q. 382. On what day did Christ die? 

 A. Christ died on Good Friday.

 

 Q. 383. Why do you call that day "good" on which Christ died so sorrowful a death? 

 A. We call that day good on which Christ died because by His death He showed His great love for man, and

purchased for him every blessing.

 

 Q. 384. How long was Our Lord hanging on the cross before He died? 

 A. Our Lord was hanging on the Cross about three hours before He died. While thus suffering, His enemies stood

around blaspheming and mocking Him. By His death He proved Himself a real mortal man, for He could not die in His divine nature.

 

 Q. 385. What do we call the words Christ spoke while hanging on the Cross? 

 A. We call the words Christ spoke while hanging on the Cross "the seven last words of Jesus on the Cross." They

teach us the dispositions we should have at the hour of death.

 

 Q. 386. Repeat the seven last words or sayings of Jesus on the Cross. 

 A. The seven last words or sayings of Jesus on the Cross are:

   1.(1) "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do," in which He forgives and prays for His enemies. 

   2.(2) "Amen, I say to thee, this day thou shalt be with Me in Paradise," in which He pardons the penitent

     sinner. 

   3.(3) "Woman, behold thy Son" -- "Behold thy Mother," in which He gave up what was dearest to Him on

     earth, and gave us Mary for our Mother. 

   4.(4) "My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" from which we learn the suffering of His mind. 

   5.(5) "I thirst," from which we learn the suffering of His body. 

   6.(6) "All is consummated," by which He showed the fulfillment of all the prophecies concerning Him and the

     completion of the work of our redemption. 

   7.(7) "Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit," by which He showed His perfect resignation to the Will of

     His Eternal Father.

 

 Q. 387. What happened at the death of Our Lord? 

 A. At the death of Our Lord there were darkness and earthquake; many holy dead came forth from their graves,

and the veil concealing the Holy of Holies, in the Temple of Jerusalem, was torn asunder.

 Q. 388. What was the Holy of Holies in the temple? 

 A. The Holy of Holies was the sacred part of the Temple, in which the Ark of the Covenant was kept, and where

the high priest consulted the Will of God.

 

 Q. 389. What was the "Ark of the Covenant"? 

 A. The Ark of the Covenant was a precious box in which were kept the tablets of stone bearing the written

Commandments of God, the rod which Aaron changed into a serpent before King Pharao, and a portion of the

manna with which the Israelites were miraculously fed in the desert. The Ark of the Covenant was a figure of the

Tabernacle in which we keep the Holy Eucharist.

 

 Q. 390. Why was the veil of the Temple torn asunder at the death of Christ? 

 A. The veil of the Temple was torn asunder at the death of Christ because at His death the Jewish religion ceased

to be the true religion, and God no longer manifested His presence in the Temple.

 

 Q. 391. Why did the Jewish religion, which up to the death of Christ had been the true religion, cease at

that time to be the true religion? 

 A. The Jewish religion, which, up to the death of Christ, had been the true religion, ceased at that time to be the

true religion, because it was only a promise of the redemption and figure of the Christian religion, and when the

redemption was accomplished and the Christian religion established by the death of Christ, the promise and the

figure were no longer necessary.

 

 Q. 392. Were all the laws of the Jewish religion abolished by the establishment of Christianity? 

 A. The moral laws of the Jewish religion were not abolished by the establishment of Christianity, for Christ came

not to destroy these laws, but to make them more perfect. Its ceremonial laws were abolished when the Temple of

Jerusalem ceased to be the House of God.

 

 Q. 393. What do we mean by moral and ceremonial laws? 

 A. By "moral" laws we mean laws regarding good and evil. By "ceremonial" laws we mean laws regulating the

manner of worshipping God in Temple or Church.

 

 Q. 394. Where did Christ die? 

 A. Christ died on Mount Calvary.

 

 Q. 395. Where was Mount Calvary, and what does the name signify? 

 A. Mount Calvary was the place of execution, not far from Jerusalem; and the name signifies the "place of skulls."

 

 Q. 396. How did Christ die? 

 A. Christ was nailed to the Cross, and died on it between two thieves.

 

 Q. 397. Why was Our Lord crucified between thieves? 

 A. Our Lord was crucified between thieves that His enemies might thus add to His disgrace by making Him equal

to the worst criminals.

 

 Q. 398. Why did Christ suffer and die? 

 A. Christ suffered and died for our sins.

 

 Q. 399. How was Our Lord's body buried? 

 A. Our Lord's body was wrapped in a clean linen cloth and laid in a new sepulchre or tomb cut in a rock, by

Joseph of Arimathea and other pious persons who believed in Our Divine Lord.

 

 Q. 400. What lessons do we learn from the sufferings and death of Christ? 

 A. From the sufferings and death of Christ we learn the great evil of sin, the hatred God bears to it, and the

necessity of satisfying for it.

 

 Q. 401. Whither did Christ's soul go after His death? 

 A. After Christ's death His soul descended into hell.

 

 Q. 402. Did Christ's soul descend into the hell of the damned? 

 A. The hell into which Christ's soul descended was not the hell of the dammed, but a place or state of rest called

Limbo, where the souls of the just were waiting for Him.

 

 Q. 403. Why did Christ descend into Limbo? 

 A. Christ descended into Limbo to preach to the souls who were in prison -- that is, to announce to them the joyful tidings of their redemption.

 

 Q. 404. Where was Christ's body while His soul was in Limbo? 

 A. While Christ's soul was in Limbo His body was in the holy sepulchre.

 

 Q. 405. On what day did Christ rise from the dead? 

 A. Christ rose from the dead, glorious and immortal, on Easter Sunday, the third day after His death.

 

 Q. 406. Why is the Resurrection the greatest of Christ's miracles? 

 A. The Resurrection is the greatest of Christ's miracles because all He taught and did is confirmed by it and

depends upon it. He promised to rise from the dead and without the fulfillment of that promise we could not believe in Him.

 

 Q. 407. Has any one ever tried to disprove the miracle of the resurrection? 

 A. Unbelievers in Christ have tried to disprove the miracle of the resurrection as they have tried to disprove all His other miracles; but the explanations they give to prove Christ's miracles false are far more unlikely and harder to believe than the miracles themselves.

   

Q. 408. What do we mean when we say Christ rose "glorious" from the dead? 

 A. When we say Christ rose "glorious" from the dead we mean that His body was in a glorified state; that is, gifted

with the qualities of a glorified body.

 

 Q. 409. What are the qualities of a glorified body? 

 A. The qualities of a glorified body are:

   1.(1) Brilliancy, by which it gives forth light; 

   2.(2) Agility, by which it moves from place to place as rapidly as an angel; 

   3.(3) Subtility, by which material things cannot shut it out; 

   4.(4) Impassibility, by which it is made incapable of suffering.

 

 Q. 410. Was Christ three full days in the tomb? 

 A. Christ was not three full days, but only parts of three days in the tomb.

 

 Q. 411. How long did Christ stay on earth after His resurrection? 

 A. Christ stayed on earth forty days after His resurrection, to show that He was truly risen from the dead, and to

instruct His apostles.

 

 Q. 412. Was Christ visible to all and at all times during the forty days He remained on earth after His

resurrection? 

 A. Christ was not visible to all nor at all times during the forty days He remained on earth after His resurrection.

We know that He appeared to His apostles and others at least nine times, though He may have appeared oftener.

 

 Q. 413. How did Christ show that He was truly risen from the dead? 

 A. Christ showed that He was truly risen from the dead by eating and conversing with His Apostles and others to

whom He appeared. He showed the wounds in His hands, feet and side, and it was after His resurrection that He

gave to His Apostles the power to forgive sins.

 

 Q. 414. After Christ had remained forty days on earth, whither did He go? 

 A. After forty days Christ ascended into heaven, and the day on which be ascended into heaven is called

Ascension Day.

 

 Q. 415. Where did the ascension of Our Lord take place? 

 A. Christ ascended into heaven from Mount Olivet, the place made sacred by His agony on the night before His

death.

 

 Q. 416. Who were present at the ascension and who ascended with Christ? 

 A. From various parts of Scripture we may conclude there were about 125 persons -- though traditions tell us

there was a greater number -- present at the Ascension. They were the Apostles, the Disciples, the pious women

and others who had followed Our Blessed Lord. The souls of the just who were waiting in Limbo for the

redemption ascended with Christ.

  Q. 417. Why is the paschal candle which is lighted on Easter morning extinguished at the Mass on

Ascension Day? 

 A. The paschal candle which is lighted on Easter morning signifies Christ's visible presence on earth, and it is

extinguished on Ascension Day to show that He, having fulfilled all the prophecies concerning Himself and having accomplished the work of redemption, has transferred the visible care of His Church to His Apostles and returned in His body to heaven.

  Q. 418. Where is Christ in heaven? 

 A. In heaven Christ sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.

 

 Q. 419. What do you mean by saying that Christ sits at the right hand of God? 

 A. When I say that Christ sits at the right hand of God I mean that Christ as God is equal to His Father in all things, and that as man He is in the highest place in heaven next to God.

 

 

 LESSON NINTH: On the Holy Ghost and His Descent upon the Apostles

  Q. 420. Who is the Holy Ghost?

 A. The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the Blessed Trinity. 

 

 Q. 421. Did the Holy Ghost ever appear?

 A. The Holy Ghost appeared at times under the form of a dove, and again under the form of tongues of fire; for,

being a pure spirit without a body, He can take any form. 

 

 Q. 422. Is the Holy Ghost called by other names?

 A. The Holy Ghost is called also the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, the Spirit of Truth and other names given in Holy

Scripture. 

 

 Q. 423. From whom does the Holy Ghost proceed?

 A. The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. 

 

 Q. 424. Is the Holy Ghost equal to the Father and the Son?

 A. The Holy Ghost is equal to the Father and the Son, being the same Lord and God as they are. 

 

 Q. 425. On what day did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?

 A. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles ten days after the Ascension of our Lord; and the day on which

He came down upon the Apostles is called Whitsunday, or Pentecost. 

 

 Q. 426. Why is the day on which the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles called Whitsunday?

 A. The day on which the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles is called Whitsunday or White Sunday,

probably because the Christians who were baptized on the eve of Pentecost wore white garments for some time

afterward, as a mark of the purity bestowed upon their souls by the Sacrament of Baptism. 

 

 Q. 427. Why is this feast called also Pentecost?

 A. This feast is called also Pentecost because Pentecost means the fiftieth; and the Holy Ghost came down upon

the Apostles fifty days after the resurrection of Our Lord. 

 

 Q. 428. How did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?

 A. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles in the form of tongues of fire. 

 

 Q. 429. What did the form of tongues of fire denote?

 A. The form of tongues of fire denoted the sacred character and divine authority of the preaching and teaching of

the Apostles, by whose words and fervor all men were to be converted to the love of God. 

  

Q. 430. Who sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles?

 A. Our Lord Jesus Christ sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. 

 

 Q. 431. Did the Apostles know that the Holy Ghost would come down upon them?

 A. The Apostles knew that the Holy Ghost would come down upon them; for Christ promised His Apostles that

after His Ascension He would send the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, to teach them all truths and to abide with

them forever. 

 

 Q. 432. Has any one ever denied the existence of the Holy Ghost?

 A. Some persons have denied the existence of the Holy Ghost; others have denied that He is a real person equal to

the Father and the Son; but all these assertions are shown to be false by the words of Holy Scripture and the

infallible teaching of the Church. 

   

Q. 433. What are the sins against the Holy Ghost which Our Lord said will not be forgiven either in this

world or in the next?

 A. The sins against the Holy Ghost which Our Lord said will not be forgiven either in this world or in the next, are sins committed out of pure malice, and greatly opposed to the mercy of God, and are, therefore, seldom forgiven. 

   

Q. 434. Why did Christ send the Holy Ghost?

 A. Christ sent the Holy Ghost to sanctify His Church, to enlighten and strengthen the Apostles, and to enable them to preach the Gospel. 

 

 Q. 435. How was the Church sanctified through the coming of the Holy Ghost?

 A. The Church was sanctified through the coming of the Holy Ghost by receiving those graces which Christ had

merited for His ministers, the bishops and priests, and for the souls of all those committed to their care. 

 

 Q. 436. How were the Apostles enlightened through the coming of the Holy Ghost?

 A. The Apostles were enlightened through the coming of the Holy Ghost by receiving the grace to remember and

understand in its true meaning all that Christ had said and done in their presence. 

 

 Q. 437. How were the Apostles strengthened through the coming of the Holy Ghost?

 A. The Apostles were strengthened through the coming of the Holy Ghost by receiving the grace to brave every

danger, even death itself, in the performance of their sacred duties. 

 

 Q. 438. What does "Apostle," and what does "Gospel" mean?

 A. "Apostle" means a person sent, and "Gospel" means good tidings or news. Hence the name "Gospel" is given to the inspired history of Our Lord's life and works upon earth. 

 

 Q. 439. Name the Apostles.

 A. The Apostles were: Peter, Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew, James, Thaddeus,

Simon, and Judas Iscariot, in whose place Mathias was chosen. 

 

 Q. 440. Was St. Paul an Apostle?

 A. St. Paul was an Apostle, but as he was not called till after the Ascension of Our Lord he is not numbered

among the twelve. He is called the Apostle of the Gentiles; that is, of all those who were not of the Jewish religion

or members of the Church of the Old Law. 

  

Q. 441. How did St. Paul become an Apostle?

 A. While on his way to persecute the Christians St. Paul was miraculously converted and called to be an Apostle

by Our Lord Himself, who spoke to him. St. Paul was called Saul before his conversion. 

 

 Q. 442. Who were the Evangelists?

 A. St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke and St. John are called Evangelists, because they wrote the four Gospels

bearing their names, and Evangelia is the Latin name for Gospels. St. Mark and St. Luke were not Apostles, but

St. Matthew and St. John were both Apostles and Evangelists. 

 

 Q. 443. Why did not the Apostles fully understand when Christ Himself taught them?

 A. The Apostles did not fully understand when Christ Himself taught them because during His stay with them on

earth they were only preparing to become Apostles; and their minds were yet filled with many worldly thoughts and desires that were to be removed at the coming of the Holy Ghost. 

 

 Q. 444. Will the Holy Ghost abide with the Church forever?

 A. The Holy Ghost will abide with the Church forever, and guide it in the way of holiness and truth. 

 

 Q. 445. What benefit do we derive from the knowledge that the Holy Ghost will abide with the Church

forever?

 A. From the knowledge that the Holy Ghost will abide with the Church forever we are made certain that the

Church can never teach us falsehood, and can never be destroyed by the enemies of Our Faith. 

  

Q. 446. What visible power was given to the Apostles through the coming of the Holy Ghost?

 A. Through the coming of the Holy Ghost the Apostles received the "gift of tongues," by which they could be

understood in every language, though they preached in only one. 

 

 Q. 447. Why did such wonderful gifts accompany confirmation, or the coming of the Holy Ghost, in the

first ages of the Church?

 A. Such wonderful gifts accompanied Confirmation in the first ages of the Church to prove the power, truth and

divine character of Christianity to those who otherwise might not believe, and to draw the attention of all to the

establishment of the Christian Church. 

 

 Q. 448. Why are these signs not continued everywhere at the present time?

 A. These signs are not continued everywhere at the present time, because now that the Church is fully established

and its divine character and power proved in other ways, such signs are no longer necessary. 

 

 Q. 449. Were such powers as the "gift of tongues" a part of the Sacrament of Confirmation?

 A. Such powers as the "gift of tongues" were not a part of the Sacrament of Confirmation, but they were added to

it by the Holy Ghost when necessary for the good of the Church. 

 

LESSON TENTH: On the Effects of the Redemption 

  Q. 450. What is an effect? 

 A. An effect is that which is caused by something else, as smoke, for example, is an effect of fire.

 

 Q. 451. What does redemption mean? 

 A. Redemption means the buying back of a thing that was given away or sold.

 

 Q. 452. What did Adam give away by his sin, and what did Our Lord buy back for him and us? 

 A. By his sin Adam gave away all right to God's promised gifts of grace in this world and of glory in the next, and Our Lord bought back the right that Adam threw away.

 

 Q. 453. Which are the chief effects of the Redemption? 

 A. The chief effects of the Redemption are two: The satisfaction of God's justice by Christ's sufferings and death,

and the gaining of grace for men.

 

 Q. 454. Why do we say "chief effects"? 

 A. We say "chief effects" to show that these are the most important but not the only effects of the Redemption --

for all the benefits of our holy religion and of its influence upon the world are the effects of the redemption.

   

Q. 455. Why did God's justice require satisfaction? 

 A. God's justice required satisfaction because it is infinite and demands reparation for every fault. Man in his state

of sin could not make the necessary reparation, so Christ became man and made it for him.

 

 Q. 456. What do you mean by grace? 

 A. By grace I mean a supernatural gift of God bestowed on us, through the merits of Jesus Christ, for our

salvation.

 

 Q. 457. What does "supernatural" mean? 

 A. Supernatural means above or greater than nature. All gifts such as health, learning or the comforts of life, that

affect our happiness chiefly in this world, are called natural gifts, and all gifts such as blessings that affect our

happiness chiefly in the next world are called supernatural or spiritual gifts.

 

 Q. 458. What do you mean by "merit"? 

 A. Merit means the quality of deserving well or ill for our actions. In the question above it means a right to reward for good deeds done.

 

 Q. 459. How many kinds of grace are there? 

 A. There are two kinds of grace, sanctifying grace and actual grace.

 

 Q. 460. What is the difference between sanctifying grace and actual grace? 

 A. Sanctifying grace remains with us as long as we are not guilty of mortal sin; and hence, it is often called habitual grace; but actual grace comes to us only when we need its help in doing or avoiding an action, and it remains with us only while we are doing or avoiding the action.

   

Q. 461. What is sanctifying grace? 

 A. Sanctifying grace is that grace which makes the soul holy and pleasing to God.

   

Q. 462. What do you call those graces or gifts of God by which we believe in Him, hope in Him, and love

Him? 

 A. Those graces or gifts of God by which we believe in Him, and hope in Him, and love Him, are called the Divine virtues of Faith, Hope, and Charity.

   

Q. 463. What do you mean by virtue and vice? 

 A. Virtue is the habit of doing good, and vice is the habit of doing evil. An act, good or bad, does not form a habit; and hence, a virtue or a vice is the result of repeated acts of the same kind.

   

Q. 464. Does habit excuse us from the sins committed through it? 

 A. Habit does not excuse us from the sins committed through it, but rather makes us more guilty by showing how

often we must have committed the sin to acquire the habit. If, however, we are seriously trying to overcome a bad

habit, and through forgetfulness yield to it, the habit may sometimes excuse us from the sin.

   

Q. 465. What is Faith? 

 A. Faith is a Divine virtue by which we firmly believe the truths which God has revealed.

   

Q. 466. What is Hope? 

 A. Hope is a Divine virtue by which we firmly trust that God will give us eternal life and the means to obtain it.

 

 Q. 467. What is Charity? 

 A. Charity is a Divine virtue by which we love God above all things for His own sake, and our neighbor as

ourselves for the love of God.

   

Q. 468. Why are Faith, Hope and Charity called virtues? 

 A. Faith, Hope and Charity are called virtues because they are not mere acts, but habits by which we always and

in all things believe God, hope in Him, and love Him.

  

Q. 469. What kind of virtues are Faith, Hope and Charity? 

 A. Faith, Hope and Charity are called infused theological virtues to distinguish them from the four moral virtues -- Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance.

 

 Q. 470. Why do we say the three theological virtues are infused and the four moral virtues acquired? 

 A. We say the three theological virtues are infused; that is, poured into our souls, because they are strictly gifts of

God and do not depend upon our efforts to obtain them, while the four moral virtues -- Prudence, Justice,

Fortitude and Temperance -- though also gifts of God, may, as natural virtues, be acquired by our own efforts.

 

 Q. 471. Why do we believe God, hope in Him, and love Him? 

 A. We believe God and hope in Him because He is infinitely true and cannot deceive us. We love Him because He is infinitely good and beautiful and worthy of all love.

 

 Q. 472. What mortal sins are opposed to Faith? 

 A. Atheism, which is a denial of all revealed truths, and heresy, which is a denial of some revealed truths, and

superstition, which is a misuse of religion, are opposed to Faith.

 

 Q. 473. Who is our neighbor? 

 A. Every human being capable of salvation of every age, country, race or condition, especially if he needs our help, is our neighbor in the sense of the Catechism.

 

 Q. 474. Why should we love our neighbor? 

 A. We should love our neighbor because he is a child of God, redeemed by Jesus Christ, and because he is our

brother created to dwell in heaven with us.

 

 Q. 475. What is actual grace? 

 A. Actual grace is that help of God which enlightens our mind and moves our will to shun evil and do good.

  Q. 476. Is grace necessary to salvation? 

 A. Grace is necessary to salvation, because without grace we can do nothing to merit heaven.

  Q. 477. Can we resist the grace of God? 

 A. We can, and unfortunately often do, resist the grace of God.

  Q. 478. Is it a sin knowingly to resist the grace of God? 

 A. It is a sin, knowingly, to resist the grace of God, because we thereby insult Him and reject His gifts without

which we cannot be saved.

  Q. 479. Does God give His grace to every one? 

 A. God gives to everyone He creates sufficient grace to save his soul; and if persons do not save their souls, it is

because they have not used the grace given.

  Q. 480. What is the grace of perseverance? 

 A. The grace of perseverance is a particular gift of God which enables us to continue in the state of grace till death.

  Q. 481. Can we merit the grace of final perseverance or know when we possess it? 

 A. We cannot merit the grace of final perseverance, or know when we possess it, because it depends entirely upon

God's mercy and not upon our actions. To imagine we possess it would lead us into the sin of presumption.

  Q. 482. Can a person merit any supernatural reward for good deeds performed while he is in mortal sin? 

 A. A person cannot merit any supernatural reward for good deeds performed while he is in mortal sin;

nevertheless, God rewards such good deeds by giving the grace of repentance; and, therefore, all persons, even

those in mortal sin, should ever strive to do good.

  Q. 483. Does God reward anything but our good works?

 A. God rewards our good intention and desire to serve Him, even when our works are not successful. We should

make this good intention often during the day, and especially in the morning.

 

 

 LESSON ELEVENTH: On the Church 

  Q. 484. How was the true religion preserved from Adam till the coming of Christ? 

 A. The true religion was preserved from Adam till the coming of Christ by the patriarchs, prophets and other holy

men whom God appointed and inspired to teach His Will and Revelations to the people, and to remind them of the promised Redeemer.

  Q. 485. Who were the prophets, and what was their chief duty? 

 A. The prophets were men to whom God gave a knowledge of future events connected with religion, that they

might foretell them to His people and thus give proof that the message came from God. Their chief duty was to

foretell the time, place and circumstances of Our Saviour's coming into the world, that men might know when and

where to look for Him, and might recognize Him when He came.

  Q. 486. How could they be saved who lived before Christ became man? 

 A. They who lived before Christ became man could be saved by belief in the Redeemer to come and by keeping

the Commandments of God.

 

 Q. 487. Was the true religion universal before the coming of Christ? 

 A. The true religion was not universal before the coming of Christ. It was confined to one people -- the

descendants of Abraham. All other nations worshipped false gods.

 

 Q. 488. Which are the means instituted by Our Lord to enable men at all times to share in the fruits of the

Redemption? 

 A. The means instituted by Our Lord to enable men at all times to share in the fruits of His Redemption are the

Church and the Sacraments.

 

 Q. 489. What is the Church? 

 A. The Church is the congregation of all those who profess the faith of Christ, partake of the same Sacraments,

and are governed by their lawful pastors under one visible Head.

 

 Q. 490. How may the members of the Church on earth be divided? 

 A. The members of the Church on earth may be divided into those who teach and those who are taught. Those

who teach, namely, the Pope, bishops and priests, are called the Teaching Church, or simply the Church. Those

who are taught are called the Believing Church, or simply the faithful.

 

 Q. 491. What is the duty of the Teaching Church? 

 A. The duty of the Teaching Church is to continue the work Our Lord began upon earth, namely, to teach revealed

truth, to administer the Sacraments and to labor for the salvation of souls.

 

 Q. 492. What is the duty of the faithful? 

 A. The duty of the faithful is to learn the revealed truths taught; to receive the Sacraments, and to aid in saving souls by their prayers, good works and alms.

 

 Q. 493. What do you mean by "profess the faith of Christ"? 

 A. By "profess the faith of Christ" we mean, believe all the truths and practice the religion He has taught.

 

 Q. 494. What do we mean by "lawful pastors"? 

 A. By "lawful pastors" we mean those in the Church who have been appointed by lawful authority and who have,

therefore, a right to rule us. The lawful pastors in the Church are: Every priest in his own parish; every bishop in his own diocese, and the Pope in the whole Church.

 

 Q. 495. Who is the invisible Head of the Church? 

 A. Jesus Christ is the invisible Head of the Church.

 

 Q. 496. Who is the visible Head of the Church? 

 A. Our Holy Father the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, is the Vicar of Christ on earth and the visible Head of the

Church.

 

 Q. 497. What does "vicar" mean? 

 A. Vicar is a name used in the Church to designate a person who acts in the name and authority of another. Thus a

Vicar Apostolic is one who acts in the name of the Pope, and a Vicar General is one who acts in the name of the

bishop.

 

 Q. 498. Could any one be Pope without being Bishop of Rome? 

 A. One could not be Pope without being Bishop of Rome, and whoever is elected Pope must give up his title to

any other diocese and take the title of Bishop of Rome.

 

 Q. 499. Why is the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, the visible Head of the Church? 

 A. The Pope, the Bishop of Rome, is the visible Head of the Church because he is the successor of St. Peter,

whom Christ made the chief of the Apostles and the visible Head of the Church.

  Q. 500. Why are Catholics called "Roman"? 

 A. Catholics are called Roman to show that they are in union with the true Church founded by Christ and governed by the Apostles under the direction of St. Peter, by divine appointment the Chief of the Apostles, who founded the Church of Rome and was its first bishop.

 

 Q. 501. By what name is a bishop's diocese sometimes called? 

 A. A bishop's diocese is sometimes called his see. The diocese of Rome, on account of its authority and dignity, is

called the Holy See, and its bishop is called the Holy Father or Pope. Pope means father.

 

 Q. 502. What do we call the right by which St. Peter or his successor has always been the head of the

Church and of all its bishops? 

 A. We call the right by which St. Peter or his successor has always been the head of the Church, and of all its

bishops, the Primacy of St. Peter or of the Pope. Primacy means holding first place.

 

 Q. 503. How is it shown that St. Peter or his successor has always been the head of the Church? 

 A. It is shown that St. Peter or his successor has always been the head of the Church:

   1.(1) From the words of Holy Scripture, which tell how Christ appointed Peter Chief of the Apostles and

     head of the Church. 

   2.(2) From the history of the Church, which shows that Peter and his successors have always acted and have

     always been recognized as the head of the Church.

 

 Q. 504. How do we know that the rights and privileges bestowed on St. Peter were given also to his

successors -- the Popes? 

 A. We know that the rights and privileges bestowed on St. Peter were given also to his successors, the Popes,

because the promises made to St. Peter by Our Lord were to be fulfilled in the Church till the end of time, and as

Peter was not to live till the end of time, they are fulfilled in his successors.

 

 Q. 505. Did St. Peter establish any Church before he came to Rome? 

 A. Before he came to Rome, St. Peter established a Church at Antioch and ruled over it for several years.

 

 Q. 506. Who are the successors of the other Apostles? 

 A. The successors of the other Apostles are the Bishops of the Holy Catholic Church.

 

 Q. 507. How do we know that the bishops of the Church are the successors of the Apostles? 

 A. We know that the bishops of the Church are the successors of the Apostles because they continue the work of

the Apostles and give proof of the same authority. They have always exercised the rights and powers that belonged

to the Apostles in making laws for the Church, in consecrating bishops and ordaining priests.

 

 Q. 508. Why did Christ found the Church? 

 A. Christ founded the Church to teach, govern, sanctify, and save all men.

 

 Q. 509. Are all bound to belong to the Church? 

 A. All are bound to belong to the Church, and he who knows the Church to be the true Church and remains out of

it cannot be saved.

 

 Q. 510. Is it ever possible for one to be saved who does not know the Catholic Church to be the true

Church? 

 A. It is possible for one to be saved who does not know the Catholic Church to be the true Church, provided that

person:

   1.(1) Has been validly baptized; 

   2.(2) Firmly believes the religion he professes and practices to be the true religion, and 

   3.(3) Dies without the guilt of mortal sin on his soul.

 

 Q. 511. Why do we say it is only possible for a person to be saved who does not know the Catholic

Church to be the true Church? 

 A. We say it is only possible for a person to be saved who does not know the Catholic Church to be the true

Church, because the necessary conditions are not often found, especially that of dying in a state of grace without

making use of the Sacrament of Penance.

 

 Q. 512. How are such persons said to belong to the Church? 

 A. Such persons are said to belong to the "soul of the church"; that is, they are really members of the Church

without knowing it. Those who share in its Sacraments and worship are said to belong to the body or visible part

of the Church.

 

 Q. 513. Why must the true Church be visible? 

 A. The true Church must be visible because its founder, Jesus Christ, commanded us under pain of condemnation

to hear the Church; and He could not in justice command us to hear a Church that could not be seen and known.

 

 Q. 514. What excuses do some give for not becoming members of the true Church? 

 A. The excuses some give for not becoming members of the true church are:

   1.(1) They do not wish to leave the religion in which they were born. 

   2.(2) There are too many poor and ignorant people in the Catholic Church. 

   3.(3) One religion is as good as another if we try to serve God in it, and be upright and honest in our lives.

 

 Q. 515. How do you answer such excuses? 

 A. 

   1.(1) To say that we should remain in a false religion because we were born in it is as untrue as to say we

     should not heal our bodily diseases because we were born with them. 

   2.(2) To say there are too many poor and ignorant in the Catholic Church is to declare that it is Christ's

     Church; for He always taught the poor and ignorant and instructed His Church to continue the work. 

   3.(3) To say that one religion is as good as another is to assert that Christ labored uselessly and taught falsely;

     for He came to abolish the old religion and found the new in which alone we can be saved as He Himself

     declared.

 

 Q. 516. Why can there be only one true religion? 

 A. There can be only one true religion, because a thing cannot be false and true at the same time, and, therefore, all religions that contradict the teaching of the true Church must teach falsehood. If all religions in which men seek to serve God are equally good and true, why did Christ disturb the Jewish religion and the Apostles condemn

heretics?

 

 

 LESSON TWELFTH: On the Attributes and Marks of the Church 

  Q. 517. What is an attribute? 

 A. An attribute is any characteristic or quality that a person or thing may be said to have. All perfections or

imperfections are attributes

.

  Q. 518. What is a mark? 

 A. A mark is a given and known sign by which a thing can be distinguished from all others of its kind. Thus a

trademark is used to distinguish the article bearing it from all imitations of the same article.

 

 Q. 519. How do we know that the Church must have the four marks and three attributes usually ascribed

or given to it? 

 A. We know that the Church must have the four marks and three attributes usually ascribed or given to it from the

words of Christ given in the Holy Scripture and in the teaching of the Church from its beginning.

 

 Q. 520. Can the Church have the four marks without the three attributes? 

 A. The Church cannot have the four marks without the three attributes, because the three attributes necessarily

come with the marks and without them the marks could not exist.

 

 Q. 521. Why are both marks and attributes necessary in the Church? 

 A. Both marks and attributes are necessary in the Church, for the marks teach us its external or visible qualities,

while the attributes teach us its internal or invisible qualities. It is easier to discover the marks than the attributes; for it is easier to see that the Church is one than that it is infallible.

 

 Q. 522. Which are the attributes of the Church? 

 A. The attributes of the Church are three:

   1.authority, infallibility, and indefectibility.

 

 Q. 523. What is authority? 

 A. Authority is the power which one person has over another so as to be able to justly exact obedience. Rulers

have authority over their subjects, parents over their children, and teachers over their scholars.

 

 Q. 524. From whom must all persons derive whatever lawful authority they possess? 

 A. All persons must derive whatever lawful authority they possess from God Himself, from whom they receive it

directly or indirectly. Therefore, to disobey our lawful superiors is to disobey God Himself, and hence such

disobedience is always sinful.

 

 Q. 525. What do you mean by the authority of the Church? 

 A. By the authority of the Church I mean the right and power which the Pope and the Bishops, as the successors

of the Apostles, have to teach and to govern the faithful.

 

 Q. 526. What do you mean by the infallibility of the Church? 

 A. By the infallibility of the Church I mean that the Church can not err when it teaches a doctrine of faith or morals.

 

 Q. 527. What do we mean by a "doctrine of faith or morals"? 

 A. By a doctrine of faith or morals we mean the revealed teaching that refers to whatever we must believe and do

in order to be saved.

 

 Q. 528. How do you know that the Church can not err? 

 A. I know that the Church can not err because Christ promised that the Holy Ghost would remain with it forever

and save it from error. If, therefore, the Church has erred, the Holy Ghost must have abandoned it and Christ has

failed to keep His promise, which is a thing impossible.

 

 Q. 529. Since the Church can not err, could it ever be reformed in its teaching of faith or morals? 

 A. Since the Church can not err, it could never be reformed in its teaching of faith or morals. Those who say the

Church needed reformation in faith or morals accuse Our Lord of falsehood and deception.

 

 Q. 530. When does the Church teach infallibly? 

 A. The Church teaches infallibly when it speaks through the Pope and Bishops united in general council, or through the Pope alone when he proclaims to all the faithful a doctrine of faith or morals.

 

 Q. 531. What is necessary that the Pope may speak infallibly or ex-cathedra? 

 A. That the Pope may speak infallibly, or ex-cathedra:

   1.(1) He must speak on a subject of faith or morals; 

   2.(2) He must speak as the Vicar of Christ and to the whole Church; 

   3.(3) He must indicate by certain words, such as, we define, we proclaim, etc., that he intends to speak

     infallibly.

 

 Q. 532. Is the Pope infallible in everything he says and does? 

 A. The Pope is not infallible in everything he says and does, because the Holy Ghost was not promised to make

him infallible in everything, but only in matters of faith and morals for the whole Church. Nevertheless, the Pope's opinion on any subject deserves our greatest respect on account of his learning, experience and dignity.

 

 Q. 533. Can the Pope commit sin? 

 A. The Pope can commit sin and he must seek forgiveness in the Sacrament of Penance as others do. Infallibility

does not prevent him from sinning, but from teaching falsehood when he speaks ex-cathedra.

 

 Q. 534. What does ex-cathedra mean? 

 A. "Cathedra" means a seat, and "ex" means out of. Therefore, ex-cathedra means speaking from the seat or

official place held by St. Peter and his successors as the head of the whole Church.

 

 Q. 535. Why is the chief Church in a diocese called a Cathedral? 

 A. The chief Church in a diocese is called a Cathedral because the bishop's cathedra, that is, his seat or throne, is

erected in it, and because he celebrates all important feasts and performs all his special duties in it.

 

 Q. 536. How many Popes have governed the Church from St. Peter to Pius XI.? 

 A. From St. Peter to Pius XI., 261 Popes have governed the Church; and many of them have been remarkable for

their zeal, prudence, learning and sanctity.

 

 Q. 537. What does anti-pope mean, and who were the anti-popes? 

 A. Anti-pope means a pretended pope. The anti-popes were men who by the aid of faithless Christians or others

unlawfully seized and claimed the papal power while the lawful pope was in prison or exile.

 

 Q. 538. Why must the Pope sometimes warn us on political and other matters? 

 A. The Pope must sometimes warn us on political and other matters, because whatever nations or men do is either

good or bad, just or unjust, and wherever the Pope discovers falsehood, wickedness or injustice he must speak

against it and defend the truths of faith and morals. He must protect also the temporal rights and property of the

Church committed to his care.

 

 Q. 539. What do we mean by the "temporal power" of the Pope? 

 A. By the temporal power of the Pope we mean the right which the Pope has as a temporal or ordinary ruler to

govern the states and manage the properties that have rightfully come into the possession of the Church.

 

 Q. 540. How did the Pope acquire and how was he deprived of the temporal power? 

 A. The Pope acquired the temporal power in a just manner by the consent of those who had a right to bestow it.

He was deprived of it in an unjust manner by political changes.

 

 Q. 541. How was the temporal power useful to the Church? 

 A. The temporal power was useful to the Church:

   1.(1) Because it gave the Pope the complete independence necessary for the government of the Church and

     for the defense of truth and virtue. 

   2.(2) It enabled him to do much for the spread of the true religion by giving alms for the establishment and

     support of Churches and schools in poor or pagan countries.

 

 Q. 542. What name do we give to the offerings made yearly by the faithful for the support of the Pope and

the government of the Church? 

 A. We call the offerings made yearly by the faithful for the support of the Pope and government of the Church

"Peter's pence." It derives its name from the early custom of sending yearly a penny from every house to the

successor of St. Peter, as a mark of respect or as an alms for some charity.

 

 Q. 543. What do you mean by the indefectibility of the Church? 

 A. By the indefectibility of the Church I mean that the Church, as Christ founded it, will last till the end of time.

 

 Q. 544. What is the difference between the infallibility and indefectibility of the Church? 

 A. When we say the Church is infallible we mean that it can never teach error while it lasts; but when we say the

Church is indefectible, we mean that it will last forever and be infallible forever; that it will always remain as Our

Lord founded it and never change the doctrines He taught.

 

 Q. 545. Did Our Lord Himself make all the laws of the Church? 

 A. Our Lord Himself did not make all the laws of the Church. He gave the Church also power to make laws to suit the needs of the times, places or persons as it judged necessary.

 

 Q. 546. Can the Church change its laws? 

 A. The Church can, when necessary, change the laws it has itself made, but it cannot change the laws that Christ

has made. Neither can the Church change any doctrine of faith or morals.

 

 Q. 547. In whom are these attributes found in their fullness? 

 A. These attributes are found in their fullness in the Pope, the visible Head of the Church, whose infallible authority to teach bishops, priests, and people in matters of faith or morals will last to the end of the world.

 

 Q. 548. Has the Church any marks by which it may be known? 

 A. The Church has four marks by which it may be known: it is One; it is Holy; it is Catholic; it is Apostolic.

 

 Q. 549. How is the Church One? 

 A. The Church is One because all its members agree in one faith, are all in one communion, and are all under one

head.

 

 Q. 550. How is it evident that the Church is one in government? 

 A. It is evident that the Church is one in government, for the faithful in a parish are subject to their pastors, the

pastors are subject to the bishops of their dioceses, and the bishops of the world are subject to the Pope.

 

 Q. 551. What is meant by the Hierarchy of the Church? 

 A. By the Hierarchy of the Church is meant the sacred body of clerical rules who govern the Church.

 

 Q. 552. How is it evident that the Church is one in worship? 

 A. It is evident that the Church is one in worship because all its members make use of the same sacrifice and

receive the same Sacraments.

 

 Q. 553. How is it evident that the Church is one in faith? 

 A. It is evident the Church is one in faith because all Catholics throughout the world believe each and every article of faith proposed by the Church.

 

 Q. 554. Could a person who denies only one article of our faith be a Catholic? 

 A. A person who denies even one article of our faith could not be a Catholic; for truth is one and we must accept it whole and entire or not at all.

 

 Q. 555. Are there any pious beliefs and practices in the Church that are not articles of faith? 

 A. There are many pious beliefs and practices in the Church that are not articles of faith; that is, we are not bound

under pain of sin to believe in them; yet we will often find them useful aids to holiness, and hence they are

recommended by our pastors.

 

 Q. 556. Of what sin are persons guilty who put firm belief in religious or other practices that are either

forbidden or useless? 

 A. Persons who put a firm belief in religious or other practices that are forbidden or useless are guilty of the sin of

superstition.

 

 Q. 557. Where does the Church find the revealed truths it is bound to teach? 

 A. The Church finds the revealed truths it is bound to teach in the Holy Scripture and revealed traditions.

 

 Q. 558. What is the Holy Scripture or Bible? 

 A. The Holy Scripture or Bible is the collection of sacred, inspired writings through which God has made known to us many revealed truths. Some call them letters from Heaven to earth, that is, from God to man.

 

 Q. 559. What is meant by the Canon of the Sacred Scriptures? 

 A. The Canon of Sacred Scriptures means the list the Church has prepared to teach us what sacred writings are

Holy Scripture and contain the inspired word of God.

 

 Q. 560. Where does the Church find the revealed traditions? 

 A. The Church finds the revealed traditions in the decrees of its councils; in its books of worship; in its paintings

and inscriptions on tombs and monuments; in the lives of its Saints; the writings of its Fathers, and in its own

history.

 

 Q. 561. Must we ourselves seek in the Scriptures and traditions for what we are to believe? 

 A. We ourselves need not seek in the Scriptures and traditions for what we are to believe. God has appointed the

Church to be our guide to salvation and we must accept its teaching us our infallible rule of faith.

 

 Q. 562. How do we show that the Holy Scriptures alone could not be our guide to salvation and infallible

rule of faith? 

 A. We show that the Holy Scripture alone could not be our guide to salvation and infallible rule of faith:

   1.(1) Because all men cannot examine or understand the Holy Scripture; but all can listen to the teaching of the

     Church; 

   2.(2) Because the New Testament or Christian part of the Scripture was not written at the beginning of the

     Church's existence, and, therefore, could not have been used as the rule of faith by the first Christians; 

   3.(3) Because there are many things in the Holy Scripture that cannot be understood without the explanation

     given by tradition, and hence those who take the Scripture alone for their rule of faith are constantly

     disputing about its meaning and what they are to believe.

 

 Q. 563. How is the Church Holy? 

 A. The Church is Holy because its founder, Jesus Christ, is holy; because it teaches a holy doctrine; invites all to a

holy life; and because of the eminent holiness of so many thousands of its children.

 

 Q. 564. How is the Church Catholic or universal? 

 A. The Church is Catholic or universal because it subsists in all ages, teaches all nations, and maintains all truth.

 

 Q. 565. How do you show that the Catholic Church is universal in time, in place, and in doctrine? 

 A. 

   1.(1) The Catholic Church is universal in time, for from the time of the Apostles to the present it has existed,

     taught and labored in every age; 

   2.(2) It is universal in place, for it has taught throughout the whole world; 

   3.(3) It is universal in doctrine, for it teaches the same everywhere, and its doctrines are suited to all classes of

     persons. It has converted all the pagan nations that have ever been converted.

 

 Q. 566. Why does the Church use the Latin language instead of the national language of its children? 

 A. The Church uses the Latin language instead of the national language of its children:

   1.(1) To avoid the danger of changing any part of its teaching in using different languages; 

   2.(2) That all its rulers may be perfectly united and understood in their communications; 

   3.(3) To show that the Church is not an institute of any particular nation, but the guide of all nations.

 

 Q. 567. How is the Church Apostolic? 

 A. The Church is Apostolic because it was founded by Christ on His Apostles, and is governed by their lawful

successors, and because it has never ceased, and never will cease, to teach their doctrine.

 

 Q. 568. Does the Church, by defining certain truths, thereby make new doctrines? 

 A. The Church, by defining, that is, by proclaiming certain truths, articles of faith, does not make new doctrines,

but simply teaches more clearly and with greater effort truths that have always been believed and held by the

Church.

 

 Q. 569. What, then, is the use of defining or declaring a truth an article of faith if it has always been

believed? 

A. The use of defining or declaring a truth an article of faith, even when it has always been believed, is:

   1.(1) To clearly contradict those who deny it and show their teaching false; 

   2.(2) To remove all doubt about the exact teaching of the Church, and to put an end to all discussion about

     the truth defined.

  Q. 570. In which Church are these attributes and marks found? 

 A. These attributes and marks are found in the Holy Roman Catholic Church alone.

 

 Q. 571. How do you show that Protestant Churches have not the marks of the true Church? 

 A. Protestant Churches have not the marks of the true Church, because:

   1.(1) They are not one either in government or faith; for they have no chief head, and they profess different

     beliefs; 

   2.(2) They are not holy, because their doctrines are founded on error and lead to evil consequences; 

   3.(3) They are not catholic or universal in time, place or doctrine. They have not existed in all ages nor in all

     places, and their doctrines do not suit all classes; 

   4.(4) They are not apostolic, for they were not established for hundreds of years after the Apostles, and they

     do not teach the doctrines of the Apostles.

  Q. 572. From whom does the Church derive its undying life and infallible authority? 

 A. The Church derives its undying life and infallible authority from the Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, who abides

with it forever.

  Q. 573. By whom is the Church made and kept One, Holy, and Catholic? 

 A. The Church is made and kept One, Holy, and Catholic by the Holy Ghost, the spirit of love and holiness, who

unites and sanctifies its members throughout the world.

 

 

 LESSON THIRTEENTH: On the Sacraments in General 

  Q. 574. What is a Sacrament? 

 A. A Sacrament is an outward sign instituted by Christ to give grace.

 

 Q. 575. Are these three things, namely: An outward or visible sign, the institution of that sign by Christ,

and the giving of grace through the use of that sign, always necessary for the existence of a Sacrament? 

 A. These three things, namely:

   1.An outward or visible sign, the institution of that sign by Christ, and the giving of grace through the use of

     that sign,

are always necessary for the existence of a Sacrament, and if any of the three be wanting there can be no

Sacrament.

 

 Q. 576. Why does the Church use numerous ceremonies or actions in applying the outward signs of the

Sacraments? 

 A. The Church uses numerous ceremonies or actions in applying the outward signs of the Sacraments to increase

our reverence and devotion for the Sacraments, and to explain their meaning and effects.

 

 Q. 577. How many Sacraments are there? 

 A. There are seven Sacraments:

   1.Baptism, Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony.

 

 Q. 578. Were all the Sacraments instituted by Our Lord? 

 A. All the Sacraments were instituted by Our Lord, for God alone has power to attach the gift of grace to the use

of an outward or visible sign. The Church, however, can institute the ceremonies to be used in administering or

giving the Sacraments.

 

 Q. 579. How do we know there are seven Sacraments and no more or less? 

 A. We know there are seven Sacraments and no more or less because the Church always taught that truth. The

number of the Sacraments is a matter of faith, and the Church cannot be mistaken in matters of faith.

 

 Q. 580. Why have the Sacraments been instituted? 

 A. The Sacraments have been instituted as a special means through which we are to receive the grace merited for

us by Christ. As Christ is the giver of the grace, He has the right to determine the manner in which it shall be given, and one who refuses to make use of the Sacraments will not receive God's grace.

 

 Q. 581. Do the Sacraments recall in any way the means by which Our Lord merited the graces we receive

through them? 

 A. The Sacraments recall in many ways the means by which Our Lord merited the graces we receive through

them. Baptism recalls His profound humility; Confirmation His ceaseless prayer; Holy Eucharist His care of the

needy; Penance His mortified life; Extreme Unction His model death; Holy Orders His establishment of the

priesthood, and Matrimony His close union with the Church.

 

 Q. 582. Give, for example, the outward sign in Baptism and Confirmation. 

 A. The outward sign in Baptism is the pouring of the water and the saying of the words of Baptism. The outward

sign in Confirmation is the anointing with oil, the saying of the words of Confirmation and the placing of the bishop's hands over the person he confirms.

 

 Q. 583. What is the use of the outward signs in the Sacraments? 

 A. Without the outward signs in the Sacraments we could not know when or with what effect the grace of the

Sacraments enters into our souls.

 

 Q. 584. Does the outward sign merely indicate that grace has been given, or does the use of the outward

sign with the proper intention also give the grace of the Sacrament? 

 A. The outward sign is not used merely to indicate that grace has been given, for the use of the outward sign with

the proper intention also gives the grace of the Sacrament. Hence the right application of the outward sign is always followed by the gift of internal grace if the Sacrament be administered with the right intention and received with the right dispositions.

 

 Q. 585. What do we mean by the "right intention" for the administration of the Sacraments? 

 A. By the right intention for the administration of the Sacraments we mean that whoever administers a Sacrament

must have the intention of doing what Christ intended when He instituted the Sacrament and what the Church

intends when it administers the Sacrament.

 

 Q. 586. Is there any likeness between the thing used in the outward sign and the grace given in each

Sacrament? 

A. There is a great likeness between the thing used in the outward sign and the grace given in each Sacrament; thus water is used for cleansing; Baptism cleanses the soul; Oil gives strength and light; Confirmation strengthens and enlightens the soul; Bread and wine nourish; the Holy Eucharist nourishes the soul.

 

 Q. 587. What do we mean by the "matter and form" of the Sacraments? 

 A. By the "matter" of the Sacraments we mean the visible things, such as water, oil, bread, wine, etc., used for the

Sacraments. By the "form" we mean the words, such as "I baptize thee," "I confirm thee," etc., used in giving or

administering the Sacraments.

 

 Q. 588. Do the needs of the soul resemble the needs of the body? 

 A. The needs of the soul do resemble the needs of the body; for the body must be born, strengthened, nourished,

healed in affliction, helped at the hour of death, guided by authority, and given a place in which to dwell. The soul is brought into spiritual life by Baptism; it is strengthened by Confirmation; nourished by the Holy Eucharist; healed by Penance; helped at the hour of our death by Extreme Unction; guided by God's ministers through the Sacrament of Holy Orders, and it is given a body in which to dwell by the Sacrament of Matrimony.

 

 Q. 589. Whence have the Sacraments the power of giving grace? 

 A. The Sacraments have the power of giving grace from the merits of Jesus Christ.

 

 Q. 590. Does the effect of the Sacraments depend on the worthiness or unworthiness of the one who

administers them? 

 A. The effect of the Sacraments does not depend on the worthiness or unworthiness of the one who administers

them, but on the merits of Jesus Christ, who instituted them, and on the worthy dispositions of those who receive

them.

 

 Q. 591. What grace do the Sacraments give? 

 A. Some of the Sacraments give sanctifying grace, and others increase it in our souls.

 

 Q. 592. When is a Sacrament said to give, and when is it said to increase, grace in our souls? 

 A. A Sacrament is said to give grace when there is no grace whatever in the soul, or in other words, when the soul

is in mortal sin. A Sacrament is said to increase grace when there is already grace in the soul, to which more is

added by the Sacrament received.

 

 Q. 593. Which are the Sacraments that give sanctifying grace? 

 A. The Sacraments that give sanctifying grace are Baptism and Penance; and they are called Sacraments of the

dead.

 

 Q. 594. Why are Baptism and Penance called Sacraments of the dead? 

 A. Baptism and Penance are called Sacraments of the dead because they take away sin, which is the death of the

soul, and give grace, which is its life.

 

 Q. 595. May not the Sacrament of Penance be received by one who is in a state of grace? 

 A. The Sacrament of Penance may be and very often is received by one who is in a state of grace, and when thus

received it increases -- as the Sacraments of the living do -- the grace already in the soul.

 

 Q. 596. Which are the Sacraments that increase sanctifying grace in our soul? 

 A. The Sacraments that increase sanctifying grace in our souls are:

   1.Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony;

and they are called Sacraments of the living.

 

 Q. 597. What do we mean by Sacraments of the dead and Sacraments of the living? 

 A. By the Sacraments of the dead we mean those Sacraments that may be lawfully received while the soul is in a

state of mortal sin. By the Sacraments of the living we mean those Sacraments that can be lawfully received only

while the soul is in a state of grace -- i.e., free from mortal sin. Living and dead do not refer here to the persons,

but to the condition of the souls; for none of the Sacraments can be given to a dead person.

 

 Q. 598. Why are Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony called

Sacraments of the living? 

 A. Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony are called Sacraments of the

living because those who receive them worthily are already living the life of grace.

 

 Q. 599. What sin does he commit who receives the Sacraments of the living in mortal sin? 

 A. He who receives the Sacraments of the living in mortal sin commits a sacrilege, which is a great sin, because it is  an abuse of a sacred thing.

 

 Q. 600. In what other ways besides the unworthy reception of the Sacraments may persons commit

sacrilege? 

 A. Besides the unworthy reception of the Sacraments, persons may commit sacrilege by the abuse of a sacred

person, place or thing; for example, by willfully wounding a person consecrated to God; by robbing or destroying a Church; by using the sacred vessels of the Altar for unlawful purposes, etc.

 

 Q. 601. Besides sanctifying grace do the Sacraments give any other grace? 

 A. Besides sanctifying grace the Sacraments give another grace, called sacramental grace.

 

 Q. 602. What is sacramental grace? 

 A. Sacramental grace is a special help which God gives, to attain the end for which He instituted each Sacrament.

 

 Q. 603. Is the Sacramental grace independent of the sanctifying grace given in the Sacraments? 

 A. The Sacramental grace is not independent of the sanctifying grace given in the Sacraments; for it is the

sanctifying grace that gives us a certain right to special helps -- called Sacramental grace -- in each Sacrament, as

often as we have to fulfill the end of the Sacrament or are tempted against it.

 

 Q. 604. Give an example of how the Sacramental grace aids us, for instance, in Confirmation and Penance.

 A. The end of Confirmation is to strengthen us in our faith. When we are tempted to deny our religion by word or

deed, the Sacramental Grace of Confirmation is given to us and helps us to cling to our faith and firmly profess it.

The end of Penance is to destroy actual sin. When we are tempted to sin, the Sacramental Grace of Penance is

given to us and helps us to overcome the temptation and persevere in a state of grace. The sacramental grace in

each of the other Sacraments is given in the same manner, and aids us in attaining the end for which each

Sacrament was instituted and for which we receive it.

 

 Q. 605. Do the Sacraments always give grace? 

 A. The Sacraments always give grace, if we receive them with the right dispositions.

 

 Q. 606. What do we mean by the "right dispositions" for the reception of the Sacraments? 

 A. By the right dispositions for the reception of the Sacraments we mean the proper motives and the fulfillment of

all the conditions required by God and the Church for the worthy reception of the Sacraments.

 

 Q. 607. Give an example of the "right dispositions" for Penance and for the Holy Eucharist. 

 A. The right dispositions for Penance are:

   1.(1)To confess all our mortal sins as we know them; 

   2.(2) To be sorry for them, and 

   3.(3) To have the determination never to commit them or others again.

The right dispositions for the Holy Eucharist are:

   1.(1) To know what the Holy Eucharist is; 

   2.(2) To be in a state of grace, and 

   3.(3) -- except in special cases of sickness -- to be fasting from midnight.

 

 Q. 608. Can we receive the Sacraments more than once? 

 A. We can receive the Sacraments more than once, except Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders.

 

 Q. 609. Why can we not receive Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders more than once? 

 A. We cannot receive Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders more than once, because they imprint a character

in the soul.

  

Q. 610. What is the character which these Sacraments imprint in the soul? 

 A. The character which these Sacraments imprint in the soul is a spiritual mark which remains forever.

 

 Q. 611. Does this character remain in the soul even after death? 

 A. This character remains in the soul even after death; for the honor and glory of those who are saved; for the

shame and punishment of those who are lost.

 

 Q. 612. Can the Sacraments be given conditionally? 

 A. The Sacraments can be given conditionally as often as we doubt whether they were properly given before, or

whether they can be validly given now.

 

 Q. 613. What do we mean by giving a Sacrament conditionally? 

 A. By giving a Sacrament conditionally we mean that the person administering the Sacrament intends to give it only in case it has not been given already or in case the person has the right dispositions for receiving it, though the dispositions cannot be discovered.

 

 Q. 614. Give an example of how a Sacrament is given conditionally. 

 A. In giving Baptism, for instance, conditionally -- or what we call conditional Baptism -- the priest, instead of

saying absolutely, as he does in ordinary Baptism: "I baptize thee," etc., says: "If you are not already baptized, or if you are capable of being baptized, I baptize thee," etc., thus stating the sole condition on which he intends to

administer the Sacrament.

  Q. 615. Which of the Sacraments are most frequently given conditionally? 

 A. The Sacraments most frequently given conditionally are Baptism, Penance and Extreme Unction; because in

some cases it is difficult to ascertain whether these Sacraments have been given before or whether they have been

validly given, or whether the person about to receive them has the right dispositions for them.

 

 Q. 616. Name some of the more common circumstances in which a priest is obliged to administer the

Sacraments conditionally. 

 A. Some of the more common circumstances in which a priest is obliged to administer the Sacraments conditionally

are:

   1.(1) When he receives converts into the Church and is not certain of their previous baptism, he must baptize

     them conditionally. 

   2.(2) When he is called -- as in cases of accident or sudden illness -- and doubts whether the person be alive

     or dead, or whether he should be given the Sacraments, he must give absolution and administer Extreme

     Unction conditionally.

 

 Q. 617. What is the use and effect of giving the Sacraments conditionally? 

 A. The use of giving the Sacraments conditionally is that there may be no irreverence to the Sacraments in giving

them to persons incapable or unworthy of receiving them; and yet that no one who is capable or worthy may be

deprived of them. The effect is to supply the Sacrament where it is needed or can be given, and to withhold it

where it is not needed or cannot be given.

 

 Q. 618. What is the difference between the powers of a bishop and of a priest with regard to the

administration of the Sacraments? 

 A. The difference between the powers of a bishop and of a priest with regard to the administration of the

Sacraments is that a bishop can give all the Sacraments, while a priest cannot give Confirmation or Holy Orders.

 

 Q. 619. Can a person receive all the Sacraments? 

 A. A person cannot, as a rule, receive all the Sacraments; for a woman cannot receive Holy Orders, and a man

who receives priesthood is forbidden to receive the Sacrament of Matrimony.

 

 

 

 

 LESSON FOURTEENTH: On Baptism 

  Q. 620. When was baptism instituted? 

 A. Baptism was instituted, very probably, about the time Our Lord was baptized by St. John, and its reception

was commanded when after His resurrection Our Lord said to His Apostles: "All power is given to Me in heaven

and in earth. Going, therefore, teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of

the Holy Ghost."

 

 Q. 621. What is Baptism? 

 A. Baptism is a Sacrament which cleanses us from original sin, makes us Christians, children of God, and heirs of

heaven.

 

 Q. 622. What were persons called in the first ages of the Church who were being instructed and prepared

for baptism? 

 A. Persons who were being instructed and prepared for baptism, in the first ages of the Church, were called

catechumens, and they are frequently mentioned in Church history.

 

 Q. 623. What persons are called heirs? 

 A. All persons who inherit or come lawfully into the possession of property or goods at the death of another, are

called heirs.

 

 Q. 624. Why, then, are we the heirs of Christ? 

 A. We are the heirs of Christ because at His death we came into the possession of God's friendship, of grace, and

of the right to enter heaven, provided we comply with the conditions Our Lord has laid down for the gaining of this inheritance.

 

 Q. 625. What conditions has Our Lord laid down for the gaining of this inheritance? 

 A. The conditions Our Lord has laid down for the gaining of this inheritance are:

   1.(1) That we receive, when possible, the Sacraments He has instituted; and 

   2.(2) That we believe and practice all He has taught.

 

 Q. 626. Did not St. John the Baptist institute the Sacrament of Baptism? 

 A. St. John the Baptist did not institute the Sacrament of Baptism, for Christ alone could institute a Sacrament. The baptism given by St. John had the effect of a Sacramental; that is, it did not of itself give grace, but prepared the way for it.

 

 Q. 627. Are actual sins ever remitted by Baptism? 

 A. Actual sins and all the punishment due to them are remitted by Baptism, if the person baptized be guilty of any.

 

 Q. 628. That actual sins may be remitted by baptism, is it necessary to be sorry for them? 

 A. That actual sins may be remitted by baptism it is necessary to be sorry for them, just as we must be when they

are remitted by the Sacrament of Penance.

 

 Q. 629. What punishments are due to actual sins? 

 A. Two punishments are due to actual sins: one, called the eternal, is inflicted in hell; and the other, called the

temporal, is inflicted in this world or in purgatory. The Sacrament of Penance remits or frees us from the eternal

punishment and generally only from part of the temporal. Prayer, good works and indulgences in this world and the sufferings of purgatory in the next remit the remainder of the temporal punishment.

 

 Q. 630. Why is there a double punishment attached to actual sins? 

    1.There is a double punishment attached to actual sins, because in their commission there is a double guilt: 

   2.

   3.(1) Of insulting God and of turning away from Him; 

   4.(2) Of depriving Him of the honor we owe Him, and of turning to His enemies.

 

 Q. 631. Is Baptism necessary to salvation? 

 A. Baptism is necessary to salvation, because without it we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

 

 Q. 632. Where will persons go who -- such as infants -- have not committed actual sin and who, through no

fault of theirs, die without baptism? 

 A. Persons, such as infants, who have not committed actual sin and who, through no fault of theirs, die without

baptism, cannot enter heaven; but it is the common belief they will go to some place similar to Limbo, where they

will be free from suffering, though deprived of the happiness of heaven.

 

 Q. 633. Who can administer Baptism? 

 A. A priest is the ordinary minister of baptism; but in case of necessity anyone who has the use of reason may

baptize.

 

 Q. 634. What do we mean by the "ordinary minister" of a Sacrament? 

 A. By the "ordinary minister" of a Sacrament we mean the one who usually does administer the Sacrament, and

who has always the right to do so.

 

 Q. 635. Can a person who has not himself been baptized, and who does not even believe in the Sacrament

of baptism, give it validly to another in case of necessity? 

 A. A person who has not himself been baptized, and who does not even believe in the Sacrament of baptism, can

give it validly to another in case of necessity, provided:

   1.(1) He has the use of reason; 

   2.(2) Knows how to give baptism, and 

   3.(3) Intends to do what the Church intends in the giving of the Sacrament. Baptism is so necessary that God

     affords every opportunity for its reception.

   

Q. 636. Why do the consequences of original sin, such as suffering, temptation, sickness, and death,

remain after the sin has been forgiven in baptism? 

 A. The consequences of original sin, such as suffering, temptation, sickness and death, remain after the sin has been forgiven in baptism:

   1.(1) To remind us of the misery that always follows sin; and 

   2.(2) To afford us an opportunity of increasing our merit by bearing these hardships patiently.

  

Q. 637. Can a person ever receive any of the other Sacraments without first receiving baptism? 

 A. A person can never receive any of the other Sacraments without first receiving baptism, because baptism makes us members of Christ's Church, and unless we are members of His Church we cannot receive His Sacraments.

   

Q. 638. How is Baptism given? 

 A. Whoever baptizes should pour water on the head of the person to be baptized, and say, while pouring the

water: "I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."

 

 Q. 639. If water cannot be had, in case of necessity, may any other liquid be used for baptism? 

 A. If water cannot be had, in case of necessity or in any case, no other liquid can be used, and the baptism cannot

be given.

 

 Q. 640. If it is impossible, in case of necessity, to reach the head, may the water be poured on any other

part of the body? 

 A. If it is impossible, in case of necessity, to reach the head, the water should be poured on whatever part of the

body can be reached; but then the baptism must be given conditionally; that is, before pronouncing the words of

baptism, you must say: "If I can baptize thee in this way, I baptize thee in the name of the Father," etc. If the head

can afterward be reached, the water must be poured on the head and the baptism repeated conditionally by saying:

"If you are not already baptized, I baptize thee in the name," etc.

 

 Q. 641. Is the baptism valid if we say: "I baptize thee in the name of the Holy Trinity," without naming the

Persons of the Trinity? 

   The baptism is not valid if we say: "I baptize thee in the name of the Holy Trinity," without naming the Persons of  the Trinity; for we must use the exact words instituted by Christ. 

 Q. 642. Is it wrong to defer the baptism of an infant? 

 A. It is wrong to defer the baptism of an infant, because we thereby expose the child to the danger of dying without the Sacrament.

 

 Q. 643. Can we baptize a child against the wishes of its parents? 

 A. We cannot baptize a child against the wishes of its parents; and if the parents are not Catholics, they must not

only consent to the baptism, but also agree to bring the child up in the Catholic religion. But if a child is surely

dying, we may baptize it without either the consent or permission of its parents.

 

 Q. 644. How many kinds of Baptism are there? 

 A. There are three kinds of Baptism:

   1.Baptism of water, of desire, and of blood.

 

 Q. 645. What is Baptism of water? 

 A. Baptism of water is that which is given by pouring water on the head of the person to be baptized, and saying at the same time, "I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."

 

 Q. 646. In how many ways was the baptism of water given in the first ages of the Church? 

 A. In the first ages of the Church, baptism of water was given in three ways, namely, by immersion or dipping, by

aspersion or sprinkling, and by infusion or pouring. Although any of these methods would be valid, only the method of infusion or pouring is now allowed in the Church.

 

 Q. 647. What are the chief ceremonies used in solemn baptism, and what do they signify? 

 A. The chief ceremonies used in solemn baptism are:

   1.(1) A profession of faith and renouncement of the devil to signify our worthiness; 

   2.(2) The placing of salt in the mouth to signify the wisdom imparted by faith; 

   3.(3) The holding of the priest's stole to signify our reception into the Church; 

   4.(4) The anointing to signify the strength given by the Sacrament; 

   5.(5) The giving of the white garment or cloth to signify our sinless state after baptism; and 

   6.(6) The giving of the lighted candle to signify the light of faith and fire of love that should dwell in our souls.

 

 Q. 648. Should one who, in case of necessity, has been baptized with private baptism, be afterwards

brought to the Church to have the ceremonies of solemn baptism completed? 

 A. One who, in case of necessity, has been baptized with private baptism should afterwards be brought to the

Church to have the ceremonies of solemn baptism completed, because these ceremonies are commanded by the

Church and bring down blessings upon us.

 

 Q. 649. Is solemn baptism given with any special kind of water? 

 A. Solemn baptism is given with consecrated water; that is, water mixed with holy oil and blessed for baptism on

Holy Saturday and on the Saturday before Pentecost. It is always kept in the baptismal font in the baptistry -- a

place near the door of the Church set apart for baptism.

 

 Q. 650. What is Baptism of desire? 

 A. Baptism of desire is an ardent wish to receive Baptism, and to do all that God has ordained for our salvation.

 

 Q. 651. What is Baptism of blood? 

 A. Baptism of blood is the shedding of one's blood for the faith of Christ.

 

 Q. 652. What is the baptism of blood most commonly called? 

 A. The baptism of blood is most commonly called martyrdom, and those who receive it are called martyrs. It is the  death one patiently suffers from the enemies of our religion, rather than give up Catholic faith or virtue. We must  not seek martyrdom, though we must endure it when it comes.

 

 Q. 653. Is Baptism of desire or of blood sufficient to produce the effects of Baptism of water? 

 A. Baptism of desire or of blood is sufficient to produce the effects of the Baptism of water, if it is impossible to

receive the Baptism of water.

 

 Q. 654. How do we know that the baptism of desire or of blood will save us when it is impossible to

receive the baptism of water? 

 A. We know that baptism of desire or of blood will save us when it is impossible to receive the baptism of water,

from Holy Scripture, which teaches that love of God and perfect contrition can secure the remission of sins ; and

also that Our Lord promises salvation to those who lay down their life for His sake or for His teaching.

 

 Q. 655. What do we promise in Baptism? 

 A. In Baptism we promise to renounce the devil, with all his works and pomps.

 

 Q. 656. What do we mean by the "pomps" of the devil? 

 A. By the pomps of the devil we mean all worldly pride, vanities and vain shows by which people are enticed into

sin, and all foolish or sinful display of ourselves or of what we possess.

 

 Q. 657. Why is the name of a saint given in Baptism? 

 A. The name of a saint is given in Baptism in order that the person baptized may imitate his virtues and have him for a protector.

 

 Q. 658. What is the Saint whose name we bear called? 

 A. The saint whose name we bear is called our patron saint -- to whom we should have great devotion.

 

 Q. 659. What names should never be given in baptism? 

 A. These and similar names should never be given in baptism:

   1.(1) The names of noted unbelievers, heretics or enemies of religion and virtue; 

   2.(2) The names of heathen gods, and 

   3.(3) Nick-names.

 

 Q. 660. Why are godfathers and godmothers given in Baptism? 

 A. Godfathers and godmothers are given in Baptism in order that they may promise, in the name of the child, what the child itself would promise if it had the use of reason.

 

 Q. 661. By what other name are godfathers and godmothers called? 

 A. Godfathers and godmothers are usually called sponsors. Sponsors are not necessary at private baptism.

 

 Q. 662. Can a person ever be sponsor when absent from the baptism? 

 A. A person can be sponsor even when absent from the baptism, provided he has been asked and has consented

to be sponsor, and provided also some one answers the questions and touches the person to be baptized in his

name. The absent godfather or godmother is then said to be sponsor by proxy and becomes the real godparent of

the one baptized.

 

 Q. 663. With whom do godparents, as well as the one baptizing, contract a relationship? 

 A. Godparents, as well as the one baptizing, contract a spiritual relationship with the person baptized (not with his

parents), and this relationship is an impediment to marriage that must be made known to the priest in case of their

future marriage with one another. The godfather and godmother contract no relationship with each other.

 

 Q. 664. What questions should persons who bring a child for baptism be able to answer? 

 A. Persons who bring a child for baptism should be able to tell:

   1.(1) The exact place where the child lives; 

   2.(2) The full name of its parents, and, in particular, the maiden name, or name before her marriage, of its

     mother; 

   3.(3) The exact day of the month on which it was born; 

   4.(4) Whether or not it has received private baptism, and 

   5.(5) Whether its parents be Catholics.

Sponsors must know also the chief truths of our religion.

 

 Q. 665. What is the obligation of a godfather and a godmother? 

 A. The obligation of a godfather and a godmother is to instruct the child in its religious duties, if the parents neglect to do so or die.

 

 Q. 666. Can persons who are not Catholics be sponsors for Catholic children? 

 A. Persons who are not Catholics cannot be sponsors for Catholic children, because they cannot perform the

duties of sponsors; for if they do not know and profess the Catholic religion themselves, how can they teach it to

their godchildren? Moreover, they must answer the questions asked at baptism and declare that they believe in the

Holy Catholic Church and in all it teaches; which would be a falsehood on their part.

 

 Q. 667. What should parents chiefly consider in the selection of sponsors for their children? 

 A. In the selection of sponsors for their children parents should chiefly consider the good character and virtue of

the sponsors, selecting model Catholics to whom they would be willing at the hour of death to entrust the care and

training of their children.

 

 Q. 668. What dispositions must adults or grown persons, have that they may worthily receive baptism? 

 A. That adults may worthily receive baptism:

   1.(1) They must be willing to receive it; 

   2.(2) They must have faith in Christ; 

   3.(3) They must have true sorrow for their sins, and 

   4.(4) They must solemnly renounce the devil and all his works; that is, all sin.

 

 Q. 669. What is the ceremony of churching? 

 A. The ceremony of churching is a particular blessing which a mother receives at the Altar, as soon as she is able

to present herself in the Church after the birth of her child. In this ceremony the priest invokes God's blessing on

the mother and child, while she on her part returns thanks to God

.

 

 LESSON FIFTEENTH: On Confirmation 

  Q. 670. What is Confirmation? 

 A. Confirmation is a Sacrament through which we receive the Holy Ghost to make us strong and perfect Christians and soldiers of Jesus Christ.

 

 Q. 671. When was Confirmation instituted? 

 A. The exact time at which Confirmation was instituted is not known. But as this Sacrament was administered by

the Apostles and numbered with the other Sacraments instituted by Our Lord, it is certain that He instituted this

Sacrament also and instructed His Apostles in its use, at some time before His ascension into heaven.

 

 Q. 672. Why is Confirmation so called? 

 A. Confirmation is so called from its chief effect, which is to strengthen or render us more firm in whatever belongs to our faith and religious duties.

 

 Q. 673. Why are we called soldiers of Jesus Christ? 

 A. We are called soldiers of Jesus Christ to indicate how we must resist the attacks of our spiritual enemies and

secure our victory over them by following and obeying Our Lord.

 

 Q. 674. May one add a new name to his own at Confirmation? 

 A. One may and should add a new name to his own at Confirmation, especially when the name of a saint has not

been given in Baptism.

 

 Q. 675. Who administers Confirmation? 

 A. The bishop is the ordinary minister of Confirmation.

 

 Q. 676. Why do we say the bishop is the "ordinary minister" of Confirmation? 

 A. We say the bishop is the ordinary minister of Confirmation because in some foreign missions, where bishops

have not yet been appointed, the Holy Father permits one of the priests to administer Confirmation with the Holy

Oil blessed by the bishop.

 

 Q. 677. How does the bishop give Confirmation? 

 A. The bishop extends his hands over those who are to be confirmed, prays that they may receive the Holy Ghost,

and anoints the forehead of each with holy chrism in the form of a cross.

 

 Q. 678. In Confirmation, what does the extending of the bishop's hands over us signify? 

 A. In Confirmation, the extending of the bishop's hands over us signifies the descent of the Holy Ghost upon us and the special protection of God through the grace of Confirmation.

 

 Q. 679. What is holy chrism? 

 A. Holy chrism is a mixture of olive-oil and balm, consecrated by the bishop.

 

 Q. 680. What do the oil and balm in Holy Chrism signify? 

 A. In Holy Chrism, the oil signifies strength, and the balm signifies the freedom from corruption and the sweetness which virtue must give to our lives.

 

 Q. 681. How many holy oils are used in the Church? 

 A. Three holy oils are used in the Church, namely, the oil of the sick, the oil of catechumens, and holy chrism.

 

 Q. 682. What constitutes the difference between these oils? 

 A. The form of prayer or blessing alone constitutes the difference between these oils; for they are all olive oil, but in the Holy Chrism, balm is mixed with the oil.

 

 Q. 683. When and by whom are the holy oils blessed? 

 A. The holy oils are blessed at the Mass on Holy Thursday by the bishop, who alone has the right to bless them.

After the blessing they are distributed to the priests of the diocese, who must then burn what remains of the old oils and use the newly blessed oils for the coming year.

 

 Q. 684. For what are the holy oils used? 

 A. The holy oils are used as follows: The oil of the sick is used for Extreme Unction and for some blessings; the oil of catechumens is used for Baptism and Holy Orders. Holy Chrism is used at Baptism and for the blessing of some sacred things, such as altars, chalices, church-bells, etc., which are usually blessed by a bishop.

 

 Q. 685. What does the bishop say in anointing the person he confirms? 

 A. In anointing the person he confirms the bishop says: "I sign thee with the sign of the cross, and I confirm thee

with the chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."

 

 Q. 686. What is meant by anointing the forehead with chrism in the form of a cross? 

 A. By anointing the forehead with chrism in the form of a cross is meant that the Christian who is confirmed must

openly profess and practice his faith, never be ashamed of it; and rather die than deny it.

 

 Q. 687. When must we openly profess and practice our religion? 

 A. We must openly profess and practice our religion as often as we cannot do otherwise without violating some

law of God or of His Church.

 

 Q. 688. Why have we good reason never to be ashamed of the Catholic faith? 

 A. We have good reason never to be ashamed of the Catholic Faith because it is the Old Faith established by

Christ and taught by His Apostles; it is the Faith for which countless Holy Martyrs suffered and died; it is the Faith that has brought true civilization, with all its benefits, into the world, and it is the only Faith that can truly reform and preserve public and private morals.

 

 Q. 689. Why does the bishop give the person he confirms a slight blow on the cheek? 

 A. The bishop gives the person he confirms a slight blow on the cheek, to put him in mind that he must be ready to suffer everything, even death, for the sake of Christ.

 

 Q. 690. Is it right to test ourselves through our imagination of what we would be willing to suffer for the

sake of Christ? 

 A. It is not right to test ourselves through our imagination of what we would be willing to suffer for the sake of

Christ, for such tests may lead us into sin. When a real test comes we are assured God will give to us, as He did to

the Holy Martyrs, sufficient grace to endure it.

 

 Q. 691. To receive Confirmation worthily is it necessary to be in the state of grace? 

 A. To receive Confirmation worthily it is necessary to be in the state of grace.

 

 Q. 692. What special preparation should be made to receive Confirmation? 

 A. Persons of an age to learn should know the chief mysteries of faith and the duties of a Christian, and be

instructed in the nature and effects of this Sacrament.

 

 Q. 693. Why should we know the chief mysteries of faith and the duties of a Christian before receiving

Confirmation? 

 A. We should know the Chief Mysteries of Faith and the duties of a Christian before receiving Confirmation

because as one cannot be a good soldier without knowing the rules of the army to which he belongs and

understanding the commands of his leader, so one cannot be a good Christian without knowing the laws of the

Church and understanding the commands of Christ.

 

 Q. 694. Is it a sin to neglect Confirmation? 

 A. It is a sin to neglect Confirmation, especially in these evil days when faith and morals are exposed to so many

and such violent temptations.

 

 Q. 695. What do we mean by "these evil days"? 

 A. By "these evil days" we mean the present age or century in which we are living, surrounded on all sides by

unbelief, false doctrines, bad books, bad example and temptation in every form.

 

 Q. 696. Is Confirmation necessary for salvation? 

 A. Confirmation is not so necessary for salvation that we could not be saved without it, for it is not given to infants even in danger of death; nevertheless, there is a divine command obliging all to receive it, if possible. Persons who have not been confirmed in youth should make every effort to be confirmed later in life.

 

 Q. 697. Are sponsors necessary in Confirmation? 

 A. Sponsors are necessary in Confirmation, and they must be of the same good character as those required at

Baptism, for they take upon themselves the same duties and responsibilities. They also contract a spiritual

relationship, which, however, unlike that in Baptism, is not an impediment to marriage.

 

 Q. 698. Which are the effects of Confirmation? 

 A. The effects of Confirmation are an increase of sanctifying grace, the strengthening of our faith, and the gifts of

the Holy Ghost.

 

 Q. 699. Which are the gifts of the Holy Ghost? 

 A. The gifts of the Holy Ghost are Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety, and Fear of

the Lord.

 

 Q. 700. Why do we receive the gift of Fear of the Lord? 

 A. We receive the gift of Fear of the Lord to fill us with a dread of sin.

 

 Q. 701. Why do we receive the gift of Piety? 

 A. We receive the gift of Piety to make us love God as a Father, and obey Him because we love Him.

 

 Q. 702. Why do we receive the gift of Knowledge? 

 A. We receive the gift of Knowledge to enable us to discover the will of God in all things.

 

 Q. 703. Why do we receive the gift of Fortitude? 

 A. We receive the gift of Fortitude to strengthen us to do the will of God in all things.

 

 Q. 704. Why do we receive the gift of Counsel? 

 A. We receive the gift of Counsel to warn us of the deceits of the devil, and of the dangers to salvation.

 

 Q. 705. How is it clear that the devil could easily deceive us if the Holy Ghost did not aid us? 

 A. It is clear that the devil could easily deceive us if the Holy Ghost did not aid us, for just as our sins do not

deprive us of our knowledge, so the devil's sin did not deprive him of the great intelligence and power which he

possessed as an angel. Moreover, his experience in the world extends over all ages and places, while ours is

confined to a few years and to a limited number of places.

 

 Q. 706. Why do we receive the gift of Understanding? 

 A. We receive the gift of Understanding to enable us to know more clearly the mysteries of faith.

 

 Q. 707. Why do we receive the gift of Wisdom? 

 A. We receive the gift of Wisdom to give us a relish for the things of God, and to direct our whole life and all our

actions to His honor and glory.

 

 Q. 708. Which are the Beatitudes? 

 A. The Beatitudes are:

   1.1. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 

   2.2. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the land. 

   3.3. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. 

   4.4. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall be filled. 

   5.5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 

   6.6. Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. 

   7.7. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. 

   8.8. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

 

 Q. 709. What are the Beatitudes and why are they so called? 

 A. The Beatitudes are a portion of Our Lord's Sermon on the Mount, and they are so called because each of them

holds out a promised reward to those who practice the virtues they recommend.

 

 Q. 710. Where did Our Lord usually preach? 

 A. Our Lord usually preached wherever an opportunity of doing good by His Words presented itself. He preached

at times in the synagogues or meeting-houses but more frequently in the open air -- by the seashore or on the

mountain, and often by the wayside.

 

 Q. 711. What is the meaning and use of the Beatitudes in general? 

 A. 

   1.(1) In general the Beatitudes embrace whatever pertains to the perfection of Christian life, and they invite us

     to the practice of the highest Christian virtues. 

   2.(2) In different forms they all promise the same reward, namely, sanctifying grace in this life and eternal glory

     in the next. 

   3.(3) They offer us encouragement and consolation for every trial and affliction.

 

 Q. 712. What does the first Beatitude mean by the "poor in spirit"? 

 A. The first Beatitude means by the "poor in spirit" all persons, rich or poor, who would not offend God to possess or retain anything that this world can give; and who, when necessity or charity requires it, give willingly for the glory of God. It includes also those who humbly submit to their condition in life when it cannot be improved by lawful means.

 

 Q. 713. Who are the mourners who deserve the consolation promised in the third Beatitude? 

 A. The mourners who deserve the consolation promised in the third Beatitude are they who, out of love for God,

bewail their own sins and those of the world; and they who patiently endure all trials that come from God or for His sake.

 

 Q. 714. What lessons do the other Beatitudes convey? 

 A. The other Beatitudes convey these lessons: The meek suppress all feelings of anger and humbly submit to

whatever befalls them by the Will of God; and they never desire to do evil for evil. The justice after which we

should seek is every Christian virtue included under that name, and we are told that if we earnestly desire and seek it we shall obtain it. The persecuted for justice' sake are they who will not abandon their faith or virtue for any cause.

 

 Q. 715. Who may be rightly called merciful? 

 A. The merciful are they who practice the corporal and spiritual works of mercy, and who aid by word or deed

those who need their help for soul or body.

 

 Q. 716. Why are the clean of heart promised so great a reward? 

 A. The clean of heart, that is, the truly virtuous, whose thoughts, desires, words and works are pure and modest,

are promised so great a reward because the chaste and sinless have always been the most intimate friends of God.

 

 Q. 717. What is the duty of a peacemaker? 

 A. It is the duty of a peacemaker to avoid and prevent quarrels, reconcile enemies, and to put an end to all evil

reports of others or evil speaking against them. As peacemakers are called the children of God, disturbers of

peace should be called the children of the devil.

 

 Q. 718. Why does Our Lord speak in particular of poverty, meekness, sorrow, desire for virtue, mercy,

purity, peace and suffering? 

 A. Our Lord speaks in particular of poverty, meekness, sorrow, desire for virtue, mercy, purity, peace and

suffering because these are the chief features in His own earthly life; poverty in His birth, life and death; meekness in His teaching; sorrow at all times. He eagerly sought to do good, showed mercy to all, recommended chastity, brought peace, and patiently endured suffering.

 

 Q. 719. Which are the twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost? 

 A. The twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost are Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Long-suffering,

Mildness, Faith, Modesty, Continency, and Chastity.

 

 Q. 720. Why are charity, joy, peace, etc., called fruits of the Holy Ghost? 

 A. Charity, joy, peace, etc., are called fruits of the Holy Ghost because they grow in our souls out of the seven

gifts of the Holy Ghost.

 

 

 

 LESSON SEVENTEENTH: On the Sacrament of Penance 

  Q. 721. What is the Sacrament of Penance? 

 A. Penance is a Sacrament in which the sins committed after Baptism are forgiven.

 

 Q 722. Has the word Penance any other meaning? 

 A. The word Penance has other meanings. It means also those punishments we inflict upon ourselves as a means of atoning for our past sins; it means likewise that disposition of the heart in which we detest and bewail our sins

because they were offensive to God.

 

 Q. 723. How does the institution of the Sacrament of Penance show the goodness of Our Lord? 

 A. The institution of the Sacrament of Penance shows the goodness of Our Lord, because having once saved us

through Baptism, He might have left us to perish if we again committed sin.

 

 Q. 724. What are the natural benefits of the Sacrament of Penance? 

 A. The natural benefits of the Sacrament of Penance are: It gives us in our confessor a true friend, to whom we can go in all our trials and to whom we can confide our secrets with the hope of obtaining advice and relief.

 

 Q. 725. How does the Sacrament of Penance remit sin, and restore to the soul the friendship of God? 

 A. The Sacrament of Penance remits sin and restores the friendship of God to the soul by means of the absolution

of the priest.

 

 Q. 726. What is Absolution? 

 A. Absolution is the form of prayer or words the priest pronounces over us with uplifted hand when he forgives the sins we have confessed. It is given while we are saying the Act of Contrition after receiving our Penance.

 

 Q. 727. Does the priest ever refuse absolution to a penitent? 

 A. The priest must and does refuse absolution to a penitent when he thinks the penitent is not rightly disposed for

the Sacrament. He sometimes postpones the absolution till the next confession, either for the good of the penitent

or for the sake of better preparation -- especially when the person has been a long time from confession.

 

 Q. 728. What should a person do when the priest has refused or postponed absolution? 

 A. When the priest has refused or postponed absolution, the penitent should humbly submit to his decision, follow

his instructions, and endeavor to remove whatever prevented the giving of the absolution and return to the same

confessor with the necessary dispositions and resolution of amendment.

 

 Q. 729. Can the priest forgive all sins in the Sacrament of Penance? 

 A. The priest has the power to forgive all sins in the Sacrament of Penance, but he may not have the authority to

forgive all. To forgive sins validly in the Sacrament of Penance, two things are required:

   1.(1) The power to forgive sins which every priest receives at his ordination, and 

   2.(2) The right to use that power which must be given by the bishop, who authorizes the priest to hear

     confessions and pass judgment on the sins.

 

 Q. 730. What are the sins called which the priest has no authority to absolve? 

 A. The sins which the priest has no authority to absolve are called reserved sins. Absolution from these sins can be obtained only from the bishop, and sometimes only from the Pope, or by his special permission. Persons having a reserved sin to confess cannot be absolved from any of their sins till the priest receives faculties or authority to absolve the reserved sin also.

 

 Q. 731. Why is the absolution from some sins reserved to the Pope or bishop? 

 A. The absolution from some sins is reserved to the Pope or bishop to deter or prevent, by this special restriction,

persons from committing them, either on account of the greatness of the sin itself or on account of its evil

consequences.

 

 Q. 732. Can any priest absolve a person in danger of death from reserved sins without the permission of

the bishop? 

 A. Any priest can absolve a person in danger of death from reserved sins without the permission of the bishop,

because at the hour of death the Church removes these restrictions in order to save, if possible, the soul of the

dying.

 

 Q. 733. How do you know that the priest has the power of absolving from the sins committed after

Baptism? 

 A. I know that the priest has the power of absolving from the sins committed after Baptism, because Jesus Christ

granted that power to the priests of His Church when He said: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose sins you shall

forgive, they are forgiven them; whose sins you shall retain, they are retained."

 

 Q. 734. How do we know that Our Lord, while on earth, had the power to forgive sins? 

 A. We know that Our Lord, while on earth, had the power to forgive sins:

   1.(1) Because He was always God, and; 

   2.(2) Because He frequently did forgive sins and proved their forgiveness by miracles.

Since He had the power Himself, He could give it to His Apostles.

 

 Q. 735. Was the power to forgive sins given to the apostles alone? 

 A. The power to forgive sins was not given to the apostles alone, because it was not given for the benefit merely of those who lived at the time of the apostles, but for all who, having grievously sinned, after Baptism, should need forgiveness. Since, therefore, Baptism will be given till the end of time, and since the danger of sinning after it always remains the power to absolve from such sins must also remain in the Church till the end of time.

 

 Q. 736. When was the Sacrament of Penance instituted? 

 A. The Sacrament of Penance was instituted after the resurrection of Our Lord, when He gave to His apostles the

power to forgive sins, which He had promised to them before His death.

 

 Q. 737. Are the enemies of our religion right when they say man cannot forgive sins? 

 A. The enemies of our religion are right when they say man cannot forgive sins if they mean that he cannot forgive them by his own power, but they are certainly wrong if they mean that he cannot forgive them even by the power of God, for man can do anything if God gives him the power. The priest does not forgive sins by his own power as man, but by the authority he receives as the minister of God.

 

 Q. 738. How do the priests of the Church exercise the power of forgiving sins? 

 A. The priests of the Church exercise the power of forgiving sins by hearing the confession of sins, and granting

pardon for them as ministers of God and in His name.

 

 Q. 739. How does the power to forgive sins imply the obligation of going to confession? 

 A. The power to forgive sins implies the obligation of going to confession because as sins are usually committed

secretly, the priest could never know what sins to forgive and what not to forgive, unless the sins committed were

made known to him by the persons guilty of them.

 

 Q. 740. Could God not forgive our sins if we confessed them to Himself in secret? 

 A. Certainly, God could forgive our sins if we confessed them to Himself in secret, but He has not promised to do

so; whereas He has promised to pardon them if we confess them to His priests. Since He is free to pardon or not

to pardon, He has the right to establish a Sacrament through which alone He will pardon.

 

 Q. 741. What must we do to receive the Sacrament of Penance worthily? 

 A. To receive the Sacrament of Penance worthily we must do five things:

   1.1. We must examine our conscience. 

   2.2. We must have sorrow for our sins. 

   3.3. We must make a firm resolution never more to offend God. 

   4.4. We must confess our sins to the priest. 

   5.5. We must accept the penance which the priest gives us.

 

 Q. 742. What should we pray for in preparing for confession? 

 A. In preparing for confession we should pray to the Holy Ghost to give us light to know our sins and to

understand their guilt; for grace to detest them; for courage to confess them and for strength to keep our

resolutions.

 

 Q. 743. What faults do many commit in preparing for confession? 

 A. In preparing for confession many commit the faults:

   1.(1) Of giving too much time to the examination of conscience and little or none in exciting themselves to true

     sorrow for the sins discovered; 

   2.(2) Of trying to recall every trifling circumstance, instead of thinking of the means by which they will avoid

     their sins for the future.

 

 Q. 744. What, then, is the most important part of the preparation for confession? 

 A. The most important part of the preparation for confession is sincere sorrow for the sins committed and the firm

determination to avoid them for the future.

 

 Q. 745. What is the chief reason that our confessions do not always amend our way of living? 

 A. The chief reason that our confessions do not always amend our way of living is our want of real earnest

preparation for them and the fact that we have not truly convinced ourselves of the need of amendment. We often

confess our sins more from habit, necessity or fear than from a real desire of receiving grace and of being restored

to the friendship of God.

 

 Q. 746. What faults are to be avoided in making our confession? 

 A. In making our confession we are to avoid:

   1.(1) Telling useless details, the sins of others, or the name of any person; 

   2.(2) Confessing sins we are not sure of having committed; exaggerating our sins or their number; multiplying

     the number of times a day by the number of days to get the exact number of habitual sins; 

   3.(3) Giving a vague answer, such as "sometimes," when asked how often; waiting after each sin to be asked

     for the next; 

   4.(4) Hesitating over sins through pretented modesty and thus delaying the priests and others; telling the exact

     words in each when we have committed several sins of the same kind, cursing, for example; and, lastly,

     leaving the confessional before the priest gives us a sign to go.

 

 Q. 747. Is it wrong to go to confession out of your turn against the will of others waiting with you? 

 A. It is wrong to go to confession out of our turn against the will of others waiting with us, because:

   1.(1) It causes disorder, quarreling and scandalous conduct in the Church; 

   2.(2) It is unjust, makes others angry and lessens their good dispositions for confession; 

   3.(3) It annoys and distracts the priest by the confusion and disorder it creates.

It is better to wait than go to confession in an excited and disorderly manner.

 

 Q. 748. What should a penitent do who knows he cannot perform the penance given? 

 A. A penitent who knows he cannot perform the penance given should ask the priest for one that he can perform.

When we forget the penance given we must ask for it again, for we cannot fulfill our duty by giving ourselves a

penance. The penance must be performed at the time and in the manner the confessor directs.

 

 Q. 749. What is the examination of conscience? 

 A. The examination of conscience is an earnest effort to recall to mind all the sins we have committed since our last worthy confession.

 

 Q. 750. When is our confession worthy? 

 A. Our confession is worthy when we have done all that is required for a good confession, and when, through the

absolution, our sins are really forgiven.

 

 Q. 751. How can we make a good examination of conscience? 

 A. We can make a good examination of conscience by calling to memory the commandments of God, the precepts of the Church, the seven capital sins, and the particular duties of our state in life, to find out the sins we have committed.

  Q. 752. What should we do before beginning the examination of conscience? 

 A. Before beginning the examination of conscience we should pray to God to give us light to know our sins and

grace to detest them.

 

 LESSON EIGHTEENTH: On Contrition 

  Q. 753. What is contrition, or sorrow for sin? 

 A. Contrition, or sorrow for sin, is a hatred of sin and a true grief of the soul for having offended God, with a firm

purpose of sinning no more.

 

 Q. 754. Give an example of how we should hate and avoid sin. 

 A. We should hate and avoid sin as one hates and avoids a poison that almost caused his death. We may not

grieve over the death of our soul as we do over the death of a friend, and yet our sorrow may be true; because the

sorrow for sin comes more from our reason than from our feelings.

 

 Q. 755. What kind of sorrow should we have for our sins? 

 A. The sorrow we should have for our sins should be interior, supernatural, universal, and sovereign.

 

 Q. 756. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be interior? 

 A. When I say that our sorrow should be interior, I mean that it should come from the heart, and not merely from

the lips.

 

 Q. 757. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be supernatural? 

 A. When I say that our sorrow should be supernatural, I mean that it should be prompted by the grace of God,

and excited by motives which spring from faith, and not by merely natural motives.

 

 Q. 758. What do we mean by "motives that spring from faith" and by "merely natural motives" with

regard to sorrow for sin? 

 A. By sorrow for sin from "motives that spring from faith," we mean sorrow for reasons that God has made known to us, such as the loss of heaven, the fear of hell or purgatory, or the dread of afflictions that come from God in punishment for sin. By "merely natural motives" we mean sorrow for reasons made known to us by our own experience or by the experience of others, such as loss of character, goods or health. A motive is whatever moves our will to do or avoid anything.

 

 Q. 759. What do you mean by saying that our sorrow should be universal? 

 A. When I say that our sorrow should be universal, I mean that we should be sorry for all our mortal sins without

exception.

 

 Q. 760. Why cannot some of our mortal sins be forgiven while the rest remain on our souls? 

 A. It is impossible for any of our mortal sins to be forgiven unless they are all forgiven, because as light and

darkness cannot be together in the same place, so sanctifying grace and mortal sin cannot dwell together. If there

be grace in the soul, there can be no mortal sin, and if there be mortal sin, there can be no grace, for one mortal sin expels all grace.

 

 Q. 761. What do you mean when you say that our sorrow should be sovereign? 

 A. When I say that our sorrow should be sovereign, I mean that we should grieve more for having offended God

than for any other evil that can befall us.

 

 Q. 762. Why should we be sorry for our sins? 

 A. We should be sorry for our sins because sin is the greatest of evils and an offense against God our Creator,

Preserver, and Redeemer, and because it shuts us out of heaven and condemns us to the eternal pains of hell.

 

 Q. 763. How do we show that sin is the greatest of all evils? 

 A. We show that sin is the greatest of evils because its effects last the longest and have the most terrible

consequences. All the misfortunes of this world can last only for a time, and we escape them at death, whereas the

evils caused by sin keep with us for all eternity and are only increased at death.

 

 Q. 764. How many kinds of contrition are there? 

 A. There are two kinds of contrition; perfect contrition and imperfect contrition.

 

 Q. 765. What is perfect contrition? 

 A. Perfect contrition is that which fills us with sorrow and hatred for sin, because it offends God, who is infinitely

good in Himself and worthy of all love.

 

 Q. 766. When will perfect contrition obtain pardon for mortal sin without the Sacrament of Penance? 

 A. Perfect contrition will obtain pardon for mortal sin without the Sacrament of Penance when we cannot go to

confession, but with the perfect contrition we must have the intention of going to confession as soon as possible, if we again have the opportunity.

 

 Q. 767. What is imperfect contrition? 

 A. Imperfect contrition is that by which we hate what offends God because by it we lose heaven and deserve hell;

or because sin is so hateful in itself.

 

 Q. 768. What other name is given to imperfect contrition and why is it called imperfect? 

 A. Imperfect contrition is called attrition. It is called imperfect only because it is less perfect than the highest grade of contrition by which we are sorry for sin out of pure love of God's own goodness and without any consideration  of what befalls ourselves.

  

Q. 769. Is imperfect contrition sufficient for a worthy confession? 

 A. Imperfect contrition is sufficient for a worthy confession, but we should endeavor to have perfect contrition.

 

 Q. 770. What do you mean by a firm purpose of sinning no more? 

 A. By a firm purpose of sinning no more I mean a fixed resolve not only to avoid all mortal sin, but also its near

occasions.

 

 Q. 771. What do you mean by the near occasions of sin? 

 A. By the near occasions of sin I mean all the persons, places and things that may easily lead us into sin.

 

 Q. 772. Why are we bound to avoid occasions of sin? 

 A. We are bound to avoid occasions of sin because Our Lord has said: "He who loves the danger will perish in it"; and as we are bound to avoid the loss of our souls, so we are bound to avoid the danger of their loss. The

occasion is the cause of sin, and you cannot take away the evil without removing its cause.

 

 Q. 773. Is a person who is determined to avoid the sin, but who is unwilling to give up its near occasion

when it is possible to do so, rightly disposed for confession? 

 A. A person who is determined to avoid the sin, but who is unwilling to give up its near occasion when it is possible to do so, is not rightly disposed for confession, and he will not be absolved if he makes known to the priest the true state of his conscience.

 

 Q. 774. How many kinds of occasions of sin are there? 

 A. There are four kinds of occasions of sin:

   1.(1) Near occasions, through which we always fall; 

   2.(2) Remote occasions, through which we sometimes fall; 

   3.(3) Voluntary occasions or those we can avoid; and 

   4.(4) Involuntary occasions or those we cannot avoid.

A person who lives in a near and voluntary occasion of sin need not expect forgiveness while he continues in that

state.

 

 Q. 775. What persons, places and things are usually occasions of sin? 

 A. 

   1.(1) The persons who are occasions of sin are all those in whose company we sin, whether they be bad of

     themselves or bad only while in our company, in which case we also become occasions of sin for them; 

   2.(2) The places are usually liquor saloons, low theaters, indecent dances, entertainments, amusements,

     exhibitions, and all immoral resorts of any kind, whether we sin in them or not; 

   3.(3) The things are all bad books, indecent pictures, songs, jokes and the like, even when they are tolerated

     by public opinion and found in public places.

 

 

 

 LESSON NINETEENTH: On Confession 

  Q. 776. What is Confession? 

 A. Confession is the telling of our sins to a duly authorized priest, for the purpose of obtaining forgiveness.

 

 Q. 777. Who is a duly authorized priest? 

 A. A duly authorized priest is one sent to hear confessions by the lawful bishop of the diocese in which we are at

the time of our confession.

 

 Q. 778. Is it ever allowed to write our sins and read them to the priest in the confessional or give them to

him to read? 

 A. It is allowed, when necessary, to write our sins and read them to the priest, as persons do who have almost

entirely lost their memory. It is also allowed to give the paper to the priest, as persons do who have lost the use of

their speech. In such cases the paper must, after the confession, be carefully destroyed either by the priest or the

penitent.

 

 Q. 779. What is to be done when persons must make their confession and cannot find a priest who

understands their language? 

 A. Persons who must make their confession and who cannot find a priest who understands their language, must

confess as best they can by some signs, showing what sins they wish to confess and how they are sorry for them.

 

 Q. 780. What sins are we bound to confess? 

 A. We are bound to confess all our mortal sins, but it is well also to confess our venial sins.

 

 Q. 781. Why is it well to confess also the venial sins we remember? 

 A. It is well to confess also the venial sins we remember:

   1.(1) Because it shows our hatred of all sin, and 

   2.(2) Because it is sometimes difficult to determine just when a sin is venial and when mortal.

 

 Q. 782. What should one do who has only venial sins to confess? 

 A. One who has only venial sins to confess should tell also some sin already confessed in his past life for which he knows he is truly sorry; because it is not easy to be truly sorry for slight sins and imperfections, and yet we must be sorry for the sins confessed that our confession may be valid -- hence we add some past sin for which we are truly sorry to those for which we may not be sufficiently sorry.

 

 Q. 783. Should a person stay from confession because he thinks he has no sin to confess ? 

 A. A person should not stay from confession because he thinks he has no sin to confess, for the Sacrament of

Penance, besides forgiving sin, gives an increase of sanctifying grace, and of this we have always need, especially

to resist temptation. The Saints, who were almost without imperfection, went to confession frequently.

 

 Q. 784. Should a person go to Communion after confession even when the confessor does not bid him go?

 A. A person should go to Communion after confession even when the confessor does not bid him go, because the

confessor so intends unless he positively forbids his penitent to receive Communion. However, one who has not

yet received his first Communion should not go to Communion after confession, even if the confessor by mistake

should bid him go.

 

 Q. 785. Which are the chief qualities of a good Confession? 

 A. The chief qualities of a good Confession are three: it must be humble, sincere, and entire.

 

 Q. 786. When is our Confession humble? 

 A. Our Confession is humble when we accuse ourselves of our sins, with a deep sense of shame and sorrow for

having offended God.

 

 Q. 787. When is our Confession sincere? 

 A. Our Confession is sincere when we tell our sins honestly and truthfully, neither exaggerating nor excusing them.

 

 Q. 788. Why is it wrong to accuse ourselves of sins we have not committed? 

 A. It is wrong to accuse ourselves of sins we have not committed, because, by our so doing, the priest cannot

know the true state of our souls, as he must do before giving us absolution.

 

 Q. 789. When is our Confession entire? 

 A. Our Confession is entire when we tell the number and kinds of our sins and the circumstances which change

their nature.

 

 Q. 790. What do you mean by the "kinds of sin?" 

 A. By the "kinds of sin," we mean the particular division or class to which the sins belong; that is, whether they be sins of blasphemy, disobedience, anger, impurity, dishonesty, etc. We can determine the kind of sin by discovering the commandment or precept of the Church we have broken or the virtue against which we have acted.

  Q. 791. What do we mean by "circumstances which change the nature of sins?" 

 A. By "circumstances which change the nature of sins" we mean anything that makes it another kind of sin. Thus to steal is a sin, but to steal from the Church makes our theft sacrilegious. Again, impure actions are sins, but a person  must say whether they were committed alone or with others, with relatives or strangers, with persons married or single, etc., because these circumstances change them from one kind of impurity to another.

 

 Q. 792. What should we do if we cannot remember the number of our sins? 

 A. If we cannot remember the number of our sins, we should tell the number as nearly as possible, and say how

often we may have sinned in a day, a week, or a month, and how long the habit or practice has lasted.

 

 Q. 793. Is our Confession worthy if, without our fault, we forget to confess a mortal sin? 

 A. If without our fault we forget to confess a mortal sin, our Confession is worthy, and the sin is forgiven; but it

must be told in Confession if it again comes to our mind.

 

 Q. 794. May a person who has forgotten to tell a mortal sin in confession go to Holy Communion before

going again to confession? 

 A. A person who has forgotten to tell a mortal sin in confession may go to communion before again going to

confession, because the forgotten sin was forgiven with those confessed, and the confession was good and worthy.

 

 Q. 795. Is it a grievous offense willfully to conceal a mortal sin in Confession? 

 A. It is a grievous offense willfully to conceal a mortal sin in Confession, because we thereby tell a lie to the Holy

Ghost, and make our Confession worthless.

 

 Q. 796. How is concealing a sin telling a lie to the Holy Ghost? 

 A. Concealing a sin is telling a lie to the Holy Ghost, because he who conceals the sin declares in confession to

God and the priest that he committed no sins but what he has confessed, while the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth,

saw him committing the sin he now conceals and still sees it in his soul while he denies it.

 

 Q. 797. Why is it foolish to conceal sins in confession? 

 A. It is foolish to conceal sins in confession:

   1.(1) Because we thereby make our spiritual condition worse; 

   2.(2) We must tell the sin sometime if we ever hope to be saved; 

   3.(3) It will be made known on the day of judgment, before the world, whether we conceal it now or confess

     it.

 

 Q. 798. What must he do who has willfully concealed a mortal sin in Confession? 

 A. He who has willfully concealed a mortal sin in Confession must not only confess it, but must also repeat all the

sins he has committed since his last worthy Confession.

 

 Q. 799. Must one who has willfully concealed a mortal sin in confession do more than repeat the sins

committed since his last worthy confession? 

 A. One who has willfully concealed a mortal sin in confession must, besides repeating all the sins he has committed since his last worthy confession, tell also how often he has unworthily received absolution and Holy Communion during the same time.

 

 Q. 800. Why does the priest give us a penance after Confession? 

 A. The priest gives us a penance after Confession, that we may satisfy God for the temporal punishment due to our sins.

 

 Q. 801. Why should we have to satisfy for our sins if Christ has fully satisfied for them? 

 A. Christ has fully satisfied for our sins and after our baptism we were free from all guilt and had no satisfaction to make. But when we willfully sinned after baptism, it is but just that we should be obliged to make some satisfaction.

 

 Q. 802. Is the slight penance the priest gives us sufficient to satisfy for all the sins confessed? 

 A. The slight penance the priest gives us is not sufficient to satisfy for all the sins confessed:

   1.(1) Because there is no real equality between the slight penance given and the punishment deserved for sin; 

   2.(2) Because we are all obliged to do penance for sins committed, and this would not be necessary if the

     penance given in confession satisfied for all.

The penance is given and accepted in confession chiefly to show our willingness to do penance and make amends

for our sins.

  Q. 803. Does not the Sacrament of Penance remit all punishment due to sin? 

 A. The Sacrament of Penance remits the eternal punishment due to sin, but it does not always remit the temporal

punishment which God requires as satisfaction for our sins.

 

 Q. 804. Why does God require a temporal punishment as a satisfaction for sin? 

 A. God requires a temporal punishment as a satisfaction for sin to teach us the great evil of sin and to prevent us

from falling again.

 

 Q. 805. Which are the chief means by which we satisfy God for the temporal punishment due to sin? 

 A. The chief means by which we satisfy God for the temporal punishment due to sin are: Prayer, Fasting,

Almsgiving; all spiritual and corporal works of mercy, and the patient suffering of the ills of life.

 

 Q. 806. What fasting has the greatest merit? 

 A. The fasting imposed by the Church on certain days of the year, and particularly during Lent, has the greatest

merit.

 

 Q. 807. What is Lent? 

 A. Lent is the forty days before Easter Sunday, during which we do penance, fast and pray to prepare ourselves

for the resurrection of Our Lord; and also to remind us of His own fast of forty days before His Passion.

 

 Q. 808. What do we mean by "almsgiving"? 

 A. By almsgiving we mean money, goods, or assistance given to the poor or to charitable purposes. The law of

God requires all persons to give alms in proportion to their means.

 

 Q. 809. What "ills of life" help to satisfy God for sin? 

 A. The ills of life that help to satisfy God for sin are sickness, poverty, misfortune, trial, affliction, etc., especially,

when we have not brought them upon ourselves by sin.

 

 Q. 810. How did the Christians in the first ages of the Church do Penance? 

 A. The Christians in the first ages of the Church did public penance, especially for the sins of which they were

publicly known to be guilty. Penitents were excluded for a certain time from Mass or the Sacrament, and some

were obliged to stand at the door of the Church begging the prayers of those who entered.

 

 Q. 811. What were these severe Penances of the First Ages of the Church called? 

 A. These severe penances of the first ages of the Church were called canonical penances, because their kind and

duration were regulated by the Canons or laws of the Church.

 

 Q. 812. How can we know spiritual from corporal works of mercy? 

 A. We can know spiritual from corporal works of mercy, for whatever we do for the soul is a spiritual work, and

whatever we do for the body is a corporal work.

 

 Q. 813. Which are the chief spiritual works of mercy? 

 A. The chief spiritual works of mercy are seven:

   1.To admonish the sinner, to instruct the ignorant, to counsel the doubtful, to comfort the sorrowful, to bear

     wrongs patiently, to forgive all injuries, and to pray for the living and the dead.

 

 Q. 814. When are we bound to admonish the sinner? 

 A. We are bound to admonish the sinner when the following conditions are fulfilled:

   1.(1) When his fault is a mortal sin; 

   2.(2) When we have authority or influence over him, and 

   3.(3) When there is reason to believe that our warning will not make him worse instead of better.

  Q. 815. Who are meant by the "ignorant" we are to instruct, and the "doubtful" we are to counsel? 

 A. By the ignorant we are to instruct and the doubtful we are to counsel, are meant those particularly who are

ignorant of the truths of religion and those who are in doubt about matters of faith. We must aid such persons as far  as we can to know and believe the truths necessary for salvation.

 

 Q. 816. Why are we advised to bear wrong patiently and to forgive all injuries? 

 A. We are advised to bear wrongs patiently and to forgive all injuries, because, being Christians, we should imitate the example of Our Divine Lord, who endured wrongs patiently and who not only pardoned but prayed for those who injured Him.

 

 Q. 817. If, then, it be a Christian virtue to forgive all injuries, why do Christians establish courts and

prisons to punish wrongdoers? 

A. Christians establish courts and prisons to punish wrongdoers, because the preservation of lawful authority, good order in society, the protection of others, and sometimes even the good of the guilty one himself, require that crimes be justly punished. As God Himself punishes crime and as lawful authority comes from Him, such authority has the right to punish, though individuals should forgive the injuries done to themselves personally.

 

 Q. 818. Why is it a work of mercy to pray for the living and the dead? 

 A. It is a work of mercy to aid those who are unable to aid themselves. The living are exposed to temptations, and

while in mortal sin they are deprived of the merit of their good works and need our prayers. The dead can in no

way help themselves and depend on us for assistance.

 

 Q. 819. Which are the chief corporal works of mercy? 

 A. The chief corporal works of mercy are seven:

   1.To feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, to ransom the captive, to harbor the

     harborless, to visit the sick, and to bury the dead.

 

 Q. 820. How may we briefly state the corporal works of mercy? 

 A. We may briefly state the corporal works of mercy by saying that we are obliged to help the poor in all their

forms of want.

 

 Q. 821. How are Christians aided in the performance of works of mercy? 

 A. Christians are aided in the performance of works of mercy through the establishment of charitable institutions

where religious communities of holy men or women perform these duties for us, provided we supply the necessary means by our almsgiving and good works.

 

 Q. 822. Who are religious? 

 A. Religious are self-sacrificing men and women who, wishing to follow more closely the teachings of Our Lord,

dedicate their lives to the service of God and religion. They live together in societies approved by the Church,

under a rule and guidance of a superior. They keep the vows of chastity, poverty and obedience, and divide their

time between prayer and good works. The houses in which they dwell are called convents or monasteries, and the

societies in which they live are called religious orders, communities or congregations.

 

 Q. 823. Are there any religious communities of priests? 

 A. There are many religious communities of priests, who, besides living according to the general laws of the

Church, as all priests do, follow certain rules laid down for their community. Such priests are called the regular

clergy, because living by rules to distinguish them from the secular clergy who live in their parishes under no special rule. The chief work of the regular clergy is to teach in colleges and give missions and retreats.

 

 Q. 824. Why are there so many different religious communities? 

 A. There are many different religious communities:

   1.(1) Because all religious are not fitted for the same work, and 

   2.(2) Because they desire to imitate Our Lord's life on earth as perfectly as possible; and when each

     community takes one of Christ's works and seeks to become perfect in it, the union of all their works

     continues as perfectly as we can the works He began upon earth.

 

 

LESSON TWENTIETH: On the Manner of Making a Good Confession 

 

 Q. 825. What should we do on entering the confessional? 

 A. On entering the confessional we should kneel, make the sign of the Cross, and say to the priest, "Bless me,

father"; then add, "I confess to Almighty God and to you, father, that I have sinned."

 

 Q. 826. Which are the first things we should tell the priest in Confession? 

 A. The first things we should tell the priest in Confession are the time of our last Confession, and whether we said

the penance and went to Holy Communion.

 

 Q. 827. Should we tell anything else in connection with our last confession? 

 A. In connection with our last confession we should tell also what restrictions -- if any -- were placed upon us with  regard to our occasions of sin, and what obligations with regard to the payment of debts, restitution, injuries done to others and the like, we were commanded to fulfill.

 

 Q. 828. After telling the time of our last Confession and Communion what should we do? 

 A. After telling the time of our last Confession and Communion we should confess all the mortal sins we have since committed, and all the venial sins we may wish to mention.

 

 Q. 829. What is a general confession? 

 A. A general confession is the telling of the sins of our whole life or a great part of it. It is made in the same manner as an ordinary confession, except that it requires more time and longer preparation.

 

 Q. 830. When should a General Confession be made? 

 A. A general confession:

   1.(1) Is necessary when we are certain that our past confessions were bad; 

   2.(2) It is useful on special occasions in our lives when some change in our way of living is about to take place;

   3.(3) It is hurtful and must not be made when persons are scrupulous.

  

Q. 831. What are the signs of scruples and the remedy against them? 

 A. The signs of scruples are chiefly:

   1.(1) To be always dissatisfied with our confessions; 

   2.(2) To be self-willed in deciding what is sinful and what is not.

The chief remedy against them is to follow exactly the advice of the confessor without questioning the reason or

utility of his advice.

 

 Q. 832. What must we do when the confessor asks us questions? 

 A. When the confessor asks us questions we must answer them truthfully and clearly.

 

 Q. 833. What should we do after telling our sins? 

 A. After telling our sins we should listen with attention to the advice which the confessor may think proper to give.

 

 Q. 834. What duties does the priest perform in the confessional? 

 A. In the confessional the priest performs the duties:

   1.(1) Of a judge, by listening to our self-accusations and passing sentence upon our guilt or innocence; 

   2.(2) Of a father, by the good advice and encouragement he gives us; 

   3.(3) Of a teacher, by his instructions, and 

   4.(4) Of a physician, by discovering the afflictions of our soul and giving us the remedies to restore it to

     spiritual health.

 

 Q. 835. Why is it beneficial to go always if possible to the same confessor? 

 A. It is beneficial to go always, if possible, to the same confessor, because our continued confessions enable him to see more clearly the true state of our soul and to understand better our occasions of sin.

 

 Q. 836. Should we remain away from confession because we cannot go to our usual confessor? 

 A. We should not remain away from confession because we cannot go to our usual confessor, for though it is well

to confess to the same priest, it is not necessary to do so. One should never become so attached to a confessor

that his absence or the great inconvenience of going to him would become an excuse for neglecting the Sacraments.

  Q. 837. How should we end our Confession? 

 A. We should end our Confession by saying, "I also accuse myself of all the sins of my past life," telling, if we

choose, one or several of our past sins.

 

 Q. 838. What should we do while the priest is giving us absolution? 

 A. While the priest is giving us absolution we should from our heart renew the Act of Contrition.

 

 

 LESSON TWENTY-FIRST: On Indulgences 

  Q. 839. What is an Indulgence? 

 A. An Indulgence is the remission in whole or in part of the temporal punishment due to sin.

 

 Q. 840. What does the word "indulgence" mean? 

 A. The word indulgence means a favor or concession. An indulgence obtains by a very slight penance the

remission of penalties that would otherwise be severe.

 

 Q. 841. Is an Indulgence a pardon of sin, or a license to commit sin? 

 A. An Indulgence is not a pardon of sin, nor a license to commit sin, and one who is in a state of mortal sin cannot

gain an Indulgence.

 

 Q. 842. How do good works done in mortal sin profit us? 

 A. Good works done in mortal sin profit us by obtaining for us the grace to repent and sometimes temporal

blessings. Mortal sin deprives us of all our merit, nevertheless God will bestow gifts for every good deed as He will punish every evil deed.

 

 Q. 843. How many kinds of Indulgences are there? 

 A. There are two kinds of Indulgences -- Plenary and Partial.

 

 Q. 844. What is Plenary Indulgence? 

 A. A Plenary Indulgence is the full remission of the temporal punishment due to sin.

 

 Q. 845. Is it easy to gain a Plenary Indulgence? 

 A. It is not easy to gain a Plenary Indulgence, as we may understand from its great privilege. To gain a Plenary

Indulgence, we must hate sin, be heartily sorry for even our venial sins, and have no desire for even the slightest sin.  Though we may not gain entirely each Plenary Indulgence we seek, we always gain a part of each; that is, a partial indulgence, greater or less in proportion to our good dispositions.

 

 Q. 846. Which are the most important Plenary Indulgences granted by the Church? 

 A. The most important Plenary Indulgences granted by the Church are:

   1.(1) The Indulgences of a jubilee which the Pope grants every twenty-five years or on great occasions by

     which he gives special faculties to confessors for the absolution of reserved sins; 

   2.(2) The Indulgence granted to the dying in their last agony.

 

 Q. 847. What is a Partial Indulgence? 

 A. A Partial Indulgence is the remission of part of the temporal punishment due to sin.

 

 Q. 848. How long has the practice of granting Indulgences been in use in the Church, and what was its

origin? 

 A. The practice of granting Indulgences has been in use in the Church since the time of the apostles. It had its origin  in the earnest prayers of holy persons, and especially of the martyrs begging the Church for their sake to shorten the severe penances of sinners, or to change them into lighter penances. The request was frequently granted and the penance remitted, shortened or changed, and with the penance remitted the temporal punishment

corresponding to it was blotted out.

 

 Q. 849. How do we show that the Church has the power to grant Indulgences? 

 A. We show that the Church has the power to grant Indulgences, because Christ has given it power to remit all

guilt without restriction, and if the Church has power, in the Sacrament of penance, to remit the eternal punishment -- which is the greatest -- it must have power to remit the temporal or lesser punishment, even outside the Sacrament of Penance.

 

 Q. 850. How do we know that these Indulgences have their effect? 

 A. We know that these Indulgences have their effect, because the Church, through her councils, declares

Indulgences useful, and if they have no effect they would be useless, and the Church would teach error in spite of

Christ's promise to guide it.

 

 Q. 851. Have there ever existed abuses among the faithful in the manner of using Indulgences? 

 A. There have existed, in past ages, some abuses among the faithful in the manner of using Indulgences, and the

Church has always labored to correct such abuses as soon as possible. In the use of pious practices we must be

always guided by our lawful superiors.

 

 Q. 852. How have the enemies of the Church made use of the abuse of Indulgences? 

 A. The enemies of the Church have made use of the abuse of Indulgences to deny the doctrine of Indulgences, and to break down the teaching and limit the power of the Church. Not to be deceived in matters of faith, we must

always distinguish very carefully between the abuses to which a devotion may lead and the truths upon which the

devotion rests.

 

 Q. 853. How does the Church by means of Indulgences remit the temporal punishment due to sin? 

 A. The Church, by means of Indulgences, remits the temporal punishment due to sin by applying to us the merits of Jesus Christ, and the superabundant satisfactions of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the saints; which merits and satisfactions are its spiritual treasury.

 

 Q. 854. What do we mean by the "superabundant satisfaction of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints"? 

 A. By the superabundant satisfaction of the Blessed Virgin and the saints, we mean all the satisfaction over and

above what was necessary to satisfy for their own sins. As their good works were many and their sins few -- the

Blessed Virgin being sinless -- the satisfaction not needed for themselves is kept by the Church in a spiritual

treasury to be used for our benefit.

 

 Q. 855. Does the Church, by granting Indulgences, free us from doing Penance? 

 A. The Church, by granting Indulgences, does not free us from doing penance, but simply makes our penance

lighter that we may more easily satisfy for our sins and escape the punishments they deserve.

  

Q. 856. Who has the power to grant Indulgences? 

 A. The Pope alone has the power to grant Indulgences for the whole Church; but the bishops have power to grant

partial Indulgences in their own diocese. Cardinals and some others, by the special permission of the Pope, have

the right to grant certain Indulgences.

 

 Q. 857. Where shall we find the Indulgences granted by the Church? 

 A. We shall find the Indulgences granted by the Church in the declarations of the Pope and of the Sacred

Congregation of Cardinals. These declarations are usually put into prayer books and books of devotion or

instruction.

 

 Q. 858. What must we do to gain an Indulgence? 

 A. To gain an Indulgence we must be in the state of grace and perform the works enjoined.

 

 Q. 859. Besides being in a state of grace and performing the works enjoined, what else is necessary for

the gaining of an Indulgence? 

 A. Besides being in a state of grace and performing the works enjoined, it is necessary for the gaining of an

Indulgence to have at least the general intention of gaining it.

 

 Q. 860. How and why should we make a general intention to gain all possible Indulgences each day? 

 A. We should make a general intention at our morning prayers to gain all possible Indulgences each day, because

several of the prayers we say and good works we perform may have Indulgences attached to them, though we are

not aware of it.

 

 Q. 861. What works are generally enjoined for the gaining of Indulgences? 

 A. The works generally enjoined for the gaining of Indulgences are: The saying of certain prayers, fasting, and the use of certain articles of devotion; visits to Churches or altars, and the giving of alms. For the gaining of Plenary Indulgences it is generally required to go to confession and Holy Communion and pray for the intention of the Pope.

 

 Q. 862. What does praying for a person's intention mean? 

 A. Praying for a person's intention means praying for whatever he prays for or desires to obtain through prayer --

some spiritual or temporal favors.

 

 Q. 863. What does an Indulgence of forty days mean? 

 A. An Indulgence of forty days means that for the prayer or work to which an Indulgence of forty days is attached, God remits as much of our temporal punishment as He remitted for forty days' canonical penance. We do not know just how much temporal punishment God remitted for forty days' public penance, but whatever it was, He remits the same now when we gain an Indulgence of forty days. The same rule applies to Indulgences of a year or any length of time.

 

 Q. 864. Why did the Church moderate its severe penances? 

 A. The Church moderated its severe penances, because when Christians -- terrified by persecution -- grew

weaker in their faith, there was danger of some abandoning their religion rather than submit to the penances

imposed. The Church, therefore, wishing to save as many as possible, made the sinner's penance as light as

possible.

 

 Q. 865. To what things may Indulgences be attached? 

 A. Plenary or Partial Indulgences may be attached to prayers and solid articles of devotion; to places such as

churches, altars, shrines, etc., to be visited; and by a special privilege they are sometimes attached to the good

works of certain persons.

 

 Q. 866. When do things lose the Indulgences attached to them? 

 A. Things lose the Indulgences attached to them:

   1.(1) When they are so changed at once as to be no longer what they were; 

   2.(2) When they are sold.

Rosaries and other indulgenced articles do not lose their indulgences, when they are loaned or given away, for the

indulgence is not personal but attached to the article itself.

 

 Q. 867. Will a weekly Confession suffice to gain during the week all Indulgences to which Confession is

enjoined as one of the works? 

 A Weekly confession will suffice to gain during the week all Indulgences to which confession is enjoined as one of  the works, provided we continue in a state of grace, perform the other works enjoined and have the intention of  gaining these Indulgences.

 

 Q. 868. How and when may we apply Indulgences for the benefit of the souls in Purgatory? 

 A. We may apply Indulgences for the benefit of the souls in Purgatory by way of intercession; whenever this

application is mentioned and permitted by the Church in granting the Indulgence; that is, when the Church declares  that the Indulgence granted is applicable to the souls of the living or the souls in Purgatory; so that we may gain it for the benefit of either.

 

 

 LESSON TWENTY-SECOND: On the Holy Eucharist  

  Q. 869. What does the word Eucharist strictly mean? 

 A. The word Eucharist strictly means pleasing, and this Sacrament is so called because it renders us most pleasing

to God by the grace it imparts, and it gives us the best means of thanking Him for all His blessings.

 

 Q. 870. What is the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. The Holy Eucharist is the Sacrament which contains the body and blood, soul and divinity, of our Lord Jesus

Christ under the appearances of bread and wine.

  

Q. 871. What do we mean when we say the Sacrament which contains the Body and Blood? 

 A. When we say the Sacrament which contains the Body and Blood, we mean the Sacrament which is the Body

and Blood, for after the Consecration there is no other substance present in the Eucharist.

 

 Q. 872. When is the Holy Eucharist a Sacrament, and when is it a sacrifice? 

 A. The Holy Eucharist is a Sacrament when we receive it in Holy Communion and when it remains in the

Tabernacle of the Altar. It is a sacrifice when it is offered up at Mass by the separate Consecration of the bread

and wine, which signifies the separation of Our Lord's blood from His body when He died on the Cross.

 

 Q. 873. When did Christ institute the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. Christ instituted the Holy Eucharist at the Last Supper, the night before He died.

 

 Q. 874. Who were present when our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. When Our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist, the twelve Apostles were present.

 

 Q. 875. How did our Lord institute the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. Our Lord instituted the Holy Eucharist by taking bread, blessing, breaking, and giving to His Apostles, saying:

"Take ye and eat. This is my body"; and then, by taking the cup of wine, blessing and giving it, saying to them:

"Drink ye all of this. This is my blood which shall be shed for the remission of sins. Do this for a commemoration of  me."

 

 Q. 876. What happened when our Lord said, "This is my body; this is my blood"? 

 A. When Our Lord said, "This is my body," the substance of the bread was changed into the substance of His

body; when He said, "This is my blood," the substance of the wine was changed into the substance of His blood.

 

 Q. 877. How do we prove the Real Presence, that is, that Our Lord is really and truly present in the Holy

Eucharist? 

 A. We prove the Real Presence -- that is, that Our Lord is really and truly present in the Holy Eucharist:

   1.(1) By showing that it is possible to change one substance into another; 

   2.(2) By showing that Christ did change the substance of bread and wine into the substance of His body and

     blood; 

   3.(3) By showing that He gave this power also to His Apostles and to the priests of His Church.

 

 Q. 878. How do we know that it is possible to change one substance into another? 

 A. We know that it is possible to change one substance into another, because:

   1.(1) God changed water into blood during the plagues of Egypt. 

   2.(2) Christ changed water into wine at the marriage of Cana. 

   3.(3) Our own food is daily changed into the substance of our flesh and blood; and what God does gradually,

     He can also do instantly by an act of His will.

  

Q. 879. Are these changes exactly the same as the changes that take place in the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. These changes are not exactly the same as the changes that take place in the Holy Eucharist, for in these

changes the appearance also is changed, but in the Holy Eucharist only the substance is changed while the

appearance remains the same.

 

 Q. 880. How do we show that Christ did change bread and wine into the substance of His body and blood?

 A. We show that Christ did change bread and wine into the substance of His body and blood:

   1.(1) From the words by which He promised the Holy Eucharist; 

   2.(2) From the words by which He instituted the Holy Eucharist; 

   3.(3) From the constant use of the Holy Eucharist in the Church since the time of the Apostles; 

   4.(4) From the impossibility of denying the Real Presence in the Holy Eucharist, without likewise denying all

     that Christ has taught and done; for we have stronger proofs for the Holy Eucharist than for any other

     Christian truth.

  

Q. 881. Is Jesus Christ whole and entire both under the form of bread and under the form of wine? 

 A. Jesus Christ is whole and entire both under the form of bread and under the form of wine.

 

 Q. 882. How do we know that under the appearance of bread we receive also Christ's blood; and under

the appearance of wine we receive also Christ's body? 

 A. We know that under the appearance of bread we receive also Christ's blood, and under the appearance of

wine we receive also Christ's body; because in the Holy Eucharist we receive the living body of Our Lord, and a

living body cannot exist without blood, nor can living blood exist without a body.

 

 Q. 883. Is Jesus Christ present whole and entire in the smallest portion of the Holy Eucharist, under the

form of either bread or wine? 

 A. Jesus Christ is present whole and entire in the smallest portion of the Holy Eucharist under the form of either

bread or wine; for His body in the Eucharist is in a glorified state, and as it partakes of the character of a spiritual

substance, it requires no definite size or shape.

 

 Q. 884. Did anything remain of the bread and wine after their substance had been changed into the

substance of the body and blood of our Lord? 

 A. After the substance of the bread and wine had been changed into the substance of the body and blood of Our

Lord, there remained only the appearances of bread and wine.

 

 Q. 885. What do you mean by the appearances of bread and wine? 

 A. By the appearances of bread and wine I mean the figure, the color, the taste, and whatever appears to the

senses.

 

 Q. 886. What is this change of the bread and wine into the body and blood of our Lord called? 

 A. This change of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Our Lord is called Transubstantiation.

 

 Q. 887. What is the second great miracle in the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. The second great miracle in the Holy Eucharist is the multiplication of the presence of Our Lord's body in so

many places at the same time, while the body itself is not multiplied -- for there is but one body of Christ.

 

 Q. 888. Are there not, then, as many bodies of Christ as there are tabernacles in the world, or as there

are Masses being said at the same time? 

 A. There are not as many bodies of Christ as there are tabernacles in the world, or as there are Masses being said

at the same time; but only one body of Christ, which is everywhere present whole and entire in the Holy Eucharist,  as God is everywhere present, while He is but one God.

 

 Q. 889. How was the substance of the bread and wine changed into the substance of the body and blood of

Christ? 

 A. The substance of the bread and wine was changed into the substance of the body and blood of Christ by His

almighty power.

 

 Q. 890. Does this change of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ continue to be made in the

Church? 

 A. This change of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ continues to be made in the Church by Jesus

Christ through the ministry of His priests.

 

 Q. 891. When did Christ give His priests the power to change bread and wine into His body and blood? 

 A. Christ gave His priests the power to change bread and wine into His body and blood when He said to the

Apostles, "Do this in commemoration of Me."

 

 Q. 892. What do the words "Do this in commemoration of Me" mean? 

 A. The words "Do this in commemoration of Me" mean: Do what I, Christ, am doing at My last supper, namely,

changing the substance of bread and wine into the substance of My body and blood; and do it in remembrance of

Me.

  Q. 893. How do the priests exercise this power of changing bread and wine into the body and blood of

Christ? 

 A. The priests exercise this power of changing bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ through the

words of consecration in the Mass, which are words of Christ: "This is my body; this is my blood."

 

 Q. 894. At what part of the Mass does the Consecration take place? 

 A. The Consecration in the Mass takes place immediately before the elevation of the Host and Chalice, which are

raised above the head of the priest that the people may adore Our Lord who has just come to the altar at the

words of Consecration.

 

 LESSON TWENTY-THIRD: On the Ends for Which the Holy Eucharist Was Instituted 

  

 Q. 895. Why did Christ institute the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. Christ instituted the Holy Eucharist:

   1.To unite us to Himself and to nourish our soul with His divine life. 

   2.To increase sanctifying grace and all virtues in our soul. 

   3.To lessen our evil inclinations. 

   4.To be a pledge of everlasting life. 

   5.To fit our bodies for a glorious resurrection. 

   6.To continue the sacrifice of the Cross in His Church.

 

 Q. 896. Has the Holy Eucharist any other effect? 

 A. The Holy Eucharist remits venial sins by disposing us to perform acts of love and contrition. It preserves us from mortal sin by exciting us to greater fervor and strengthening us against temptation.

 

 Q. 897. How are we united to Jesus Christ in the Holy Eucharist? 

 A. We are united to Jesus Christ in the Holy Eucharist by means of Holy Communion.

 

 Q. 898. What is Holy Communion? 

 A. Holy Communion is the receiving of the body and blood of Christ.

 

 Q. 899. Is it not beneath the dignity of Our Lord to enter our bodies under the appearance of ordinary

food? 

 A. It is not beneath the dignity of Our Lord to enter our bodies under the appearance of ordinary food any more

than it was beneath His dignity to enter the body of His Blessed Mother and remain there as an ordinary child for

nine months. Christ's dignity, being infinite, can never be diminished by any act on His own or on our part.

  

Q. 900. Why does not the Church give Holy Communion to the people as it does to the priest under the

appearance of wine also? 

 A. The Church does not give Holy Communion to the people as it does to the priest under the appearance of wine

also, to avoid the danger of spilling the Precious Blood; to prevent the irreverence some might show if compelled

to drink out of a chalice used by all, and lastly, to refute those who denied that Our Lord's blood is present under

the appearance of bread also.

  Q. 901. What is necessary to make a good Communion? 

 A. To make a good Communion it is necessary to be in the state of sanctifying grace and to fast according to the

laws of the Church.

 

 Q. 902. What should a person do who, through forgetfulness or any other cause, has broken the fast

necessary for Holy Communion? 

 A. A person who through forgetfulness or any other cause has broken the fast necessary for Holy Communion,

should again fast and receive Holy Communion the following morning if possible, without returning to confession. It is not a sin to break one's fast, but it would be a mortal sin to receive Holy Communion after knowingly breaking the fast necessary for it.

 

 Q. 903. Does he who receives Communion in mortal sin receive the body and blood of Christ? 

 A. He who receives Communion in mortal sin receives the body and blood of Christ, but does not receive His

grace, and he commits a great sacrilege.

 

 Q. 904. Is it enough to be free from mortal sin to receive plentifully the graces of Holy Communion? 

 A. To receive plentifully the graces of Holy Communion it is not enough to be free from mortal sin, but we should be free from all affection to venial sin, and should make acts of lively faith, of firm hope, and ardent love.

 

 Q. 905. What is the fast necessary for Holy Communion? 

 A. The fast necessary for Holy Communion is the abstaining from food, alcoholic drinks and non-alcoholic drinks

for one hour before Holy Communion. Water does not break the fast.

 

 Q. 906. Does medicine taken by necessity or food taken by accident break the fast for Holy Communion? 

 A. Medicine does not break the fast; food taken by accident within one hour before Communion breaks the fast.

 

 Q. 907. Is any one ever allowed to receive Holy Communion when not fasting? 

 A. To protect the Blessed Sacrament from insult or injury, or when in danger of death, Holy Communion may be

received without fasting.

 

 Q. 908. Is the Holy Communion called by any other name when given to one in danger of death? 

 A. When the Holy Communion is given to one in danger of death, it is called Viaticum, and is given with its own

form of prayer. In giving Holy Communion the priest says: "May the body of Our Lord Jesus Christ guard your

soul to eternal life." In giving Holy Viaticum he says: "Receive, brother (or sister), the Viaticum of the body of Our Lord Jesus Christ, which will guard you from the wicked enemy and lead you into eternal life."

 

 Q. 909. When are we bound to receive Holy Communion? 

 A. We are bound to receive Holy Communion, under pain of mortal sin, during the Easter time and when in danger of death.

 

 Q. 910. Is it well to receive Holy Communion often? 

 A. It is well to receive Holy Communion often, as nothing is a greater aid to a holy life than often to receive the

Author of all grace and the Source of all good.

  

Q. 911. How shall we know how often we should receive Holy Communion? 

 A. We shall know how often we shall receive Holy Communion only from the advice of our confessor, by whom

we must be guided, and whom we must strictly obey in this as well as in all matters concerning the state of our soul.

 

 Q. 912. What is a spiritual Communion? 

 A. A spiritual communion is an earnest desire to receive Communion in reality, by which desire we make all

preparations and thanksgivings that we would make in case we really received the Holy Eucharist. Spiritual

Communion is an act of devotion that must be pleasing to God and bring us blessings from Him.

 

 Q. 913. What should we do after Holy Communion? 

 A. After Holy Communion we should spend some time in adoring Our Lord, in thanking Him for the grace we

have received, and in asking Him for the blessings we need.

 

 Q. 914. What length of time should we spend in thanksgiving after Holy Communion? 

 A. We should spend sufficient time in Thanksgiving after Holy Communion to show due reverence to the Blessed

Sacrament; for Our Lord is personally with us as long as the appearance of bread and wine remains.

 

 Q. 915. What should we be particular about when receiving Holy Communion? 

 A. When receiving Holy Communion we should be particular:

   1.(1) About the respectful manner in which we approach and return from the altar; 

   2.(2) About our personal appearance, especially neatness and cleanliness; 

   3.(3) About raising our head, opening our mouth and putting forth the tongue in the proper manner; 

   4.(4) About swallowing the Sacred Host; 

   5.(5) About removing it carefully with the tongue, in case it should stick to the mouth, but never with the finger

     under any circumstances.

 

 

 LESSON TWENTY-FOURTH: On the Sacrifice of the Mass 

  Q. 916. When and where are the bread and wine changed into the body and blood of Christ? 

 A. The bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ at the Consecration in the Mass.

 

 Q. 917. What is the Mass? 

 A. The Mass is the unbloody sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ.

 

 Q. 918. Why is this Sacrifice called the Mass? 

 A. This Sacrifice is called the "Mass" very probably from the words "Ite Missa est," used by the priest as he tells

the people to depart when the Holy Sacrifice is ended.

 

 Q. 919. What is a sacrifice? 

 A. A sacrifice is the offering of an object by a priest to God alone, and the consuming of it to acknowledge that He is the Creator and Lord of all things.

  Q. 920. Is the Mass the same sacrifice as that of the Cross? 

 A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the Cross.

 

 Q. 921. How is the Mass the same sacrifice as that of the Cross? 

 A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the Cross because the offering and the priest are the same -- Christ

our Blessed Lord; and the ends for which the sacrifice of the Mass is offered are the same as those of the sacrifice

of the Cross.

 

 Q. 922. What were the ends for which the sacrifice of the Cross was offered? 

 A. The ends for which the sacrifice of the Cross was offered were:

   1.1st. To honor and glorify God; 

   2.2nd. To thank Him for all the graces bestowed on the whole world; 

   3.3rd. To satisfy God's justice for the sins of men; 

   4.4th. To obtain all graces and blessings.

 

 Q. 923. How are the fruits of the Mass distributed? 

 A. The fruits of the Mass are distributed thus:

   1.The first benefit is bestowed on the priest who says the Mass; 

   2.The second on the person for whom the Mass is said, or for the intention for which it is said; 

   3.The third on those who are present at the Mass, and particularly on those who serve it, and 

   4.The fourth on all the faithful who are in communion with the Church.

 

 Q. 924. Are all Masses of equal value in themselves or do they differ in worth? 

 A. All Masses are equal in value in themselves and do not differ in worth, but only in the solemnity with which they are celebrated or in the end for which they are offered.

 

 Q. 925. How are Masses distinguished? 

 A. Masses are distinguished thus:

   1.(1) When the Mass is sung by a bishop, assisted by a deacon and sub-deacon, it is called a Pontifical Mass;

   2.(2) When it is sung by a priest, assisted by a deacon and sub-deacon, it is called a Solemn Mass; 

   3.(3) When sung by a priest without deacon and sub-deacon, it is called a Missa Cantata or High Mass; 

   4.(4) When the Mass is only read in a low tone it is called a low or private Mass.

 

 Q. 926. For what end or intention may Mass be offered? 

 A. Mass may be offered for any end or intention that tends to the honor and glory of God, to the good of the

Church or the welfare of man; but never for any object that is bad in itself, or in its aims; neither can it be offered

publicly for persons who are not members of the true Church.

 

 Q. 927. Explain what is meant by Requiem, Nuptial and Votive Masses. 

 A. A Requiem Mass is one said in black vestments and with special prayers for the dead. A Nuptial Mass is one

said at the marriage of two Catholics, and it has special prayers for their benefit. A Votive Mass is one said in

honor of some particular mystery or saint, on a day not set apart by the Church for the honor of that mystery or

saint.

 

 Q. 928. From what may we learn that we are to offer up the Holy Sacrifice with the priest? 

 A. We may learn that we are to offer up the Holy Sacrifice with the priest from the words used in the Mass itself;

for the priest, after offering up the bread and wine for the Sacrifice, turns to the people and says: "Orate Fratres,"

etc., which means: "Pray, brethren, that my sacrifice and yours may be acceptable to God the Father Almighty,"

and the server answers in our name: "May the Lord receive the sacrifice from thy hands to the praise and glory of

His own name, and to our benefit and that of all His Holy Church."

 

 Q. 929. From what did the custom of making an offering to the priest for saying Mass arise? 

 A. The custom of making an offering to the priest for saying Mass arose from the old custom of bringing to the

priest the bread and wine necessary for the celebration of Mass.

 

 Q. 930. Is it not simony, or the buying of a sacred thing, to offer the priest money for saying Mass for your

intention? 

 A. It is not simony, or the buying of a sacred thing, to offer the priest money for saying Mass for our intention,

because the priest does not take the money for the Mass itself, but for the purpose of supplying the things

necessary for Mass and for his own support.

 

 Q. 931. Is there any difference between the sacrifice of the Cross and the sacrifice of the Mass? 

 A. Yes; the manner in which the sacrifice is offered is different. On the Cross Christ really shed His blood and was really slain; in the Mass there is no real shedding of blood nor real death, because Christ can die no more; but the sacrifice of the Mass, through the separate consecration of the bread and the wine, represents His death on the

Cross.

 

 Q. 932. What are the chief parts of the Mass? 

 A. The chief parts of the Mass are:

   1.(1) The Offertory, at which the priests offers to God the bread and wine to be changed at the Consecration;

   2.(2) The Consecration, at which the substance of the bread and wine are changed into the substance of

     Christ's body and blood; 

   3.(3) The Communion, at which the priest receives into his own body the Holy Eucharist under the

     appearance of both bread and wine.

 

 Q. 933. At what part of the Mass does the Offertory take place, and what parts of the Mass are said

before it? 

 A. The Offertory takes place immediately after the uncovering of the chalice. The parts of the Mass said before it

are: The Introit, Kyrie, Gloria, Prayers, Epistle, Gospel and Creed. The Introit, Prayers, Epistle and Gospel change in each Mass to correspond with the feast celebrated.

 

 Q. 934. What is the part of the Mass called in which the Words of Consecration are found? 

 A. The part of the Mass in which the words of Consecration are found is called the Canon. This is the most solemn part of the Mass, and is rarely and but slightly changed in any Mass.

 

 Q. 935. What follows the Communion of the Mass? 

 A. Following the Communion of Mass, there are prayers of thanksgiving, the blessing of the people, and the saying of the last Gospel.

 

 Q. 936. What things are necessary for Mass? 

 A. The things necessary for Mass are:

   1.(1) An altar with linen covers, candles, crucifix, altar stone and Mass book; 

   2.(2) A Chalice with all needed in its use, and bread of flour from wheat and wine from the grape; 

   3.(3) Vestments for the priest, and 

   4.(4) An acolyte or server.

 

 Q. 937. What is the altar stone, and of what does it remind us? 

 A. The altar stone is that part of the altar upon which the priest rests the Chalice during Mass. This stone contains

some holy relics sealed up in it by the bishop, and if the altar is of wood this stone is inserted just in front of the

Tabernacle. The altar stone reminds us of the early history of the Church, when the martyrs' tombs were used for

altars by the persecuted Christians.

 

 Q. 938. What lesson do we learn from the practice of using martyrs' tombs for altars? 

 A. From the practice of using martyrs' tombs for altars we learn the inconvenience, sufferings and dangers the early Christians willingly underwent for the sake of hearing Mass. Since the Mass is the same now as it was then, we should suffer every inconvenience rather than be absent from Mass on Sundays or holy days.

 

 Q. 939. What things are used with the chalice during Mass? 

 A. The things used with the chalice during Mass are:

   1.(1) The purificator or cloth for wiping the inside; 

   2.(2) The paten or small silver plate used in handling the host; 

   3.(3) The pall or white card used for covering the chalice at Mass; 

   4.(4) The corporal or linen cloth on which the chalice and host rest.

 

 Q. 940. What is the host? 

 A. The host is the name given to the thin wafer of bread used at Mass. This name is generally applied before and

after Consecration to the large particle of bread used by the priest, though the small particles given to the people

are also called by the same name.

 

 Q. 941. Are large and small hosts consecrated at every Mass? 

 A. A large host is consecrated at every Mass, but small hosts are consecrated only at some Masses at which they

are to be given to the people or placed in the Tabernacle for the Holy Communion of the faithful.

 

 Q. 942. What vestments does the priest use at Mass and what do they signify? 

 A. The vestments used by the priest at Mass are:

   1.(1) The Amice, a white cloth around the shoulders to signify resistance to temptation; 

   2.(2) The Alb, a long white garment to signify innocence; 

   3.(3) The Cincture, a cord about the waist, to signify chastity; 

   4.(4) The Maniple or hanging vestment on the left arm, to signify penance; 

   5.(5) The Stole or long vestment about the neck, to signify immortality; 

   6.(6) The Chasuble or long vestment over all, to signify love and remind the priest, by its cross on front and

     back, of the Passion of Our Lord.

 

 Q. 943. How many colors of vestments are used, and what do the colors signify? 

 A. Five colors of vestments are used, namely, white, red, green, violet or purple, and black. White signifies

innocence and is used on the feasts of Our Blessed Lord, of the Blessed Virgin, and of some saints. Red signifies

love, and is used on the feasts of the Holy Ghost, and of martyrs. Green signifies hope, and is generally used on

Sundays from Epiphany to Pentecost. Violet signifies penance, and is used in Lent and Advent. Black signifies

sorrow, and is used on Good Friday and at Masses for the dead. Gold is often used for white on great feasts.

 

 Q. 944. What is the Tabernacle and what is the Ciborium? 

 A. The Tabernacle is the house-shaped part of the altar where the sacred vessels containing the Blessed

Sacrament are kept. The Ciborium is the large silver or gold vessel which contains the Blessed Sacrament while in the Tabernacle, and from which the priest gives Holy Communion to the people.

 

 Q. 945. What is the Ostensorium or Monstrance? 

 A. The Ostensorium or Monstrance is the beautiful wheel-like vessel in which the Blessed Sacrament is exposed

and kept during the Benediction.

 

 Q. 946. How should we assist at Mass? 

 A. We should assist at Mass with great interior recollection and piety and with every outward mark of respect and

devotion.

 

 Q. 947. Which is the best manner of hearing Mass? 

 A. The best manner of hearing Mass is to offer it to God with the priest for the same purpose for which it is said, to meditate on Christ's sufferings and death, and to go to Holy Communion.

 

 Q. 948. What is important for the proper and respectful hearing of Mass? 

 A. For the proper and respectful hearing of Mass it is important to be in our place before the priest comes to the

altar and not to leave it before the priest leaves the altar. Thus we prevent the confusion and distraction caused by

late coming and too early leaving. Standing in the doorways, blocking up passages and disputing about places

should, out of respect for the Holy Sacrifice, be most carefully avoided.

 

 Q. 949. What is Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, and what vestments are used at it? 

 A. Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament is an act of divine worship in which the Blessed Sacrament, placed in the ostensorium, is exposed for the adoration of the people and is lifted up to bless them. The vestments used at

Benediction are: A cope or large silk cloak and a humeral or shoulder veil.

 

 Q. 950. Why does the priest wear special vestments and use certain ceremonies while performing his

sacred duties? 

 A. The priest wears special vestments and uses certain ceremonies while performing his sacred duties:

   1.(1) To give greater solemnity and to command more attention and respect at divine worship; 

   2.(2) To instruct the people in the things that these vestments and ceremonies signify; 

   3.(3) To remind the priest himself of the importance and sacred character of the work in which he is the

     representative of Our Lord Himself.

Hence we should learn the meaning of the ceremonies of the Church.

 

 Q. 951. How do we show that the ceremonies of the Church are reasonable and proper? 

 A. We show that the ceremonies of the Church are reasonable and proper from the fact that all persons in

authority, rulers, judges and masters, require certain acts of respect from their subjects, and as we know Our Lord

is present on the altar, the Church requires definite acts of reverence and respect at the services held in His honor

and in His presence.

 

 Q. 952. Are there other reasons for the use of ceremonies? 

 A. There are other reasons for the use of ceremonies:

   1.(1) God commanded ceremonies to be used in the old law, and 

   2.(2) Our Blessed Lord Himself made use of ceremonies in performing some of His miracles.

 

 Q. 953. How are the persons who take part in a Solemn Mass or Vespers named? 

 A. The persons who take part in a Solemn Mass or Vespers are named as follows: The priest who says or

celebrates the Mass is called the celebrant; those who assist him as deacon and sub-deacon are called the

ministers; those who serve are called acolytes, and the one who directs the ceremonies is called the master of

ceremonies. If the celebrant be a bishop, the Mass or Vespers is called Pontifical Mass or Pontifical Vespers.

 

 Q. 954. What is Vespers? 

 A. Vespers is a portion of the divine office or daily prayer of the Church. It is sung in Churches generally on

Sunday afternoon or evening, and is usually followed by Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament.

 

 Q. 955. Can one satisfy for neglecting Mass on Sunday by hearing Vespers on the same day? 

 A. One cannot satisfy for neglecting Mass on Sunday by hearing Vespers on the same day, because there is no law of the Church obliging us under pain of sin to attend Vespers, while there is a law obliging us under pain of mortal sin to hear Mass.

 

 

 

 LESSON TWENTY-FIFTH: On Extreme Unction and Holy Orders 

  Q. 956. What is the Sacrament of Extreme Unction? 

 A. Extreme Unction is the Sacrament which, through the anointing and prayer of the priest, gives health and

strength to the soul, and sometimes to the body, when we are in danger of death from sickness.

 

 Q. 957. Why is this Sacrament called Extreme Unction? 

 A. Extreme means last, and Unction means an anointing or rubbing with oil, and because Catholics are anointed

with oil at Baptism, Confirmation and Holy Orders, the last Sacrament in ,which oil is used is called Extreme

Unction, or the last Unction or anointing.

 

 Q. 958. Is this Sacrament called Extreme Unction if the person recovers after receiving it? 

 A. This Sacrament is always called Extreme Unction, even if it must be given several times to the same person, for Extreme Unction is the proper name of the Sacrament, and it may be given as often as a person recovering from one attack of sickness is in danger of death by another. In a lingering illness it may be repeated after a month or six weeks, if the person slightly recovers and again relapses into a dangerous condition.

 

 Q. 959. To whom may Extreme Unction be given? 

 A. Extreme Unction may be given to all Christians dangerously ill, who have ever been capable of committing sin

after baptism and who have the right dispositions for the Sacrament. Hence it is never given to children who have

not reached the use of reason, nor to persons who have always been insane.

 

 Q. 960. What are the right dispositions for Extreme Unction? 

 A. The right dispositions for Extreme Unction are: 

   1.

   2.(1) Resignation to the Will of God with regard to our recovery; 

   3.(2) A state of grace or at least contrition for sins committed, and 

   4.(3) A general intention or desire to receive the Sacrament.

This Sacrament is never given to heretics in danger of death, because they cannot be supposed to have the

intention necessary for receiving it, nor the desire to make use of the Sacrament of Penance in putting themselves in a state of grace.

 

 Q. 961. When and by whom was Extreme Unction instituted? 

 A. Extreme Unction was instituted at the time of the apostles, for James the Apostle exhorts the sick to receive it.

It was instituted by Our Lord Himself -- though we do not know at what particular time -- for He alone can make

a visible act a means of grace, and the apostles and their successors could never have believed Extreme Unction a

Sacrament and used it as such unless they had Our Lord's authority for so doing.

  

Q. 962. When should we receive Extreme Unction? 

 A. We should receive Extreme Unction when we are in danger of death from sickness, or from a wound or

accident.

 

 Q. 963. What parts of the body are anointed in Extreme Unction? 

 A. The parts of the body anointed in Extreme Unction are: The eyes, the ears, the nose or nostrils, the lips, the

hands and the feet, because these represent our senses of sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch, which are the

means through which we have committed most of our sins.

 

 Q. 964. What things should be prepared in the sick-room when the priest is coming to give the last

Sacraments? 

 A. When the priest is coming to give the last Sacraments, the following things should be prepared:

   1.A table covered with a white cloth; a crucifix; two lighted candles in candlesticks; holy water in a small

     vessel, with a small piece of palm for a sprinkler; a glass of clean water; a tablespoon and a napkin or cloth,

     to be placed under the chin of the one receiving the Viaticum.

Besides these, if Extreme Unction also is to be given, there should be some cotton and a small piece of bread or

lemon to purify the priest's fingers.

 

 Q. 965. What seems most proper with regard to the things necessary for the last Sacraments? 

 A. It seems most proper that the things necessary for the last Sacraments should be carefully kept in every Catholic family, and should never, if possible, be used for any other purpose.

 

 Q. 966. What else is to be observed about the preparation for the administration of the last Sacraments? 

 A. The further preparation for the administration of the last Sacraments requires that out of respect for the

Sacraments, and in particular for the presence of Our Lord, everything about the sick-room, the sick person and

even the attendants, should be made as neat and clean as possible. Especially should the face, hands and feet of

the one to be anointed be thoroughly clean.

 

 Q. 967. Should we wait until we are in extreme danger before we receive Extreme Unction? 

 A. We should not wait until we are in extreme danger before we receive Extreme Unction, but if possible we

should receive it whilst we have the use of our senses.

 

 Q. 968. What should we do in case of serious illness if the sick person will not consent or is afraid to

receive the Sacraments, or, at least, wishes to put off their reception? 

 A. In case of serious illness, if the sick person will not consent, or is afraid to receive the Sacraments, or, at least,

wishes to put off their reception, we should send for the priest at once and let him do what he thinks best in the

case, and thus we will free ourselves from the responsibility of letting a Catholic die without the last Sacraments.

 

 Q. 969. Which are the effects of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction? 

 A. The effects of Extreme Unction are:

   1.1st. To comfort us in the pains of sickness and to strengthen us against temptations; 

   2.2nd. To remit venial sins and to cleanse our soul from the remains of sin; 

   3.3rd. To restore us to health, when God sees fit.

 

 Q. 970. Will Extreme Unction take away mortal sin if the dying person is no longer able to confess? 

 A. Extreme Unction will take away mortal sin if the dying person is no longer able to confess, provided he has the

sorrow for his sins that would bee necessary for the worthy reception of the Sacrament of Penance.

 

 Q. 971. How do we know that this Sacrament, more than any other, was instituted to benefit the body? 

 A. We know that this Sacrament more than any other was instituted to benefit the body:

   1.(1) From the words of St. James exhorting us to receive it; 

   2.(2) It is given when the soul is already purified by the graces of Penance and Holy Viaticum; 

   3.(3) One of its chief objects is to restore us to health if it be for our spiritual good, as most of the prayers said

     in giving this Sacrament indicate.

 

 Q. 972. Since Extreme Unction may restore us to health, should we not be glad to receive it? 

 A. Since Extreme Unction may restore us to health. we should be glad to receive it, and we should not delay its

reception till we are so near death that God could restore us only by a miracle. Again, this Sacrament, like the

others, gives sanctifying and sacramental grace, which we should be eager to obtain as soon as our sickness is

sufficient to give us the privilege of receiving the last Sacraments.

 

 Q. 973. What do you mean by the remains of sin? 

 A. By the remains of sin I mean the inclination to evil and the weakness of the will which are the result of our sins, and which remain after our sins have been forgiven.

  Q. 974. How should we receive the Sacrament of Extreme Unction? 

 A. We should receive the Sacrament of Extreme Unction in the state of grace, and with lively faith and resignation to the will of God.

 

 Q. 975. Who is the minister of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction? 

 A. The priest is the minister of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.

 

 Q. 976. What is the final preparation we should make for the reception of the last Sacraments? 

 A. The final preparation we should make for the reception of the last Sacraments consists in an earnest effort to be resigned to God's Holy Will, to excite ourselves to true sorrow for our sins, to profit by the graces given us, to

keep worldly thoughts from the mind, and to dispose ourselves as best we can for the worthy reception of the

Sacraments and the blessings of a good death.

 

 Q. 977. At what time should persons dangerously ill attend to the final arrangement of their temporal or

worldly affairs? 

 A. Persons dangerously ill should attend to the final arrangement of their temporal or worldly affairs at the very

beginning of their illness, that these things may not distract them at the hour of death, and that they may give the last hours of their life entirely to the care of their soul.

 

 Q. 978. What is the Sacrament of Holy Orders? 

 A. Holy Orders is a Sacrament by which bishops, priests, and other ministers of the Church are ordained and

receive the power and grace to perform their sacred duties.

 

 Q. 979. Besides bishops and priests, who are the other ministers of the Church? 

 A. Besides bishops and priests, the other ministers of the Church are deacons and subdeacons, who, while

preparing for the priesthood, have received some of the Holy Orders, but who have not been ordained to the full

powers of the priest.

 

 Q. 980. Why is this Sacrament called Holy Orders? 

 A. This Sacrament is called Holy Orders because it is conferred by seven different grades or steps following one

another in fixed order by which the sacred powers of the priesthood are gradually given to the one admitted to that holy state.

 

 Q. 981. What are the grades by which one ascends to the priesthood? 

 A. The grades by which one ascends to the priesthood are:

   1.(1) Tonsure, or the clipping of the hair by the bishop, by which the candidate for priesthood dedicates

     himself to the service of the altar; 

   2.(2) The four minor orders, Porter, Reader, Exorcist, and Acolyte, by which he is permitted to perform

     certain duties that laymen should not perform; 

   3.(3) Sub-deaconship, by which he takes upon himself the obligation of leading a life of perpetual chastity and

     of saying daily the divine office; 

   4.(4) Deaconship, by which be receives power to preach, baptize, and give Holy Communion.

The next step, priesthood, gives him power to offer the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and forgive sins. These orders

are not all given at once, but at times fixed by the laws of the Church.

 

 Q. 982. Are not the different orders separate Sacraments? 

 A. These different orders are not separate Sacraments. Taken all together, some are a preparation for the

Sacrament and the rest are but the one Sacrament of Holy Orders; as the roots, trunk and branches form but one

tree.

 

 Q. 983. What name is given to sub-deaconship, deaconship and priesthood? 

 A. Sub-deaconship, deaconship and priesthood are called major or greater orders, because those who receive

them are bound for life to the service of the altar and they cannot return to the service of the world to live as

ordinary laymen.

 

 Q. 984. What double power does the Church possess and confer on her pastors? 

 A. The Church possesses and confers on her pastor, the power of orders and the power of jurisdiction; that is, the

power to administer the Sacraments and sanctify the faithful, and the power to teach and make laws that direct the

faithful to their spiritual good. A bishop has the full power of orders and the Pope alone has the full power of

jurisdiction.

 

 Q. 985. How do the pastors of the Church rank according to authority? 

 A. The pastors of the Church rank according to authority as follows:

   1.(1) Priests, who govern parishes or congregations in the name of their bishop; 

   2.(2) Bishops, who rule over a number of parishes or a diocese; 

   3.(3) Archbishops, who have authority over a number of dioceses or a province; 

   4.(4) Primates, who have authority over the ecclesiastical or Church provinces of a nation; 

   5.(5) Patriarchs, who have authority over a whole country; 

   6.and last and highest, the Pope, who rules the Church throughout the world.

 

 Q. 986. How do the prelates or higher officers of the Church rank in dignity? 

 A. The prelates or higher officers of the Church rank in dignity as they rank in authority, except that in dignity

Cardinals are next to the Pope, and Vicars Apostolic, Monsignori, and others having titles follow bishops. Papal

delegates and those specially appointed by the Pope rank according to the powers he has given them.

 

 Q. 987. Who are Cardinals, what are their duties and how are they divided? 

 A. Cardinals are the members of the Supreme Council or Senate of the Church. Their duties are to advise and aid

the Pope in the government of the Church, and to elect a new Pope when the reigning Pope dies. They are divided

into committees called sacred congregations, each having, its special work to perform. All these congregations

taken together are called the Sacred College of Cardinals, of which the whole number is seventy.

 

 Q. 988. Who is a Monsignor? 

 A. A Monsignor is a worthy priest upon whom the Pope confers this title as a mark of esteem. It gives certain

privileges and the right to wear purple like a bishop.

 

 Q. 989. Who is a Vicar-General? 

 A. A Vicar-General is one who is appointed by the bishop to aid him in the government of his diocese. He shares

the bishop's power and in the bishop's absence he acts for the bishop and with his authority.

 

 Q. 990. Who is an Abbot? 

 A. An Abbot is one who exercises over a religious community of men authority similar in many things to that

exercised by a bishop over his diocese. He has also certain privileges usually granted to bishops.

 

 Q. 991. What is the pallium? 

 A. The pallium is a white woolen vestment worn by the Pope and sent by him to patriarchs, primates and

archbishops. It is the symbol of the fullness of pastoral power, and reminds the wearer of the Good Shepherd,

whose example he must follow.

 

 Q. 992. What is necessary to receive Holy Orders worthily? 

 A. To receive Holy Orders worthily it is necessary to be in the state of grace, to have the necessary knowledge

and a divine call to this sacred office.

 

 Q. 993. What name is given to this divine call and how can we discover this call? 

 A. This divine call is named a vocation to the priestly or religious life. We can discover it in our constant inclination to such a life from the pure and holy motive of serving God better in it, together with our fitness for it, or, at least, our ability to prepare for it, also in our true piety and mastery over our sinful passions and unlawful desires.

 

 Q. 994. How should we finally determine our vocation? 

 A. We should finally determine our vocation:

   1.(1) By leading a holy life that we may be more worthy of it; 

   2.(2) By praying to the Holy Ghost for light on the subject; 

   3.(3) By seeking the advice of holy and prudent persons and above all of our confessor.

 

 Q. 995. What should parents and guardians bear in mind with regard to their children's vocations? 

 A. Parents and guardians should bear in mind with regard to their children's vocations:

   1.(1)That it is their duty to aid their children to discover their vocation; 

   2.(2) That it is sinful for them to resist the Will of God by endeavoring to turn their children from their true

     vocation or to prevent them from following it by placing obstacles in their way, and, worst of all, to urge

     them to enter a state of life to which they have not been divinely called; 

   3.(3) That in giving their advice they should be guided only by the future good and happiness of their children

     and not by any selfish or worldly motive which may lead to the loss of souls.

 

 Q. 996. How should Christians look upon the priests of the Church? 

 A. Christians should look upon the priests of the Church as the messengers of God and the dispensers of His

mysteries.

 

 Q. 997. How do we know that the priests of the Church are the messengers of God? 

 A. We know that the priests of the Church are the messengers of God, because Christ said to His apostles, and

through them to their successors: "As the Father hath sent Me, I also send you"; that is to say, to preach the true

religion, to administer the Sacraments, to offer Sacrifice, and to do all manner of good for the salvation of souls.

 

 Q. 998. When did the priests of the Church receive this threefold power to preach, to forgive sins and to

consecrate bread and wine? 

 A. The priests of the Church received this three-fold power to preach, to forgive sins and to consecrate bread and

wine, when Christ said to them, through the apostles: "Go teach all nations"; "Whose sins you shall forgive they are forgiven," and "Do this for a commemoration of Me."

 

 Q. 999. Why should we show great respect to the priests and bishops of the Church? 

 A. We should show great respect to the priests and bishops of the Church:

   1.(1) Because they are the representatives of Christ upon earth, and 

   2.(2) Because they administer the Sacraments without which we cannot be saved.

Therefore, we should be most careful in what we do, say or think concerning God's ministers. To show our respect in proportion to their dignity, we address the priest as Reverend, the bishop as Right Reverend, the archbishop as Most Reverend, and the Pope as Holy Father.

 

 Q. 1000. Should we do more than merely respect the ministers of God? 

 A. We should do more than merely respect the ministers of God. We should earnestly and frequently pray for

them, that they may be enabled to perform the difficult and important duties of their holy state in a manner pleasing to God. 

 

 Q. 1001. Who can confer the Sacrament of Holy Orders? 

 A. Bishops can confer the Sacrament of Holy Orders.

 

 Q. 1002. How do we know that there is a true priesthood in the Church? 

 A. We know that there is a true priesthood in the Church:

   1.(1) Because in the Jewish religion, which was only a figure of the Christian religion, there was a true

     priesthood established by God; 

   2.(2) Because Christ conferred on His apostles and not on all the faithful the power to offer Sacrifice,

     distribute the Holy Eucharist and forgive sins.

 

 Q. 1003. But is there need of a special Sacrament of Holy Orders to confer these powers? 

 A. There is need of a special Sacrament of Holy Orders to confer these powers:

   1.(1) Because the priesthood which is to continue the work of the apostles must be visible in the Church, and

     it must therefore be conferred by some visible ceremony or outward sign; 

   2.(2) Because this outward sign called Holy Orders gives not only power but grace and was instituted by

     Christ, Holy Orders must be a Sacrament.

 

 Q. 1004. Can bishops, priests and other ministers of the Church always exercise the power they have

received in Holy Orders? 

 A. Bishops, priests and other ministers of the Church cannot exercise the power they have received in Holy Orders unless authorized and sent to do so by their lawful superiors. The power can never be taken from them, but the right to use it may be withdrawn for causes laid down in the laws of the Church, or for reasons that seem good to those in authority over them. Any use of sacred power without authority is sinful, and all who take part in such

ceremonies are guilty of sin.

 

 

 

 LESSON TWENTY-SIXTH: On Matrimony 

  Q. 1005. What is the Sacrament of Matrimony? 

 A. The Sacrament of Matrimony is the Sacrament which unites a Christian man and woman in lawful marriage.

 

 Q. 1006. When are persons lawfully married? 

 A. Persons are lawfully married when they comply with all the laws of God and of the Church relating to marriage. To marry unlawfully is a mortal sin, and it deprives the souls of the grace of the Sacrament.

 

 Q. 1007. When was marriage first instituted? 

 A. Marriage was first instituted in the Garden of Eden, when God created Adam and Eve and made them husband and wife, but it was not then a Sacrament, for their union did not confer any special grace.

 

 Q. 1008. When was the contract of marriage raised to the dignity of a Sacrament? 

 A. The exact time at which the contract of marriages was raised to the dignity of a Sacrament is not known, but the fact that it was thus raised is certain from passages in the New Testament and from the constant teaching of the Church ever since the time of the apostles. Our Lord did not merely add grace to the contract, but He made the very contract a Sacrament, so that Christians cannot make this contract without receiving the Sacrament.

 

 

 Q. 1009. What is the outward sign in the Sacrament of Matrimony, and in what does the whole essence of the marriage contract consist? 

 A. The outward sign in the Sacrament of matrimony is the mutual consent of the persons, expressed by words or signs in accordance with the laws of the Church. The whole essence of the marriage contract consists in the surrender by the persons of their bodies to each other and in declaring by word or sign that they make this surrender and take each other for husband and wife now and for life.

 

 Q. 1010. What are the chief ends of the Sacrament of Matrimony? 

 A. The chief ends of the Sacrament of matrimony are:

1.(1) To enable the husband and wife to aid each other in securing the salvation of their souls; 2.(2) To propagate or keep up the existence of the human race by bringing children into the world to serve God; 3.(3) To prevent sins against the holy virtue of purity by faithfully obeying the laws of the marriage state.

 

 

 Q. 1011. Can a Christian man and woman be united in lawful marriage in any other way than by the Sacrament of Matrimony? 

 A. A Christian man and woman cannot be united in lawful marriage in any other way than by the Sacrament of Matrimony, because Christ raised marriage to the dignity of a sacrament.

 

 Q. 1012. Were, then, all marriages before the coming of Christ unlawful and invalid? 

 A. All marriages before the coming of Christ were not unlawful and invalid. They were both lawful and valid when the persons contracting them followed the dictates of their conscience and the laws of God as they knew them; but such marriages were only contracts. Through their evil inclinations many forgot or neglected the true character of marriage till Our Lord restored it to its former unity and purity.

 

 

 Q. 1013. What do we mean by impediments to marriage? 

 A. By impediments to marriage we mean certain restrictions, imposed by the law of God or of the Church, that render the marriage invalid or unlawful when they are violated in entering into it. These restrictions regard age, health, relationship, intention, religion and other matters affecting the good of the Sacrament.

 

 

 Q. 1014. Can the Church dispense from or remove these impediments to marriage? 

 A. The Church can dispense from or remove the impediments to marriage that arise from its own laws; but it cannot dispense from impediments that arise from the laws of God and nature. Every lawmaker can change or excuse from the laws made by himself or his equals, but he cannot, of his own authority, change or excuse from laws made by a higher power.

 

 

 Q. 1015. What is required that the Church may grant, when it is able, dispensations from the impediments to marriage or from other laws? 

 A. That the Church may grant dispensations from the impediments to marriage or from other laws, there must be a good and urgent reason for granting such dispensations. The Church does not grant dispensations without cause and merely to satisfy the wishes of those who ask for them.

 

 Q. 1016. Why does the Church sometimes require the persons to whom dispensations are granted to pay a tax or fee for the privilege? 

 A. The Church sometimes requires the persons to whom dispensations are granted to pay a tax or fee for the privilege:

 

1.(1) That persons on account of this tax be restrained from asking for dispensations and may comply with the general laws; 2.(2) That the Church may not have to bear the expense of supporting an office for granting privileges to a few.

 

 

 Q. 1017. What should persons who are about to get married do? 

 A. Persons who are about to get married should give their pastor timely notice of their intention, make known to him privately whatever they suspect might be an impediment to the marriage, and make sure of all arrangements before inviting their friends.

 

 

 Q. 1018. What timely notice of marriage should be given to the priest, and why? 

 A. At least three weeks notice of marriage should be given to the priest, because, according to the laws of the Church, the names of the persons about to get married must be announced and their intended marriage published at the principal Mass in their parish for three successive Sundays.

 

 

 Q. 1019. Why are the banns of matrimony published in the Church? 

 A. The banns of matrimony are published in the Church that any person who might know of any impediment to the marriage may have an opportunity to declare it privately to the priest before the marriage takes place and thus prevent an invalid or unlawful marriage. Persons who know of such impediments and fail to declare them in due time are guilty of sin

 

 

 Q. 1020. What things in particular should persons arranging for their marriage make known to the priest? 

 A. Persons arranging for their marriage should make known to the priest whether both are Christians and Catholics; whether either has been solemnly engaged to another person; whether they have ever made any vow to God with regard to chastity or the like; whether they are related and in what degree; whether either was ever married to any member of the other's family and whether either was ever godparent in baptism for the other.

 

 

 Q. 1021. What else must they make known? 

 A. They must also make known whether either was married before and what proof can be given of the death of the former husband or wife; whether they really intend to get married, and do so of their own will; whether they are of lawful age; whether they are sound in body or suffering from any deformity that might prevent their marriage, and lastly, whether they live in the parish in which they ask to be married, and if so, how long they have lived in it.

 

 

 Q. 1022. What is particularly necessary that persons may do their duty in the marriage state? 

 A. That persons may do their duty in the marriage state, it is particularly necessary that they should be well instructed, before entering it, in the truths and duties of their religion for how will they teach their children these things if they are ignorant of them themselves?

 

 

 Q. 1023. Can the bond of Christian marriage be dissolved by any human power? 

 A. The bond of Christian marriage cannot be dissolved by any human power.

 

 

 Q. 1024. Does not a divorce granted by courts of justice break the bond of marriage? 

 A. Divorce granted by courts of justice or by any human power does not break the bond of marriage, and one who makes use of such a divorce to marry again while the former husband or wife lives commits a sacrilege and Iives in the sin of adultery. A civil divorce may give a sufficient reason for the persons to live apart and it may determine their rights with regard to support, the control of the children and other temporal things, but it has no effect whatever upon the bond and spiritual nature of the Sacrament.

 

 

 Q. 1025. Does not the Church sometimes allow husband and wife to separate and live apart? 

 A. The Church sometimes, for very good reasons, does allow husband and wife to separate and live apart; but that is not dissolving the bond of marriage, or divorce as it is called, for though separated they are still husband and wife, and neither can marry again till the other dies.

 

 

 Q. 1026. Has not the Church sometimes allowed Catholics once married to separate and marry again? 

 A. The Church has never allowed Catholics once really married to separate and marry again, but it has sometimes declared persons apparently married free to marry again, because their first marriage was null; that is, no marriage on account of some impediment not discovered till after the ceremony.

 

 

 Q. 1027. What evils follow divorce so commonly claimed by those outside the true Church and granted by civil authority? 

 A. The evils that follow divorce so commonly claimed by those outside the true Church and granted by civil authority are very many; but chiefly:

1.(1) A disregard for the sacred character of the Sacrament and for the spiritual welfare of the children; 2.(2) The loss of the true idea of home and family followed by bad morals and sinful living.

 

 

 Q. 1028. Which are the effects of the Sacrament of Matrimony? 

 A. The effects of the Sacrament of Matrimony are:

1.1st. To sanctify the love of husband and wife; 2.2nd. To give them grace to bear with each other's weaknesses; 3.3rd. To enable them to bring up their children in the fear and love of God.

 

 

 Q. 1029. What do we mean by bearing with each other's weaknesses? 

 A. By bearing with each other's weaknesses we mean that the husband and wife must be patient with each other's faults, bad habits or dispositions, pardon them easily, and aid each other in overcoming them.

 

 

 Q. 1030. How are parents specially fitted to bring up their children in the fear and love of God? 

 A. Parents are specially fitted to bring up their children in the fear and love of God:

 

1.(1) By the special grace they receive to advise and direct their children and to warn them against evil; 2.(2) By the experience they have acquired in passing through life from childhood to the position of parents.

Children should, therefore, conscientiously seek and accept the direction of good parents.

 

 

 Q. 1031. To receive the Sacrament of Matrimony worthily is it necessary to be in the state of grace? 

 A. To receive the Sacrament of Matrimony worthily it is necessary to be in the state of grace, and it is necessary also to comply with the laws of the Church.

 

 

 Q. 1032. With what laws of the Church are we bound to comply in receiving the Sacrament of Matrimony? 

 A. In receiving the Sacrament of matrimony we are bound to comply with whatever laws of the Church concern Matrimony; such as laws forbidding solemn marriage in Lent and Advent; or marriage with relatives or with persons of a different religion, and in general all laws that refer to any impediment to marriage.

 

 

 Q. 1033. In how many ways may persons be related? 

 A. Persons may be related in four ways. When they are related by blood their relationship is called consanguinity; when they are related by marriage it is called affinity; when they are related by being god-parents in Baptism or Confirmation, it is called spiritual affinity; when they are related by adoption, it is called legal affinity.

 

 

 Q. 1034. Who has the right to make laws concerning the Sacrament of marriage? 

 A. The Church alone has the right to make laws concerning the Sacrament of marriage, though the state also has the right to make laws concerning the civil effects of the marriage contract.

 

 

 Q. 1035. What do we mean by laws concerning the civil effects of the marriage contract? 

 A. By laws concerning the civil effects of the marriage contract we mean laws with regard to the property or debts of the husband and wife, the inheritance of their children, or whatever pertains to their temporal affairs. All persons are bound to obey the laws of their country when these laws are not opposed to the laws of God.

 

 

 Q. 1036. Does the Church forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons who have a different religion or no religion at all? 

 A. The Church does forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons who have a different religion or no religion at all.

 

 

 Q. 1037. Why does the Church forbid the marriage of Catholics with persons who have a different religion or no religion at all? 

 A. The Church forbids the marriage of Catholics with persons who have a different religion, or no religion at all, because such marriages generally lead to indifference, loss of faith, and to the neglect of the religious education of the children.

 

 

 Q. 1038. What are the marriages of Catholics with persons of a different religion called, and when does the Church permit them by dispensation? 

 A. The marriages of Catholics with persons of a different religion are called mixed marriages. The Church permits them by dispensation only under certain conditions and for urgent reasons; chiefly to prevent a greater evil.

 

 

 Q. 1039. What are the conditions upon which the Church will permit a Catholic to marry one who is not a Catholic? 

 A. The conditions upon which the Church will permit a Catholic to marry one who is not a Catholic are:

 

 

1.(1) That the Catholic be allowed the free exercise of his or her religion ; 2.(2) That the Catholic shall try by teaching and good example to lead the one who is not a Catholic to embrace the true faith; 3.(3) That all the children born of the marriage shall be brought up in the Catholic religion.

 

The marriage ceremony must not be repeated before a heretical minister. Without these promises, the Church will not consent to a mixed marriage, and if the Church does not consent the marriage is unlawful.

 

 Q. 1040. What penalty does the Church impose on Catholics who marry before a Protestant minister? 

 A. Catholics who marry before a Protestant minister incur excommunication; that is, a censure of the Church or spiritual penalty which prevents them from receiving the Sacrament of Penance till the priest who hears their confession gets special faculties or permission from the bishop; because by such a marriage they make profession of a false religion in acknowledging as a priest one who has neither sacred power nor authority.

 

 Q. 1041. How does the Church show its displeasure at mixed marriages? 

 A. The Church shows its displeasure at mixed marriages by the coldness with which it sanctions them, prohibiting all religious ceremony at them by forbidding the priest to use any sacred vestments, holy water or blessing of the ring at such marriages; by prohibiting them also from taking place in the Church or even in the sacristy. On the other hand, the Church shows its joy and approval at a true Catholic marriage by the Nuptial Mass and solemn ceremonies.

 

 Q. 1042. Why should Catholics avoid mixed marriages? 

 A. Catholics should avoid mixed marriages:

 

 

1.(1) Because they are displeasing to the Church and cannot bring with them the full measure of God's grace and blessing; 2.(2) Because the children should have the good example of both parents in the practice of their religion; 3.(3) Because such marriages give rise to frequent disputes on religious questions between husband and wife and between their relatives; 4.(4) Because the one not a Catholic, disregarding the sacred character of the Sacrament, may claim a divorce and marry again, leaving the Catholic married and abandoned.

 

 

 Q. 1043. Does the Church seek to make converts by its laws concerning mixed marriages? 

 A. The Church does not seek to make converts by its laws concerning mixed marriages, but seeks only to keep its children from losing their faith and becoming perverts by constant company with persons not Catholics. The Church does not wish persons to become Catholics merely for the sake of marrying Catholics. Such conversions are, as a rule, not sincere, do no good, but rather make such converts hypocrites and guilty of greater sins, especially sins of sacrilege.

 

 

 Q. 1044. Why do many marriages prove unhappy? 

 A. Many marriages prove unhappy because they are entered into hastily and without worthy motives.

 

 

 Q. 1045. When are marriages entered into hastily? 

 A. Marriages are entered into hastily when persons do not sufficiently consider and investigate the character, habits and dispositions of the one they intend to marry. It is wise to look for lasting qualities and solid virtues in a life-long companion and not to be carried away with characteristics that please only for a time.

 

 

 Q. 1046. When are motives for marriage worthy? 

 A. Motives for marriage are worthy when persons enter it for the sake of doing God's will and fulfilling the end for which He instituted the Sacrament. Whatever is opposed to the true object of the Sacrament and the sanctification of the husband and wife must be an unworthy motive.

 

 

 Q. 1047. How should Christians prepare for a holy and happy marriage? 

 A. Christians should prepare for a holy and happy marriage by receiving the Sacraments of Penance and Holy Eucharist; by begging God to grant them a pure intention and to direct their choice; and by seeking the advice of their parents and the blessing of their pastors.

 

 

 Q. 1048. How may parents be guilty of great injustice to their children in case of marriage? 

 A. Parents may be guilty of great injustice to their children in case of marriage by seeking the gratification of their own aims and desires, rather than the good of their children, and thus for selfish and unreasonable motives forcing their children to marry persons they dislike or preventing them from marrying the persons chosen by the dictates of their conscience, or compelling them to marry when they have no vocation for such a life or no true knowledge of its obligations.

 

 

 Q. 1049. May persons receive the Sacrament of Matrimony more than once? 

 A. Persons may receive the sacrament of Matrimony more than once, provided they are certain of the death of the former husband or wife and comply with the laws of the Church.

 

 

 Q. 1050. Where and at what time of the day should Catholics be married? 

 A. Catholics should be married before the altar in the Church. They should be married in the morning, and with a Nuptial Mass if possible.

 

 

 Q. 1051. What must never be forgotten by those who attend a marriage ceremony in the Church? 

 A. They who attend a marriage ceremony in the Church must never forget the presence of the Blessed Sacrament, and that all laughing, talking, or irreverence is forbidden then as at other times. Women must never enter into the presence of the Blessed Sacrament with uncovered heads, and their dress must be in keeping with the strict modesty that Our Lord's presence demands, no matter what worldly vanity or social manners may require.

 

 

 

 

 LESSON TWENTY-SEVENTH: On the Sacramentals 

  Q. 1052. What is a sacramental? 

 A. A sacramental is anything set apart or blessed by the Church to excite good thoughts and to increase devotion, and through these movements of the heart to remit venial sin.

 

 

 Q. 1053. How do the Sacramentals excite good thoughts and increase devotion? 

 A. The Sacramentals excite good thoughts by recalling to our minds some special reason for doing good and avoiding evil; especially by reminding us of some holy person, event or thing through which blessings have come to us. They increase devotion by fixing our minds on particular virtues and by helping us to understand and desire them.

 

 

 Q. 1054. Do the Sacramentals of themselves remit venial sins? 

 A. The Sacramentals of themselves do not remit venial sins, but they move us to truer devotion, to greater love for God and greater sorrow for our sins, and this devotion, love and sorrow bring us grace, and the grace remits venial sins.

 

 

 Q. 1055. Why does the Church use Sacramentals? 

 A. The Church uses Sacramentals to teach the faithful of every class the truths of religion, which they may learn as well by their sight as by their hearing; for God wishes us to learn His laws by every possible means, by every power of soul and body.

 

 

 Q. 1056. Show by an example how Sacramentals aid the ignorant in learning the truths of faith. 

 A. Sacramentals aid the ignorant in learning the truths of faith as children learn from pictures before they are able to read. Thus one who cannot read the account of Our Lord's passion may learn it from the Stations of the Cross, and one who kneels before a crucifix and looks on the bleeding head, pierced hands and wounded side, is better able to understand Christ's sufferings than one without a crucifix before him.

 

 

 Q. 1057. What are the Stations or Way of the Cross? 

 A. The Stations or Way of the Cross is a devotion instituted by the Church to aid us in meditating on Christ's passion and death. Fourteen crosses or stations, each with a picture of some scene in the passion, are arranged at distances apart. By passing from one station to another and praying before each while we meditate upon the scene it represents, we make the Way of the Cross in memory of Christ's painful journey during His passion, and we gain the indulgence granted for this pious exercise.

 

 

 Q. 1058. Are prayers and ceremonies of the Church also Sacramentals? 

 A. Prayers and ceremonies of the Church are also Sacramentals because they excite good thoughts and increase devotion. Whatever the Church dedicates to a pious use or devotes to the worship of God may be called a Sacramental.

 

 

 Q. 1059. On what ground does the Church make use of ceremonies? 

 A. The Church makes use of ceremonies:

1.(1) After the example of the Old Law, in which God described and commanded ceremonies; 2.(2) After the example of Our Lord, who rubbed clay on the eyes of the blind to whom He wished to restore sight, though He might have performed the miracle without any external act; 3.(3) On the authority of the Church itself, to whom Christ gave power to do whatever was necessary for the instruction of all men; 4.(4) To add solemnity to religious acts.

 

 

 Q. 1060. How may persons sin in using Sacramentals? 

 A. Persons may sin in using Sacramentals by using them in a way or for a purpose prohibited by the Church; also by believing that the use of Sacramentals will save us in spite of our sinful lives. We must remember that Sacramentals can aid us only through the blessing the Church gives them and through the good dispositions they excite in us. They have, therefore, no power in themselves, and to put too much confidence in their use leads to superstition.

 

 

 Q. 1061. What is the difference between the Sacraments and the sacramentals? 

 A. The difference between the Sacraments and the sacramentals is:

1.1st. The Sacraments were instituted by Jesus Christ and the sacramentals were instituted by the Church; 2.2nd. The Sacraments give grace of themselves when we place no obstacle in the way; 3.3rd. The sacramentals excite in us pious dispositions, by means of which we may obtain grace.

 

 

 Q. 1062. May the Church increase or diminish the number of Sacraments and Sacramentals? 

 A. The Church can never increase nor diminish the number of Sacraments, for as Christ Himself instituted them, He alone has power to change their number; but the Church may increase or diminish the number of the Sacramentals as the devotion of its people or the circumstances of the time and place require, for since the Church instituted them they must depend entirely upon its laws.

 

 

 Q. 1063. Which is the chief sacramental used in the Church? 

 A. The chief sacramental used in the Church is the sign of the cross.

 

 

 Q. 1064. How do we make the sign of the cross? 

 A. We make the sign of the cross by putting the right hand to the forehead, then on the breast, and then to the left and right shoulders, saying, "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen."

 

 

 Q. 1065. What is a common fault with many in blessing themselves? 

 A. A common fault with many in blessing themselves is to make a hurried motion with the hand which is in no way a sign of the cross. They perform this act of devotion without thought or intention, forgetting that the Church grants an indulgence to all who bless themselves properly while they have sorrow for their sins.

 

 

 Q. 1066. Why do we make the sign of the cross? 

 A. We make the sign of the cross to show that we are Christians and to profess our belief in the chief mysteries of our religion.

 

 Q. 1067. How is the sign of the cross a profession of faith in the chief mysteries of our religion? 

 A. The sign of the cross is a profession of faith in the chief mysteries of our religion because it expresses the mysteries of the Unity and Trinity of God and of the Incarnation and death of our Lord.

 

 Q. 1068. How does the sign of the cross express the mystery of the Unity and Trinity of God? 

 A. The words, "In the name," express the Unity of God; the words that follow, "of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," express the mystery of the Trinity.

 

 Q. 1069. How does the sign of the cross express the mystery of the Incarnation and death of our Lord? 

 A. The sign of the cross expresses the mystery of the Incarnation by reminding us that the Son of God, having become man, suffered death on the cross.

 

 

 Q. 1070. What other sacramental is in very frequent use? 

 A. Another sacramental in very frequent use is holy water.

 

 

 Q. 1071. What is holy water? 

 A. Holy water is water blessed by the priest with solemn prayer to beg God's blessing on those who use it, and protection from the powers of darkness.

 

 Q. 1072. How does the water blessed on Holy Saturday, or Easter Water, as it is called, differ from the holy water blessed at other times? 

 A. The water blessed on Holy Saturday, or Easter Water, as it is called, differs from the holy water blessed at other times in this, that the Easter water is blessed with greater solemnity, the paschal candle, which represents Our Lord risen from the dead, having been dipped into it with a special prayer.

 

 

 Q. 1073. Is water ever blessed in honor of certain saints? 

 A. Water is sometimes blessed in honor of certain saints and for special purposes. The form of prayer to be used in such blessings is found in the Roman Ritual -- the book containing prayers and ceremonies for the administration of the Sacraments and of blessings authorized by the Church.

 

 

 Q. 1074. Are there other sacramentals besides the sign of the cross and holy water? 

 A. Beside the sign of the cross and holy water there are many other sacramentals, such as blessed candles, ashes, palms, crucifixes, images of the Blessed Virgin and of the saints, rosaries, and scapulars.

  Q. 1075. When are candles blessed in the Church and why are they used? 

 A. Candles are blessed in the Church on the feast of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin -- February 2nd. They are used chiefly to illuminate and ornament our altars, as a mark of reverence for the presence of Our Lord and of joy at His coming.

 

 Q. 1076. What praiseworthy custom is now in use in many places? 

 A. A praiseworthy custom now in use in many places is the offering by the faithful on the feast of the Purification of candles for the use of the altar during the year. It is pleasing to think we have candles burning in our name on the altar of God, and if the Jewish people yearly made offerings to their temple, faithful Christians should not neglect their altars and churches where God Himself dwells.

 

 Q. 1077. When are ashes blessed in the Church and why are they used? 

 A. Ashes are blessed in the Church on Ash Wednesday. They are used to keep us in mind of our humble origin, and of how the body of Adam, our forefather, was formed out of the slime or clay of the earth; also to remind us of death, when our bodies will return to dust, and of the necessity of doing penance for our sins. These ashes are obtained by burning the blessed palms of the previous year.

 

 Q. 1078. When are palms blessed and of what do they remind us? 

 A. Palms are blessed on Palm Sunday. They remind us of Our Lord's triumphal entry into Jerusalem, when the people, wishing to honor Him and make Him king, strewed palm branches and even their own garments in His path, singing: Hosanna to the Son of David.

 

 Q. 1079. What is the difference between a cross and a crucifix? 

 A. A cross has no figure on it and a crucifix has a figure of Our Lord. The word crucifix means fixed or nailed to the cross.

 

 Q. 1080. What is the Rosary? 

 A. The Rosary is a form of prayer in which we say a certain number of Our Fathers and Hail Marys, meditating or thinking for a short time before each decade; that is, before each Our Father and ten Hail Marys, on some particular event in the life of Our Lord. These events are called mysteries of the Rosary. The string of beads on which these prayers are said is also called a Rosary. The ordinary beads are of five decades, or one-third of the whole Rosary.

 

 Q. 1081. Who taught the use of the Rosary in its present form? 

 A. St. Dominic taught the use of the Rosary in its present form. By it he instructed his hearers in the chief truths of our holy religion and converted many to the true faith.

 

 Q. 1082. How do we say the Rosary, or beads? 

 A. To say the Rosary or beads we bless ourselves with the cross, then say the Apostles' Creed and the Our Father on the first large bead, then the Hail Mary on each of the three small beads, and then Glory be to the Father, etc. Then we mention or think of the first mystery we wish to honor, and say an Our Father on the large bead and a Hail Mary on each small bead of the ten that follow. At the end of every decade, or ten Hail Marys, we say "Glory be to the Father;" etc. Then we mention the next mystery and do as before, and so on to the end.

 

 

 Q. 1083. How many mysteries of the Rosary are there? 

 A. There are fifteen mysteries of the Rosary arranged in the order in which these events occurred in the life of Our Lord, and divided into five joyful, five sorrowful, and five glorious mysteries.

 

 Q. 1084. Say the five joyful mysteries of the Rosary. 

 A. The five joyful mysteries of the Rosary are:

1.(1) The Annunciation -- the Angel Gabriel telling the Blessed Virgin that she is to be the Mother of God; 2.(2) The Visitation -- the Blessed Virgin goes to visit her cousin, St. Elizabeth, the mother of St. John the Baptist; 3.(3) The Nativity, or birth, of Our Lord; 4.(4) The Presentation of the Child Jesus in the temple -- His parents offered Him to God; 5.(5) The finding of the Child Jesus in the temple -- His parents had lost Him in Jerusalem for three days.

 

 Q. 1085. Say the five sorrowful mysteries of the Rosary. 

 A. The five sorrowful mysteries of the Rosary are:

1.(1) The Agony in the Garden -- Our Lord was in dreadful anguish and bathed in a bloody sweat; 2.(2) The Scourging at the Pillar -- Christ was stripped of His garments and lashed in a cruel manner; 3.(3) The Crowning with Thorns -- He was mocked as a king by heartless men; 4.(4) The Carriage of the Cross -- from the place He was condemned to Calvary, the place of Crucifixion; 5.(5) The Crucifixion -- He was nailed to the cross amid the jeers and blasphemies of His enemies.

 

 Q. 1086. Say the five glorious mysteries of the Rosary. 

 A. The five glorious mysteries of the Rosary are:

1.(1) The Resurrection of Our Lord; 2.(2) The Ascension of Our Lord; 3.(3) The Coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles; 4.(4) The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin -- after death she was taken body and soul into heaven; 5.(5) The Coronation of the Blessed Virgin -- on entering heaven she was made queen of all the Angels and Saints and placed in dignity next to her Divine Son, Our Blessed Lord.

 

 

 Q. 1087. On what days, according to the pious custom of the faithful, are the different mysteries of the Rosary usually said? 

 A. According to the pious custom of the faithful, the different mysteries of the Rosary are usually said on the following days, namely: the joyful on Mondays and Thursdays, the sorrowful on Tuesdays and Fridays, and the glorious on Sundays, Wednesdays and Saturdays.

 

 Q. 1088. What do the letters I. N. R. I. over the crucifix mean? 

 A. The letters I. N. R. I. over the crucifix are the first letters of four Latin words that mean Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. Our Lord did say He was king of the Jews, but He also said that He was not their temporal or earthly king, but their spiritual and heavenly king.

 

 

 Q. 1089. To what may we attribute the desire of the Jews to put Christ to death? 

 A. We may attribute the desire of the Jews to put Christ to death to the jealously, hatred and ill-will of their priests and the Pharisees, whose faults He rebuked and whose hypocrisy He exposed. By their slanders and lies they induced the people to follow them in demanding Our Lord's crucifixion.

 

 Q. 1090. With whom did the Blessed Virgin live after the death of Our Lord? 

 A. After the death of Our Lord the Blessed Virgin lived for about eleven years with the Apostle St. John the Evangelist, called also the Beloved Disciple. He wrote one of the four Gospels, three Epistles, and the Apocalypse, or Book of Revelations -- the last book of the Bible. He lived to the age of a hundred years or more and died last of all the apostles.

 

 Q. 1091. What do we mean by the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, and why do we believe in it? 

 A. By the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin we mean that her body was taken up into heaven after her death. We believe in it:

 

1.(1) Because the Church cannot teach error, and yet from an early age the Church has celebrated the Feast of the Assumption; 2.(2) Because no one ever claimed to have a relic of our Blessed Mother's body, and surely the apostles, who knew and loved her, would have secured some relic had her body remained upon earth.

 

 Q. 1092. What do the letters I. H. S. on an altar or sacred things mean? 

 A. The letters I. H. S. on an altar or sacred things means the name Jesus; for it is in that way the Holy Name is written in the Greek language when some of the letters are left out.

 

 Q. 1093. What is the scapular, and why is it worn? 

 A. The scapular is a long, broad piece of woolen cloth forming a part of the religious dress of monks, priests and sisters of some religious orders. It is worn over the shoulders and extends from the shoulders to the feet. The small scapular made in imitation of it, and consisting of two small pieces of cloth fastened together by strings, is worn by the faithful as a promise or proof of their willingness to practice some particular devotion, indicated by the kind of scapular they wear.

 

 Q. 1094. How many kinds of scapulars are there in use among the faithful? 

 A. Among the faithful there are many kinds of scapulars in use, such as the brown scapular or scapular of Mount Carmel worn in honor of Our Lord's passion; the white, in honor of the Holy Trinity; the blue, in honor of the Immaculate Conception; and the black, in honor of the seven dolors of the Blessed Virgin. When these are joined together and worn as one they are called the five scapulars. The brown scapular is best known and entitles its wearer to the greatest privileges and indulgences.

 

 

 Q. 1095. What are the seven dolors of the Blessed Virgin? 

 A. The seven dolors of the Blessed Virgin are the chief sorrowful events in the life of Our Blessed Lady. They are:

1.(1) The circumcision of our Lord -- when she saw his blood shed for the first time; 2.(2) Her flight into Egypt -- to save the life of the Infant Jesus, when Herod sought to kill Him; 3.(3) The three days she lost her Son in Jerusalem; 4.(4) When she saw him carrying the cross; 5.(5) When she saw him die; 6.(6) When His dead body was taken down from the cross; 7.(7) When it was laid in the sepulchre or tomb.

 

 

 Q. 1096. What are the seven dolor beads, and how do we say them? 

 A. Seven dolor beads are beads constructed with seven medals, each bearing a representation of one of the seven dolors, and seven beads between each medal and the next. At each medal we meditate on the proper dolor and the say a Hail Mary on each of the bead following it.

 

 

 Q. 1097. What is an Agnus Dei? 

 A. An Agnus Dei is a small piece of beeswax stamped with the image of a lamb and cross. It is solemnly blessed by the Pope with special prayers for those who carry it about their person in honor of Our Blessed Redeemer, whom we call the Lamb of God, Who taketh away the sins of the world. The wax is usually covered with silk or some fine material.

 

 

 

 

 

LESSON TWENTY-EIGHTH: On Prayer

Q. 1098. Is there any other means of obtaining God's grace than the Sacraments? 

A. There is another means of obtaining God's grace, and it is prayer.

Q. 1099. What is prayer?

A. Prayer is the lifting up of our minds and hearts to God, to adore Him, to thank Him for His benefits, to ask His forgiveness, and to beg of Him all the graces we need whether for soul or body.

Q. 1100. How many kinds of prayer are there?

A. There are two kinds of prayer:      Mental prayer, called meditation, in which we spend the time thinking of God or of one     or more of the truths He has revealed, that by these thoughts we may be persuaded to lead     holier lives;   Vocal prayer, in which we express these pious thoughts in words.Q. 1101. Why is mental prayer most useful to us?

A. Mental prayer is most useful to us because it compels us, while we are engaged in it, to keep our attention fixed on God and His holy laws and to keep our hearts and minds lifted up to Him.

Q. 1102. How can we make a meditation?

A. We can make a meditation:      By remembering that we are in the presence of God;   By asking the Holy Ghost to give us grace to benefit by the meditation;   By reflecting seriously on some sacred truth regarding our salvation;   By drawing some good resolution from the thoughts we have had; and   By thanking God for the knowledge and grace bestowed on us through the meditation.Q. 1103. Where may we find subjects or points for meditation?

A. We may find the subjects or points for meditation in the words of the Our Father, Hail Mary or Apostles' Creed; also in the questions and answers of our Catechism, in the Holy Bible, and in books of meditation.

Q. 1104. Is prayer necessary to salvation?

A. Prayer is necessary to salvation, and without it no one having the use of reason can be saved.

Q. 1105. At what particular times should we pray?

A. We should pray particularly on Sundays and holy days, every morning and night, in all dangers, temptations, and afflictions.

Q. 1106. How should we pray?

A. We should pray:      With attention;   With a sense of our own helplessness and dependence upon God;   With a great desire for the graces we beg of God;   With trust in God's goodness;   With perseverance.Q. 1107. What should our attention at prayer be?

A. Our attention at prayer should be threefold, namely, attention to the words, that we may say them correctly and distinctly; attention to their meaning, if we understand it, and attention to God, to whom the words are addressed.

Q. 1108. What should be the position of the body when we pray?

A. At prayer the most becoming position of the body is kneeling upright, but whether we pray kneeling, standing or sitting, the position of the body should always be one indicating reverence, respect and devotion. We may pray even lying down or walking, for Our Lord Himself says we should pray at all times.

Q. 1109. What should we do that we may pray well?

A. That we may pray well we should make a preparation before prayer:      By calling to mind the dignity of God, to whom we are about to speak, and our own     unworthiness to appear in His presence;   By fixing upon the precise grace or blessing for which we intend to ask;   By remembering God's power and willingness to give if we truly need and ,earnestly,     humbly and confidently ask.Q. 1110. Why does God not always grant our prayers?

A. God does not always grant our prayers for these and other reasons:      Because we may not pray in the proper manner;   That we may learn our dependence on Him, prove our confidence in Him, and merit rewards     by our patience and perseverance in prayer.Prudent persons do not grant every request; why, then, should God do so? 

Q. 1111. What assurance have we that God always hears and rewards our prayers, though He may not grant what we ask?

A. We have the assurance of Our Lord Himself that God always hears and rewards our prayers, though He may not grant what we ask; for Christ said: "Ask and it shall be given you," and "if you ask the Father anything in My name, He will give it to you."

Q. 1112. Which are the prayers most recommended to us?

A. The prayers most recommended to us are the Lord's Prayer, the Hail Mary, the Apostles' Creed, the Confiteor, and the Acts of Faith, Hope, Love, and Contrition.

Q. 1113. Are prayers said with distractions of any avail?

A. Prayers said with willful distraction are of no avail.

Q. 1114. Why are prayers said with willful distraction of no avail?

A. Prayers said with willful distraction are of no avail because they are mere words, such as a machine might utter, and since there is no lifting up of the mind or heart with them they cannot be prayer.

Q. 1115. Do, then, the distractions which we often have at prayer deprive our prayers of all merit?

A. The distractions which we often have at prayer do not deprive our prayers of all merit, because they are not willful when we try to keep them away, for God rewards our good intentions and the efforts we make to pray well.

Q. 1116. What, then, is a distraction?

A. A distraction is any thought that, during prayer, enters our mind to turn our thoughts and hearts from God and from the sacred duty we are performing.

Q. 1117. What are the fruits of prayer?

A. The fruits of prayer are:      It strengthens our faith,   nourishes our hope,   increases our love for God,   keeps us humble,   merits grace and atones for sin.Q. 1118. Why should we pray when God knows our needs?

A. We pray not to remind God or tell Him of what we need, but to acknowledge that He is the Supreme Giver, to adore and worship Him by showing our entire dependence upon Him for every gift to soul or body.

Q. 1119. What little prayers may we say even at work?

A. Even at work we may say little aspirations such as "My God, pardon my sins; Blessed be the Holy Name of Jesus; Holy Spirit, enlighten me; Holy Mary, pray for me," etc.

Q. 1120. Did Our Lord Himself pray, and why?

A. Our Lord Himself very frequently prayed, often spending the whole night in prayer. He prayed before every important action, not that He needed to pray, but to set us an example of how and when we should pray.

Q. 1121. Why does the Church conclude most of its prayers with the words "through Jesus Christ Our Lord"?

A. The Church concludes most of its prayers with the words "through Jesus Christ Our Lord" because it is only through His merits that we can obtain grace, and because "there is no other name given to men whereby we must be saved."

Q. 1122. Was any special promise made in favor of the united prayers of two or more persons?

A. A special promise was made in favor of the united prayers of two or more persons when Our Lord said: "Where there are two or three gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of them." Therefore, the united prayers of a congregation, sodality or family, and, above all, the public prayers of the whole Church, have great influence with God. We should join in public prayers out of true devotion, and not from habit, or, worse, to display our piety.

Q. 1123. What is the most suitable place for prayer? 

A. The most suitable place for prayer is in the Church -- the house of prayer -- made holy by special blessings and, above all, by the Real Presence of Jesus dwelling in the Tabernacle. Still, Our Lord exhorts us to pray also in secret, for His Father, who seeth in secret, will repay us.

Q. 1124. For what should we pray?

A. We should pray:      For ourselves, for the blessings of soul and body that we may be devoted servants of     God;   For the Church, for all spiritual and temporal wants, that the true faith may be     everywhere known and professed;   For our relatives, friends and benefactors, particularly for those we may in any way     have injured;   For all men, for the protection of the good and conversion of the wicked, that virtue     may flourish and vice disappear;   For our spiritual rulers, the Pope, our bishops, priests and religious communities, that     they may faithfully perform their sacred duties;   For our country and temporal rulers, that they may use their power for the good of their     subjects and for the honor and glory of God. 

 

 

 

 LESSON TWENTY-NINTH: On the Commandments of God 

Q. 1125. Is it enough to belong to God's Church in order to be saved? 

 A. It is not enough to belong to the Church in order to be saved, but we must also keep the Commandments of God and of the Church.

 

 Q. 1126. Are not the commandments of the Church also commandments of God? 

 A. The commandments of the Church are also commandments of God, for they are made by His authority and under the guidance of the Holy Ghost; nevertheless, the Church can change or abolish its own commandments, while it cannot change or abolish the commandments given directly by God Himself.

 

 Q. 1127. Which are the Commandments that contain the whole law of God? 

 A. The Commandments which contain the whole law of God are these two:

1.1st. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, with thy whole soul, with thy whole strength, and with thy whole mind; 2.2nd. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

 

 Q. 1128. Why do these two Commandments of the love of God and of our neighbor contain the whole law of God? 

 A. These two Commandments of the love of God and of our neighbor contain the whole law of God because all the other Commandments are given either to help us to keep these two, or to direct us how to shun what is opposed to them.

 

 

 Q. 1129. Explain further how the two commandments of the love of God and of our neighbor contain the teaching of the whole ten commandments. 

 A. The two commandments of the love of God and of our neighbor contain the teaching of the whole ten commandments because the first three of the ten commandments refer to God and oblige us to worship Him alone, respect His name and serve Him as He wills, and these things we will do if we love Him; secondly, the last seven of the ten commandments refer to our neighbor and forbid us to injure him in body, soul, goods or reputation, and if we love him we will do him no injury in any of these, but, on the contrary, aid him as far as we can.

 

 Q. 1130. Which are the Commandments of God? 

 A. The Commandments of God are these ten:

1.1. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt not have strange gods before me. Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor of those things that are in the waters under the earth. Thou shalt not adore them, nor serve them. 2.2. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. 3.3. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. 4.4. Honor thy father and thy mother. 5.5. Thou shalt not kill. 6.6. Thou shalt not commit adultery. 7.7. Thou shalt not steal. 8.8. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor. 9.9. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife. 10.10. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods.

 

 Q. 1131. What does the first commandment mean by a "graven thing" or "the likeness of anything" in heaven, in the earth or in the waters? 

 A. The first commandment means by a "graven thing" or "the likeness of anything" in heaven, in the earth or in the waters, the statue, picture or image of any creature in heaven or of any animal on land or in water intended for an idol and to be worshipped as a god.

 

 Q. 1132. Who gave the Ten Commandments? 

 A. God Himself gave the Ten Commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai, and Christ our Lord confirmed them.

 

 Q. 1133. How and when were the Commandments give to Moses? 

 A. The Commandments, written on two tables of stone, were given to Moses in the midst of fire and smoke, thunder and lightning, from which God spoke to him on the mountain, about fifty days after the Israelites were delivered from the bondage of Egypt and while they were on their journey through the desert to the Promised Land.

 

 Q. 1134. What do we mean when we say Christ confirmed the Commandments? 

 A. When we say Christ confirmed the Commandments we mean that He strongly approved them, and gave us by His teaching a fuller and clearer knowledge of their meaning and importance.

 

 Q. 1135. Was anyone obliged to keep the Commandments before they were given to Moses? 

 A. All persons, from the beginning of the world, were obliged to keep the Commandments, for it was always sinful to blaspheme God, murder, steal or violate any of the Commandments, though they were not written till the time of Moses.

 

 Q. 1136. How many kinds of laws had the Jews before the coming of Our Lord? 

 A. Before the coming of Our Lord the Jews had three kinds of laws:

 

 

1.(1) Civil laws, regulating the affairs of their nation; 2.(2) Ceremonial laws, governing their worship in the temple; 3.(3) Moral laws, guiding their religious belief and actions.

 

 

 Q. 1137. To which of these laws did the Ten Commandments belong? 

 A. The Ten Commandments belong to the moral law, because they are a compendium or short account of what we must do in order to save our souls; just as the Apostles' Creed is a compendium of what we must believe.

 

 

 Q. 1138. When did the civil and ceremonial laws of the Jews cease to exist? 

 A. The civil laws of the Jews ceased to exist when the Jewish people, shortly before the coming of Christ, ceased to be an independent nation. The ceremonial laws ceased to exist when the Jewish religion ceased to be the true religion; that is, when Christ established the Christian religion, of which the Jewish religion was only a figure or promise.

 

 Q. 1139. Why were not also the moral laws of the Jews abolished when the Christian religion was established? 

 A. The moral laws of the Jews could not be abolished by the establishment of the Christian religion because they regard truth and virtue and have been revealed by God, and whatever God has revealed as true must be always true, and whatever He has condemned as bad in itself must be always bad. 

 

 

 

 LESSON THIRTIETH: On the First Commandment 

  Q. 1140. What is the first Commandment? 

 A. The first Commandment is: I am the Lord thy God: thou shalt not have strange gods before me.

 

 Q. 1141. What does the commandment mean by "strange gods"? 

 A. By strange gods the commandment means idols or false gods, which the Israelites frequently worshipped when, through their sins, they had abandoned the true God.

 

 Q. 1142. How may we, in a sense, worship strange gods? 

 A. We, in a sense, may worship strange gods by giving up the salvation of our souls for wealth, honors, society, worldly pleasures, etc., so that we would offend God, renounce our faith or give up the practice of our religion for their sake.

 

 Q. 1143. How does the first Commandment help us to keep the great Commandment of the love of God? 

 A. The first Commandment helps us to keep the great Commandment of the love of God because it commands us to adore God alone.

 

 Q. 1144. How do we adore God? 

 A. We adore God by faith, hope, and charity, by prayer and sacrifice.

 

 Q. 1145. By what prayers do we adore God? 

 A. We adore God by all our prayers, but in particular by the public prayers of the Church, and, above all, by the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.

 

 Q. 1146. How may the first Commandment be broken? 

 A. The first Commandment make be broken by giving to a creature the honor which belongs to God alone; by false worship; and by attributing to a creature a perfection which belongs to God alone.

 

 Q. 1147. What is the honor which belongs to God alone? 

 A. The honor which belongs to God alone is a divine honor, in which we offer Him sacrifice, incense or prayer, solely for His own sake and for His own glory. To give such honor to any creature, however holy, would be idolatry.

 

 Q. 1148. How do we offer God false worship? 

 A. We offer God false worship by rejecting the religion He has instituted and following one pleasing to ourselves, with a form of worship He has never authorized, approved or sanctioned.

 

 Q. 1149. Why must we serve God in the form of religion He has instituted and in no other? 

 A. We must serve God in the form of religion He has instituted and in no other, because heaven is not a right, but a promised reward, a free gift of God, which we must merit in the manner He directs and pleases.

 

 Q. 1150. When do we attribute to a creature a perfection which belongs to God alone? 

 A. We attribute to a creature a perfection which belongs to God alone when we believe it possesses knowledge or power independently of God, so that it may, without His aid, make known the future or perform miracles.

 

 Q. 1151. Do those who make use of spells and charms, or who believe in dreams, in mediums, spiritists, fortune-tellers, and the like, sin against the first Commandment? 

 A. Those who make use of spells and charms, or who believe in dreams, in mediums, spiritists, fortune-tellers, and the like, sin against the first Commandment, because they attribute to creatures perfections which belong to God alone.

 

 Q. 1152. What are spells and charms? 

 A. Spells and charms are certain words, by the saying of which superstitious persons believe they can avert evil, bring good fortune or produce some supernatural or wonderful effect. They may be also objects or articles worn about the body for the same purpose.

 

 Q. 1153. Are not Agnus Deis, medals, scapulars, etc., which we wear about our bodies also charms? 

 A. Agnus Deis, medals, scapulars, etc., which we wear about our bodies, are not charms, for we do not expect any help from these things themselves, but, through the blessing they have received from the Church, we expect help from God, the Blessed Mother, or the Saint in whose honor we wear them. On the contrary, they who wear charms expect help from the charms themselves, or from some evil spirit.

 

 Q. 1154. What must we carefully guard against in all our devotions and religious practices? 

 A. In all our devotions and religious practices we must carefully guard against expecting God to perform miracles when natural causes may bring about what we hope for. God will sometimes miraculously help us, but, as a rule, only when all natural means have failed.

 

 

 Q. 1155. What are dreams and why is it forbidden to believe in them? 

 A. Dreams are the thoughts we have in sleep, when our will is unable to guide them. It is forbidden to believe in them, because they are often ridiculous, unreasonable, or wicked, and are not governed by either reason or faith.

 

 Q. 1156. Are bad dreams sinful in themselves? 

 A. Bad dreams are not sinful in themselves, because we cannot prevent them, but we may make them sinful:

1.(1) By taking pleasure in them when we awake, and 2.(2) By bad reading or immodest looks, thoughts, word or actions before going to sleep;

for by any of these things we may make ourselves responsible for the bad dreams.

 

 Q. 1157. Did not God frequently in the Old Law make use of dreams as a means of making known His will? 

 A. God did frequently in the Old Law make use of dreams as a means of making known His Will; but on such occasions He always gave proof that what He made known was not a mere dream, but rather a revelation or inspiration. He no longer makes use of such means, for He now makes known His will through the inspiration of His Church.

 

 Q. 1158. What are mediums and spiritists? 

 A. Mediums and spiritists are persons who pretend to converse with the dead or with spirits of the other world. They pretend also to give this power to others, that they may know what is going on in heaven, purgatory or hell.

 

 Q. 1159. What other practice is very dangerous to faith and morals? 

 A. Another practice very dangerous to faith and morals is the use of mesmerism or hypnotism, because it is liable to sinful abuses, for it deprives a person for a time of the control of his reason and will and places his body and mind entirely in the power of another.

 

 Q. 1160. What are fortune tellers? 

 A. Fortune tellers are imposters who, learning the past, or guessing at it, pretend to know also the future and to be able to reveal it to anyone who pays for the knowledge. They pretend also to know whatever concerns things lost or stolen, and the secret thoughts, actions or intentions of others.

 

 Q. 1161. How do we, by believing in spells, charms, mediums, spiritists and fortune tellers, attribute to creatures the perfections of God? 

 A. By believing in spells, charms, mediums, spiritists and fortune tellers we attribute to creatures the perfections of God because we expect these creatures to perform miracles, reveal the hidden judgments of God, and make known His designs for the future with regard to His creatures, things that only God Himself may do.

 

 Q. 1162. Is it sinful to consult mediums, spiritists, fortune tellers and the like when we do not believe in them, but through mere curiosity to hear what they may say? 

 A. It is sinful to consult mediums, spiritists, fortune tellers and the like even when we do not believe in them, but through mere curiosity, to hear what they may say:

 

1.(1) Because it is wrong to expose ourselves to the danger of sinning even though we do not sin; 2.(2) Because we may give scandal to others who are not certain that we go through mere curiosity; 3.(3) Because by our pretended belief we encourage these impostors to continue their wicked practices.

 

 

 Q. 1163. Are sins against faith, hope, and charity also sins against the first Commandment? 

 A. Sins against faith, hope and charity are also sins against the first Commandment.

   

Q. 1164. How does a person sin against faith? 

 A. A person sins against faith:

1.1st. By not trying to know what God has taught; 2.2nd. By refusing to believe all that God has taught; 3.3rd. By neglecting to profess his belief in what God has taught.

 

 Q. 1165. How do we fail to try to know what God has taught? 

 A. We fail to try to know what God has taught by neglecting to learn the Christian doctrine.

 

 Q. 1166. What means have we of learning the Christian doctrine? 

 A. We have many means of learning the Christian doctrine: In youth we have Catechism and special instructions suited to our age; later we have sermons, missions, retreats, religious sodalities and societies through which we may learn. At all times, we have books of instruction, and, above all, the priests of the Church, ever ready to teach us. God will not excuse our ignorance if we neglect to learn our religion when He has given us the means.

 

 Q. 1167. Should we learn the Christian doctrine merely for our own sake? 

 A. We should learn the Christian doctrine not merely for our own sake, but for the sake also of others who may sincerely wish to learn from us the truths of our holy faith.

 

 Q. 1168. How should such instruction be given to those who ask it of us? 

 A. Such instruction should be given to those who ask it of us in a kind and Christian spirit, without dispute or bitterness. We should never attempt to explain the truths of our religion unless we are certain of what we say. When we are unable to answer what is asked we should send those who inquire to the priest or to others better instructed than ourselves.

 

 Q. 1169. Who are they who do not believe all that God has taught? 

 A. They who do not believe all that God has taught are the heretics and infidels.

 

 Q. 1170. Name the different classes of unbelievers and tell what they are. 

 A. The different classes of unbelievers are:

1.(1) Atheists, who deny there is a God; 2.(2) Deists, who admit there is a God, but deny that He revealed a religion; 3.(3) Agnostics, who will neither admit nor deny the existence of God; 4.(4) Infidels, who have never been baptized, and who, through want of faith, refuse to be baptized; 5.(5) Heretics, who have been baptized Christians, but do not believe all the articles of faith; 6.(6) Schismatics, who have been baptized and believe all the articles of faith, but do not submit to the authority of the Pope; 7.(7) Apostates, who have rejected the true religion, in which they formerly believed, to join a false religion; 8.(8) Rationalists and Materialists, who believe only in material things.

 

 Q. 1171. Will the denial of only one article of faith make a person a heretic? 

 A. The denial of only one article of faith will make a person a heretic and guilty of mortal sin, because the Holy Scripture says: "Whosoever shall keep the whole law but offend in one point is become guilty of all."

 

 Q. 1172. What is an article of faith? 

 A. An article of faith is a revealed truth so important and so certain that no one can deny or doubt it without rejecting the testimony of God. The Church very clearly points out what truths are articles of faith that we may distinguish them from pious beliefs and traditions, so that no one can be guilty of the sin of heresy without knowing it.

 

 Q. 1173. Who are they who neglect to profess their belief in what God has taught? 

 A. They who neglect to profess their belief in what God has taught are all those who fail to acknowledge the true Church in which they really believe.

   

Q. 1174. How do persons who are members of the Church neglect to profess their belief? 

 A. Persons who are members of the Church neglect to profess their belief by living contrary to the teachings of the Church: that is, by neglecting Mass or the Sacraments, doing injury to their neighbor, and disgracing their religion by sinful and scandalous lives.

 

 Q. 1175. What chiefly prevents persons who believe in the Church from becoming members of it? 

 A. A want of Christian courage chiefly prevents persons who believe in the Church from becoming members of it. They fear too much the opinion or displeasure of others, the loss of position or wealth, and, in general, the trials they may have to suffer for the sake of the true faith.

 

 Q. 1176. What does Our Lord say of those who neglect the true religion for the sake of relatives or friends, or from fear of suffering? 

 A. Our Lord says of those who neglect the true religion for the sake of relatives or friends, or from fear of suffering: "He that loveth father or mother more than Me, is not worthy of Me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me, is not worthy of Me"; also: "And whosoever does not carry his cross and come after Me cannot be My disciple."

 

 Q. 1177. What excuse do some give for neglecting to seek and embrace the true religion? 

 A. Some give as an excuse for neglecting to seek and embrace the true religion that we should live in the religion in which we were born, and that one religion is as good as another if we believe we are serving God.

 

 Q. 1178. How do we show that such an excuse is false and absurd? 

 A. We show that such an excuse is false and absurd because:

 

1.(1) It is false and absurd to say that we should remain in error after we have discovered it; 2.(2) Because if one religion is as good as another, Our Lord would not have abolished the Jewish religion, nor the apostles have preached against heresy.

 

 Q. 1179. Can they who fail to profess their faith in the true Church in which they believe expect to be saved while in that state? 

 A. They who fail to profess their faith in the true Church in which they believe cannot expect to be saved while in that state, for Christ has said: "Whosoever shall deny me before men, I will also deny him before my Father who is in heaven."

 

 Q. 1180. Are we obliged to make open profession of our faith? 

 A. We are obliged to make open profession of our faith as often as God's honor, our neighbor's spiritual good or our own requires it. "Whosoever," says Christ, "shall confess me before men, I will also confess him before my Father who is in heaven."

 

 Q. 1181. When does God's honor, our neighbor's spiritual good, or our own good require us to make an open profession of our faith ? 

 A. God's honor, our neighbor's spiritual good, or our own good requires us to make an open profession of our faith as often as we cannot conceal our religion without violating some law of God or of His Church, or without giving scandal to others or exposing ourselves to the danger of sinning. Pious practices not commanded may often be omitted without any denial of faith.

 

 Q. 1182. Which are the sins against hope? 

 A. The sins against hope are presumption and despair.

 

 Q. 1183. What is presumption? 

 A. Presumption is a rash expectation of salvation without making proper use of the necessary means to obtain it.

 

 Q. 1184. How may we be guilty of presumption? 

 A. We may be guilty of presumption:

1.(1) By putting off confession when in a state of mortal sin; 2.(2) By delaying the amendment of our lives and repentance for past sins; 3.(3) By being indifferent about the number of times we yield to any temptation after we have once yielded and broken our resolution to resist it; 4.(4) By thinking we can avoid sin without avoiding its near occasion; 5.(5) By relying too much on ourselves and neglecting to follow the advice of our confessor in regard to the sins we confess.

 

 Q. 1185. What is despair? 

 A. Despair is the loss of hope in God's mercy.

 

 Q. 1186. How may we be guilty of despair? 

 A. We may be guilty of despair by believing that we cannot resist certain temptations, overcome certain sins or amend our lives so as to be pleasing to God.

 

 Q. 1187. Are all sins of presumption and despair equally great? 

 A. All sins of presumption and despair are not equally great. They may be very slight or very great in proportion to the degree in which we deny the justice or mercy of God.

 

 Q. 1188. How do we sin against the love of God? 

 A. We sin against the love of God by all sin, but particularly by mortal sin.

 

 

LESSON THIRTY-FIRST: The First Commandment -- On the Honor and Invocation of the Saints 

  Q. 1189. Does the first Commandment forbid the honoring of the saints? 

 A. The first Commandment does not forbid the honoring of the saints, but rather approves of it; because by honoring the saints, who are the chosen friends of God, we honor God Himself.

 

 Q. 1190. What does "invocation" mean? 

 A. Invocation means calling upon another for help or protection, particularly when we are in need or danger. It is used specially with regard to calling upon God or the saints, and hence it means prayer.

 

 Q. 1191. How do we show that by honoring the Saints we honor God Himself? 

 A. We honor the Saints because they honor God. Therefore, it is for His sake that we honor them, and hence by honoring them we honor Him.

 

 Q. 1192. Give another reason why we honor God by honoring the Saints. 

 A. Another reason why we honor God by honoring the Saints is this: As we honor our country by honoring its heroes, so do we honor our religion by honoring its Saints. By honoring our religion we honor God, who taught it. Therefore, by honoring the Saints we honor God, for love of whom they became religious heroes in their faith.

 

 Q. 1193. Does the first Commandment forbid us to pray to the saints? 

 A. The first Commandment does not forbid us to pray to the saints.

 

 Q. 1194. Why does the first commandment not forbid us to pray to the Saints? 

 A. The first commandment does not forbid us to pray to the Saints, because if we are allowed to ask the prayers of our fellow-creatures upon earth we should be allowed also to ask the prayers of our fellow-creatures in heaven. Moreover, the Saints must have an interest in our welfare, because whatever tends to make us good, tends also to the glory of God.

 

 Q. 1195. What do we mean by praying to the saints? 

 A. By praying to the saints we mean the asking of their help and prayers.

 

 Q. 1196. Do we not slight God Himself by addressing our prayers to saints? 

 A. We do not slight God Himself by addressing our prayers to saints, but, on the contrary, show a greater respect for His majesty and sanctity, acknowledging, by our prayers to the saints, that we are unworthy to address Him for ourselves, and that we, therefore, ask His holy friends to obtain for us what we ourselves are not worthy to ask.

 

 Q. 1197. How do we know that the saints hear us? 

 A. We know that the saints hear us, because they are with God, who makes our prayers known to them.

 

 Q. 1198. Why do we believe that the saints will help us? 

 A. We believe that the saints will help us because both they and we are members of the same Church, and they love us as their brethren.

 

 Q. 1199. How are the saints and we members of the same Church? 

 A. The saints and we are members of the same Church, because the Church in heaven and the Church on earth are one and the same Church, and all its members are in communion with one another.

 

 Q. 1200. What is the communion of the members of the Church called? 

 A. The Communion of the members of the Church is called the Communion of Saints.

 

 Q. 1201. What does the communion of saints mean? 

 A. The communion of saints means the union which exists between the members of the Church on earth with one another, and with the blessed in Heaven, and with the suffering souls in Purgatory.

   

Q. 1202. What benefits are derived from the communion of saints? 

 A. The following benefits are derived from the communion of saints: the faithful on earth assist one another by their prayers and good works, and they are aided by the intercession of the saints in Heaven, while both the saints in Heaven and the faithful on earth help the souls in Purgatory.

 

 Q. 1203. How can we best honor the Saints, and where shall we learn their virtues? 

 A. We can best honor the saints by imitating their virtues, and we shall learn their virtues from the written accounts of their lives. Among the Saints we shall find models for every age, condition or state of life.

 

 Q. 1204. Does the first Commandment forbid us to honor relics? 

 A. The first Commandment does not forbid us to honor relics, because relics are the bodies of the saints or objects directly connected with them or with our Lord.

 

 Q. 1205. How many kinds or classes of relics are there? 

 A. There are three kinds or classes of relics:

1.(1) The body or part of the body of a saint; 2.(2) Articles, such as clothing or books, used by the saint; 3.(3) Articles that have touched a relic of the body or other relic.

 

 Q. 1206. What is there special about a relic of the true cross on which Our Lord Died, and also about the instruments of His Passion? 

 A. The relics of the true Cross and relics of the thorns, nails, etc., used in the Passion are entitled to a very special veneration, and they have certain privileges with regard to their use and the manner of keeping them that other relics have not. A relic of the true Cross is never kept or carried with other relics.

 

 Q. 1207. What veneration does the Church permit us to give to relics? 

 A. The Church permits us to give relics a veneration similar to that we give images. We do not venerate the relics for their own sake, but for the sake of the persons they represent. The souls of canonized saints are certainly in heaven, and we are certain that their bodies also will be there. Therefore, we may honor their bodies because they are to be glorified in heaven and were sanctified upon earth.

 

 Q. 1208. What care does the Church take in the examination and distribution of relics? 

 A. The Church takes the greatest care in the examination and distribution of relics.

1.(1) The canonization or beatification of the person whose relic we receive must be certain. 2.(2) The relics are sent in sealed packets, that must be opened only by the bishop of the diocese to which the relics are sent, and each relic or packet must be accompanied by a document or written paper proving its genuineness. 3.(3) The relics cannot be exposed for public veneration until the bishop examines them and pronounces them authentic; that is, that they are what they are claimed to be.

 

 Q. 1209. What should we be certain of before using any relic or giving it to another? 

 A. Before using any relic or giving it to another we should be certain that all the requirements of the Church concerning it have been fulfilled, and that the relic really is, as far as it is possible for any one to know, what we believe it to be.

 

 Q. 1210. Has God Himself honored relics? 

 A. God Himself has frequently honored relics by permitting miracles to be wrought through them. There is an example given in the Bible, in the IV Book of Kings, where it is related that a dead man was restored to life when his body touched the bones, that is, the relics of the holy prophet Eliseus.

 

 Q. 1211. Does the first Commandment forbid the making of images? 

 A. The first Commandment does forbid the making of images if they are made to be adored as gods, but it does not forbid the making of them to put us in mind of Jesus Christ, His Blessed Mother, and the saints.

 

 Q. 1212  How do we show that it is only the worship and not the making of images that is forbidden by the first commandment? 

 A. We show that it is only the worship and not the making of images that is forbidden by the first commandment:

1.(1) Because no one thinks it sinful to carve statues or make photographs or paintings of relatives or friends; 2.(2) Because God Himself commanded the making of images for the temple after He had given the first commandment, and God never contradicts Himself.

 

 Q. 1213. Is it right to show respect to the pictures and images of Christ and His saints? 

 A. It is right to show respect to the pictures and images of Christ and His saints, because they are the representations and memorials of them.

 

 Q. 1214. Have we in this country any civil custom similar to that of honoring the pictures and images of saints? 

 A. We have, in this country, a civil custom similar to that of honoring pictures and images of saints, for, on Decoration or Memorial Day, patriotic citizens place flowers, flags, or emblems about the statues of our deceased civil heroes, to honor the persons these statues represent; for just as we can dishonor a man by abusing his image, so we can honor him by treating it with respect and reverence.

 

 Q. 1215. Is it allowed to pray to the crucifix or to the images and relics of the saints? 

 A. It is not allowed to pray to the crucifix or images and relics of the saints, for they have no life, nor power to help us, nor sense to hear us.

 

 Q. 1216. Why do we pray before the crucifix and the images and relics of the saints? 

 A. We pray before the crucifix and the images and relics of the saints because they enliven our devotion by exciting pious affections and desires, and by reminding us of Christ and of the saints, that we may imitate their virtues.

 

 LESSON THIRTY-SECOND: From the Second to the Fourth Commandment 

  Q. 1217. What is the second Commandment? 

 A. The second Commandment is: Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

 

 Q. 1218. What do you mean by taking God's name in vain? 

 A. By taking God's name in vain I mean taking it without reverence, as in cursing or using in a light and careless manner, as in exclamation.

 

 Q. 1219. What are we commanded by the second Commandment? 

 A. We are commanded by the second Commandment to speak with reverence of God and of the saints, and of all holy things, and to keep our lawful oaths and vows.

 

 Q. 1220. Is it sinful to use the words of Holy Scripture in a bad or worldly sense? 

 A. It is sinful to use the words of Holy Scripture in a bad or worldly sense, to joke in them or ridicule their sacred meaning, or in general to give them any meaning but the one we believe God has intended them to convey.

 

 Q. 1221. What is an oath? 

 A. An oath is the calling upon God to witness the truth of what we say.

   

Q. 1222. How is an oath usually taken? 

 A. An oath is usually taken by laying the hand on the Bible or by lifting the hand towards heaven as a sign that we call God to witness that what we are saying is under oath and to the best of our knowledge really true.

 

 Q. 1223. What is perjury? 

 A. Perjury is the sin one commits who knowingly takes a false oath; that is, swears to the truth of what he knows to be false. Perjury is a crime against the law of our country and a mortal sin before God.

 

 Q. 1224. Who have the right to make us take an oath? 

 A. All persons to whom the law of our country has given such authority have the right to make us take an oath. They are chiefly judges, magistrates and public officials, whose duty it is to enforce the laws. In religious matters bishops and others to whom authority is given have also the right to make us take an oath.

 

 Q. 1225. When may we take an oath? 

 A. We may take an oath when it is ordered by lawful authority or required for God's honor or for our own or our neighbor's good.

 

 Q. 1226. When may an oath be required for God's honor or for our own or our neighbor's good? 

 A. An oath may be required for God's honor or for our own or our neighbor's good when we are called upon to defend our religion against false charges; or to protect our own or our neighbor's property or good name; or when we are required to give testimony that will enable the lawful authorities to discover the guilt or innocence of a person accused.

   

Q. 1227. Is it ever allowed to promise under oath, in secret societies or elsewhere, to obey another in whatever good or evil he commands? 

 A. It is never allowed to promise under oath, in secret societies or elsewhere, to obey another in whatever good or evil he commands, for by such an oath we would declare ourselves ready and willing to commit sin, if ordered to do so, while God commands us to avoid even the danger of sinning. Hence the Church forbids us to join any society in which such oaths are taken by its members.

 

 Q. 1228. What societies in general are we forbidden to join? 

 A. In general we are forbidden to join:

1.(1) All societies condemned by the Church; 2.(2) All societies of which the object is unlawful and the means used sinful; 3.(3) Societies in which the rights and freedom of our conscience are violated by rash or dangerous oaths; 4.(4) Societies in which any false religious ceremony or form of worship is used.

 

 

 Q. 1229. Are trades unions and benefit societies forbidden? 

 A. Trades unions and benefit societies are not in themselves forbidden because they have lawful ends, which they can secure by lawful means. The Church encourages every society that lawfully aids its members spiritually or temporally, and censures or disowns every society that uses sinful or unlawful means to secure even a good end; for the Church can never permit anyone to do evil that good may come of it.

 

 Q. 1230. Is it lawful to vow or promise strict obedience to a religious superior? 

 A. It is lawful to vow or promise strict obedience to a religious superior, because such superior can exact obedience only in things that have the sanction of God or of His Church.

 

 Q. 1231. What is necessary to make an oath lawful? 

 A. To make an oath lawful it is necessary that what we swear to be true, and that there be a sufficient cause for taking an oath.

 

 Q. 1232. What is a vow? 

 A. A vow is a deliberate promise made to God to do something that is pleasing to Him.

 

 Q. 1233. Which are the vows most frequently made? 

 A. The vows most frequently made are the three vows of poverty, chastity and obedience, taken by persons living in religious communities or consecrated to God. Persons living in the world are sometimes permitted to make such vows privately, but this should never be done without the advice and consent of their confessor.

 

 Q. 1234. What do the vows of poverty, chastity and obedience require? 

 A. The vows of poverty, chastity and obedience require that those who make them shall not possess or keep any property or goods for themselves alone; that they shall not marry or be guilty of any immodest acts, and that they shall strictly obey their lawful superiors.

 

 Q. 1235. Has it always been a custom with pious Christians to make vows and promises to God? 

 A. It has always been a custom with pious Christians to make vows and promises to God; to beg His help for some special end, or to thank Him for some benefit received. They have promised pilgrimages, good works or alms and they have vowed to erect churches, convents, hospitals or schools.

 

 Q. 1236. What is a pilgrimage? 

 A. A pilgrimage is a journey to a holy place made in a religious manner and for a religious purpose.

 

 Q. 1237. Is it a sin not to fulfill our vows? 

 A. Not to fulfill our vows is a sin, mortal or venial, according to the nature of the vow and the intention we had in making it.

 

 Q. 1238. Are we bound to keep an unlawful oath or vow? 

 A. We are not bound, but, on the contrary, positively forbidden to keep an unlawful oath or vow. We are guilty of sin in taking such an oath or making such a vow, and we would be guilty of still greater sin by keeping them.

 

 Q. 1239. What is forbidden by the second Commandment? 

 A. The second Commandment forbids all false, rash, unjust, and unnecessary oaths, blasphemy, cursing, and profane words.

 

 Q. 1240. When is an oath rash, unjust or unnecessary? 

 A. An oath is rash when we are not sure of the truth of what we swear; it is unjust when it injures another unlawfully; and it is unnecessary when there is no good reason for taking it.

 

 Q. 1241. What is blasphemy, and what are profane words? 

 A. Blasphemy is any word or action intended as an insult to God. To say He is cruel or find fault with His works is blasphemy. It is a much greater sin than cursing or taking God's name in vain. Profane words mean here bad, irreverent or irreligious words.

 

 Q. 1242. What is the third Commandment? 

 A. The third Commandment is: Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

 

 Q. 1243. What are we commanded by the third Commandment? 

 A. By the third Commandment we are commanded to keep holy the Lord's day and the holydays of obligation, on which we are to give our time to the service and worship of God.

 

 Q. 1244. What are holydays of obligation? 

 A. Holydays of obligation are special feasts of the Church on which we are bound, under pain of mortal sin, to hear Mass and to keep from servile or bodily labors when it can be done without great loss or inconvenience. Whoever, on account of their circumstances, cannot give up work on holydays of obligation should make every effort to hear Mass and should also explain in confession the necessity of working on holydays.

 

 Q. 1245. How are we to worship God on Sundays and holydays of obligation? 

 A. We are to worship God on Sundays and holydays of obligation by hearing Mass, by prayer, and by other good works.

 

 Q. 1246. Name some of the good works recommended for Sunday. 

 A. Some of the good works recommended for Sunday are: The reading of religious books or papers, teaching Catechism, bringing relief to the poor or sick, visiting the Blessed Sacrament, attending Vespers, Rosary or other devotions in the Church; also attending the meetings of religious sodalities or societies. It is not necessary to spend the whole Sunday in such good works, but we should give some time to them, that for the love of God we may do a little more than what is strictly commanded.

 

 Q. 1247. Is it forbidden, then, to seek any pleasure or enjoyment on Sunday? 

 A. It is not forbidden to seek lawful pleasure or enjoyment on Sunday, especially to those who are occupied during the week, for God did not intend the keeping of the Sunday to be a punishment, but a benefit to us. Therefore, after hearing Mass we may take such recreation as is necessary or useful for us; but we should avoid any vulgar, noisy or disgraceful amusements that turn the day of rest and prayer into a day of scandal and sin.

 

 Q. 1248. Are the Sabbath day and the Sunday the same? 

 A. The Sabbath day and the Sunday are not the same. The Sabbath is the seventh day of the week, and is the day which was kept holy in the old law; the Sunday is the first day of the week, and is the day which is kept holy in the new law.

 

 Q. 1249. What is meant by the Old and New Law? 

 A. The Old Law means the law or religion given to the Jews; the New Law means the law or religion given to Christians.

 

 Q. 1250. Why does the Church command us to keep the Sunday holy instead of the Sabbath? 

 A. The Church commands us to keep the Sunday holy instead of the Sabbath because on Sunday Christ rose from the dead, and on Sunday He sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles.

 

 Q. 1251. Do we keep Sunday instead of Saturday holy for any other reason? 

 A. We keep Sunday instead of Saturday holy also to teach that the Old Law is not now binding upon us, but that we must keep the New Law, which takes its place.

 

 Q. 1252. What is forbidden by the third Commandment? 

 A. The third Commandment forbids all unnecessary servile work and whatever else may hinder the due observance of the Lord's day.

 

 Q. 1253. What are servile works? 

 A. Servile works are those which require labor rather of body than of mind.

 

 Q. 1254. From what do servile works derive their name? 

 A. Servile works derive their name from the fact that such works were formerly done by slaves. Therefore, reading, writing, studying and, in general, all works that slaves did not perform are not considered servile works.

 

 Q. 1255. Are servile works on Sunday ever lawful? 

 A. Servile works are lawful on Sundays when the honor of God, the good of our neighbor, or necessity requires them.

 

 Q. 1256. Give some examples of when the honor of God, the good of our neighbor or necessity may require servile works on Sunday. 

 A. The honor of God, the good of our neighbor or necessity may require servile works on Sunday, in such cases as the preparation of a place for Holy Mass, the saving of property in storms or accidents, the cooking of meals and similar works.

 

 

 

 LESSON THIRTY-THIRD: From the Fourth to the Seventh Commandment 

  Q. 1257. What is the fourth Commandment? 

 A. The fourth Commandment is: Honor thy father and thy mother.

 

 

 Q. 1258. What does the word "honor" in this commandment include? 

 A. The word "honor" in this commandment includes the doing of everything necessary for our parents' spiritual and temporal welfare, the showing of proper respect, and the fulfillment of all our duties to them.

 

 

 Q. 1259. What are we commanded by the fourth Commandment? 

 A. We are commanded by the fourth Commandment to honor, love and obey our parents in all that is not sin.

 

 

 Q. 1260. Why should we refuse to obey parents or superiors who command us to sin? 

 A. We should refuse to obey parents or superiors who command us to sin because they are not then acting with God's authority, but contrary to it and in violation of His laws.

 

 

 Q. 1261. Are we bound to honor and obey others than our parents? 

 A. We are also bound to honor and obey our bishops, pastors, magistrates, teachers, and other lawful superiors.

 

 Q. 1262. Who are meant by magistrates? 

 A. By magistrates are meant all officials of whatever rank who have a lawful right to rule over us and our temporal possessions or affairs.

 

 Q. 1263. Who are meant by lawful superiors? 

 A. By lawful superiors are meant all persons to whom we are in any way subject, such as employers or others under whose authority we live or work.

 

 Q. 1264. What is the duty of servants or workmen to their employers? 

 A. The duty of servants or workmen to their employers is to serve them faithfully and honestly, according to their agreement, and to guard against injuring their property or reputation.

 

 Q. 1265. Have parents and superiors any duties toward those who are under their charge? 

 A. It is the duty of parents and superiors to take good care of all under their charge and give them proper direction and example.

 

 Q. 1266. If parents or superiors neglect their duty or abuse their authority in any particular, should we follow their direction and example in that particular? 

 A. If parents or superiors neglect their duty or abuse their authority in any particular we should not follow their direction or example in that particular, but follow the dictates of our conscience in the performance of our duty.

 

 Q. 1267. What is the duty of employers to their servants or workmen? 

 A. The duty of employers to their servants or workmen is to see that they are kindly and fairly treated and provided for, according to their agreement, and that they are justly paid their wages at the proper time.

 

 Q. 1268. What is forbidden by the fourth Commandment? 

 A. The fourth Commandment forbids all disobedience, contempt, and stubbornness towards our parents or lawful superiors.

 

 Q. 1269. What is meant by contempt and stubbornness? 

 A. By contempt is meant willful disrespect for lawful authority, and by stubbornness is meant willful determination not to yield to lawful authority.

   

Q. 1270. What is the fifth Commandment? 

 A. The fifth Commandment is: Thou shalt not kill.

 

 Q. 1271. What killing does this commandment forbid? 

 A. This commandment forbids the killing only of human beings.

 

 Q. 1272. How do we know that this commandment forbids the killing only of human beings? 

 A. We know that this commandment forbids the killing only of human beings because, after giving this commandment, God commanded that animals be killed for sacrifice in the temple of Jerusalem, and God never contradicts Himself.

 

 Q. 1273. What are we commanded by the fifth Commandment? 

 A. We are commanded by the fifth Commandment to live in peace and union with our neighbor, to respect his rights, to seek his spiritual and bodily welfare, and to take proper care of our own life and health.

 

 Q. 1274. What sin is it to destroy one's own life, or commit suicide, as this act is called? 

 A. It is a mortal sin to destroy one's own life or commit suicide, as this act is called, and persons who willfully and knowingly commit such an act die in a state of mortal sin and are deprived of Christian burial. It is also wrong to expose one's self unnecessarily to the danger of death by rash or foolhardy feats of daring.

 

 Q. 1275. Is it ever lawful for any cause to deliberately and intentionally take away the life of an innocent person? 

 A. It is never lawful for any cause to deliberately and intentionally take away the life of an innocent person. Such deeds are always murder, and can never be excused for any reason, however important or necessary.

 

 Q. 1276. Under what circumstances may human life be lawfully taken? 

 A. Human life may be lawfully taken:

1.(1) In self-defense, when we are unjustly attacked and have no other means of saving our own lives; 2.(2) In a just war, when the safety or rights of the nation require it; 3.(3) By the lawful execution of a criminal, fairly tried and found guilty of a crime punishable by death when the preservation of law and order and the good of the community require such execution.

 

 Q. 1277. What is forbidden by the fifth Commandment? 

 A. The fifth Commandment forbids all willful murder, fighting, anger, hatred, revenge, and bad example.

 

 Q. 1278. Can the fifth commandment be broken by giving scandal or bad example and by inducing others to sin? 

 A. The fifth commandment can be broken by giving scandal or bad example and inducing others to sin, because such acts may destroy the life of the soul by leading it into mortal sin.

 

 Q. 1279. What is scandal? 

 A. Scandal is any sinful word, deed or omission that disposes others to sin, or lessens their respect for God and holy religion.

 

 Q. 1280. Why are fighting, anger, hatred and revenge forbidden by the fifth commandment? 

 A. Fighting, anger, hatred and revenge are forbidden by the fifth commandment because they are sinful in themselves and may lead to murder. The commandments forbid not only whatever violates them, but also whatever may lead to their violation.

 

 Q. 1281. What is the sixth Commandment? 

 A. The sixth Commandment is: Thou shalt not commit adultery.

 

 Q. 1282. What are we commanded by the sixth Commandment? 

 A. We are commanded by the sixth Commandment to be pure in thought and modest in all our looks, words, and actions.

 

 Q. 1283. It is a sin to listen to immodest conversation, songs or jokes? 

 A. It is a sin to listen to immodest conversation, songs or jokes when we can avoid it, or to show in any way that we take pleasure in such things.

 

 Q. 1284. What is forbidden by the sixth Commandment? 

 A. The sixth Commandment forbids all unchaste freedom with another's wife or husband; also all immodesty with ourselves or others in looks, dress, words, and actions.

 

 Q. 1285. Why are sins of impurity the most dangerous? 

 A. Sins of impurity are the most dangerous:

1.(1) Because they have the most numerous temptations; 2.(2) Because, if deliberate, they are always mortal, and 3.(3) Because, more than other sins, they lead to the loss of faith.

 

 Q. 1286. Does the sixth Commandment forbid the reading of bad and immodest books and newspapers? 

 A. The sixth Commandment does forbid the reading of bad and immodest books and newspapers.

 

 Q. 1287. What should be done with immodest book and newspapers? 

 A. Immodest books and newspapers should be destroyed as soon as possible, and if we cannot destroy them ourselves we should induce their owners to do so.

 

 

 Q. 1288. What books does the Church consider bad? 

 A. The Church considers bad all books containing teaching contrary to faith or morals, or that willfully misrepresent Catholic doctrine and practice.

 

 Q. 1289. What places are dangerous to the virtue of purity? 

 A. Indecent theaters and similar places of amusement are dangerous to the virtue of purity, because their entertainments are frequently intended to suggest immodest things.

 

 

 

 LESSON THIRTY-FOURTH: From the Seventh to the End of the Tenth Commandment 

  Q. 1290. What is the seventh Commandment? 

 A. The seventh Commandment is: Thou shalt not steal.

 

 Q. 1291. What sin is it to steal? 

 A. To steal is a mortal or venial sin, according to the amount stolen either at once or at different times. Circumstances may make the sin greater or less, and they should be explained in confession.

 

 Q. 1292. Is stealing ever a sacrilege? 

 A. Stealing is a sacrilege when the thing stolen belongs to the Church and when the stealing takes place in the Church.

 

 Q. 1293. What sins are equivalent to stealing? 

 A. All sins of cheating, defrauding or wronging others of their property; also all sins of borrowing or buying with the intention of never repaying are equivalent to stealing.

 

 Q. 1294. In what other ways may persons sin against honesty? 

 A. Persons may sin against honesty also by knowingly receiving, buying or sharing in stolen goods; likewise by giving or taking bribes for dishonest purposes.

 

 Q. 1295. What are we commanded by the seventh Commandment? 

 A. By the seventh Commandment we are commanded to give to all men what belongs to them and to respect their property.

 

 Q. 1296. How may persons working for others be guilty of dishonesty? 

 A. Persons working for others may be guilty of dishonesty by idling the time for which they are paid; also by doing bad work or supplying bad material without their employer's knowledge.

 

 Q. 1297. In what other way may a person be guilty of dishonesty? 

 A. A person may be guilty of dishonesty in getting money or goods by false pretenses and by using either for purposes for which they were not given.

 

 Q. 1298. What is forbidden by the seventh Commandment? 

 A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unjust taking or keeping what belongs to another.

 

 Q. 1299. What must we do with things found? 

 A. We must return things found to their lawful owners as soon as possible, and we must also use reasonable means to find the owners if they are unknown to us.

 

 Q. 1300. What must we do if we discover we have bought stolen goods? 

 A. If we discover we have bought stolen goods and know their lawful owners we must return the goods to them as soon as possible without demanding compensation from the owner for what we paid for the goods.

 

 Q. 1301. Are we bound to restore ill-gotten goods? 

 A. We are bound to restore ill-gotten goods, or the value of them, as far as we are able; otherwise we cannot be forgiven.

 

 Q. 1302. What must we do if we cannot restore all we owe, or if the person to whom we should restore be dead? 

 A. If we cannot restore all we owe, we must restore as much as we can, and if the person to whom we should restore be dead we must restore to his children or heirs, and if these cannot be found we may give alms to the poor.

 

 Q. 1303. What must one do who cannot pay his debts and yet wishes to receive the Sacraments? 

 A. One who cannot pay his debts and yet wishes to receive the Sacraments must sincerely promise and intend to pay them as soon as possible, and must without delay make every effort to do so.

 

 Q. 1304. Are we obliged to repair the damage we have unjustly caused? 

 A. We are bound to repair the damage we have unjustly caused.

 

 Q. 1305. What is the eighth Commandment? 

 A. The eighth Commandment is: Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

 

 Q. 1306. What are we commanded by the eighth Commandment? 

 A. We are commanded by the eighth Commandment to speak the truth in all things, and to be careful of the honor and reputation of every one.

 

 Q. 1307. What is a lie? 

 A. A lie is a sin committed by knowingly saying what is untrue with the intention of deceiving. To swear to a lie makes the sin greater, and such swearing is called perjury. Pretense, hypocrisy, false praise, boasting, etc., are similar to lies.

 

 Q. 1308. How can we know the degree of sinfulness in a lie? 

 A. We can know the degree of sinfulness in a lie by the amount of harm it does and from the intention we had in telling it.

 

 Q. 1309. Will a good reason for telling a lie excuse it? 

 A. No reason, however good, will excuse the telling of a lie, because a lie is always bad in itself. It is never allowed, even for a good intention to do a thing that is bad in itself.

 

 Q. 1310. What is forbidden by the eighth Commandment? 

 A. The eighth Commandment forbids all rash judgments, backbiting, slanders, and lies.

 

 

 Q. 1311. What are rash judgment, backbiting, slander and detraction? 

 A. Rash judgment is believing a person guilty of sin without a sufficient cause. Backbiting is saying evil things of another in his absence. Slander is telling lies about another with the intention of injuring him. Detraction is revealing the sins of another without necessity.

 

 Q. 1312. Is it ever allowed to tell the faults of another? 

 A. It is allowed to tell the faults of another when it is necessary to make them known to his parents or superiors, that the faults may be corrected and the wrong doer prevented from greater sin.

 

 Q. 1313. What is tale-bearing, and why is it wrong? 

 A. Tale-bearing is the act of telling persons what others have said about them, especially if the things said be evil. It is wrong, because it gives rise to anger, hatred and ill-will, and is often the cause of greater sins.

 

 Q. 1314. What must they do who have lied about their neighbor and seriously injured his character? 

 A. They who have lied about their neighbor and seriously injured his character must repair the injury done as far as they are able, otherwise they will not be forgiven.

 

 Q. 1315. What is the ninth Commandment? 

 A. The ninth Commandment is: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife.

 

 Q. 1316. What are we commanded by the ninth Commandment? 

 A. We are commanded by the ninth Commandment to keep ourselves pure in thought and desire.

 

 Q. 1317. What is forbidden by the ninth Commandment? 

 A. The ninth Commandment forbids unchaste thoughts, desires of another's wife or husband, and all other unlawful impure thoughts and desires.

 

 Q. 1318. Are impure thoughts and desires always sins? 

 A. Impure thoughts and desires are always sins, unless they displease us and we try to banish them.

 

 Q. 1319. What is the tenth Commandment? 

 A. The tenth Commandment is: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods.

 

 Q. 1320. What does covet mean? 

 A. Covet means to wish to get wrongfully what another possesses or to begrudge his own to him.

 

 Q. 1321. What are we commanded by the tenth Commandment? 

 A. By the tenth Commandment we are commanded to be content with what we have, and to rejoice in our neighbor's welfare.

 

 Q. 1322. Should we not, then, try to improve our position in the world? 

 A. We should try to improve our position in the world, provided we can do so honestly and without exposing ourselves to greater temptation or sin.

 

 

 Q. 1323. What is forbidden by the tenth Commandment? 

 A. The tenth Commandment forbids all desires to take or keep wrongfully what belongs to another.

 

 

 Q. 1324. In what does the sixth commandment differ from the ninth, and the seventh differ from the tenth? 

 A. The sixth commandment differs from the ninth in this, that the sixth refers chiefly to external acts of impurity, while the ninth refers more to sins of thought against purity. The seventh commandment refers chiefly to external acts of dishonesty, while the tenth refers more to thoughts against honesty.

 

 

 

 LESSON THIRTY-FIFTH: On the First and Second Commandments of the Church 

  Q. 1325. Are not the commandments of the Church also commandments of God? 

 A. The commandments of the Church are also commandments of God, because they are made by His authority, and we are bound under pain of sin to observe them.

 

 

 Q. 1326. What is the difference between the commandments of God and the Commandments of the Church? 

 A. The commandments of God were given by God Himself to Moses on Mount Sinai; the commandments of the Church were given on different occasions by the lawful authorities of the Church. The Commandments given by God Himself cannot be changed by the Church; but the commandments made by the Church itself may be changed by its authority as necessity requires.

 

 

 Q. 1327. Which are the chief commandments of the Church? 

 A. The chief commandments of the Church are six:

 

 

1.1. To hear Mass on Sundays and holydays of obligation. 2.2. To fast and abstain on the days appointed. 3.3. To confess at least once a year. 4.4. To receive the Holy Eucharist during the Easter time. 5.5. To contribute to the support of our pastors. 6.6. Not to marry persons who are not Catholics, or who are related to us within the third degree of kindred, nor privately without witnesses, nor to solemnize marriage at forbidden times. 7.

 

 

 Q. 1328. Why has the Church made commandments? 

 A. The Church has made commandments to teach the faithful how to worship God and to guard them from the neglect of their religious duties.

 

 

 Q. 1329. Is it a mortal sin not to hear Mass on a Sunday or a holyday of obligation? 

 A. It is a mortal sin not to hear Mass on a Sunday or a holyday of obligation, unless we are excused for a serious reason. They also commit a mortal sin who, having others under their charge, hinder them from hearing Mass, without a sufficient reason.

 

 Q. 1330. What is a "serious reason" excusing one from the obligation of hearing Mass? 

 A A "serious reason" excusing one from the obligation of hearing Mass is any reason that makes it impossible or very difficult to attend Mass, such as severe illness, great distance from the Church, or the need of certain works that cannot be neglected or postponed.

 

 

 Q. 1331. Are children obliged, under pain of mortal sin, the same as grown persons, to hear Mass on Sundays and holydays of obligation? 

 A. Children who have reached the use of reason are obliged under pain of mortal sin, the same as grown persons, to hear Mass on Sundays and holydays of obligation; but if they are prevented from so doing by parents, or others, then the sin falls on those who prevent them.

 

 

 Q. 1332. Why were holydays instituted by the church? 

 A. Holydays were instituted by the Church to recall to our minds the great mysteries of religion and the virtues and rewards of the saints.

 

 

 Q. 1333. How many holydays of obligation are there in this country? 

 A. In this country there are six holydays of obligation, namely:

1.(1) Feast of the Immaculate Conception (Dec. 8th);

2.(2) Christmas (Dec. 25th); 

3.(3) Feast of the Circumcision of Our Lord (Jan. 1st); 

4.(4) Feast of the Ascension of Our Lord (forty days after Easter); 

5.(5) Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin (Aug. 15th); and

6.(6) Feast of All Saints (Nov. 1st).

 

 

   Q. 1334. How should we keep the holydays of obligation? 

 A. We should keep the holydays of obligation as we should keep the Sunday.

 

 Q. 1335. Why are certain holydays called holydays of obligation? 

 A. Certain holydays are called holydays of obligation because on such days we are obliged under pain of mortal sin to hear Mass and keep from servile works as we do on Sundays.

 

 Q. 1336. What should one do who is obliged to work on a holyday of obligation? 

 A. One who is obliged to work on a holyday of obligation should, if possible, hear Mass before going to work, and should also explain this necessity in confession, so as to obtain the confessor's advice on the subject.

 

 Q. 1337. What do you mean by fast-days? 

 A. By fast-days I mean days on which we are allowed but one full meal. 

 

 Q. 1338. Is it permitted on fast days to take any food besides the one full meal? 

 A. It is permitted on fast days, besides the one full meal, to take two other meatless meals, to maintain strength, according to each one's needs. But together these two meatless meals should not equal another full meal.

 

 

 Q. 1339. Who are obliged to fast? 

 A. All persons over 21 and under 59 years of age, and whose health and occupation will permit them to fast. 

  Q. 1340. Does the Church excuse any classes of persons from the obligation of fasting? 

 A. The Church does excuse certain classes of persons from the obligation of fasting on account of their age, the condition of their health, the nature of their work, or the circumstances in which they live. These things are explained in the Regulations for Lent, read publicly in the Churches each year.

 

 Q. 1341. What should one do who doubts whether or not he is obliged to fast? 

 A. In doubt concerning fast, a parish priest or confessor should be consulted.

 

 Q. 1342. When do fast days chiefly occur in the year? 

 A. Fast days chiefly occur in the year during Lent and Advent, on the Ember days and on the vigils or eves of some great feasts. A vigil falling on a Sunday is not observed.

 

 

 Q. 1343. What do you mean by Lent, Advent, Ember days and the vigils of great feasts? 

 A. Lent is the seven weeks of penance preceding Easter. Advent is the four weeks of preparation preceding Christmas. Ember days are three days set apart in each of the four seasons of the year as special days of prayer and thanksgiving. Vigils are the days immediately preceding great feasts and spent in spiritual preparation for them.

 

 Q. 1344. What do you mean by days of abstinence? 

 A. By days of abstinence I mean days on which no meat at all may be taken (complete abstinence) or on which meat may be taken only once a day (partial abstinence). This is explained in the regulations for Lent. All the Fridays of the year are days of abstinence except when a Holyday of obligation falls on a Friday outside of Lent.

 

 

 Q. 1345. Are children and persons unable to fast bound to abstain on days of abstinence? 

 A. Children, from the age of seven years, and persons who are unable to fast are bound to abstain on days of abstinence, unless they are excused for sufficient reason. 

 

 Q. 1346. Why does the Church command us to fast and abstain? 

 A. The Church commands us to fast and abstain, in order that we may mortify our passions and satisfy for our sins. 

 

 Q. 1347. What is meant by our passions and what by mortifying them? 

 A. By our passions are meant our sinful desires and inclinations. Mortifying them means restraining them and overcoming them so that they have less power to lead us into sin.

 

 Q. 1348. Why does the Church command us to abstain from flesh-meat on Fridays? 

 A. The Church commands us to abstain from flesh-meat on Fridays in honor of the day on which our Saviour died.

 

 

 

 LESSON THIRTY-SIXTH: On the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Commandments of the Church 

  

 Q. 1349. What is meant by the command of confessing at least once a year? 

 A. By the command of confessing at least once a year is meant that we are obliged, under pain of mortal sin, to go to confession within the year.

 

 

 Q. 1350. Should we confess only once a year? 

 A. We should confess frequently, if we wish to lead a good life.

 

 Q. 1351. Should we go to confession at our usual time even if we think we have not committed sin since our last confession? 

 A. We should go to confession at our usual time even if we think we have not committed sin since our last confession, because the Sacrament of Penance has for its object not only to forgive sins, but also to bestow grace and strengthen the soul against temptation.

 

 Q. 1352. Should children go to confession? 

 A. Children should go to confession when they are old enough to commit sin, which is commonly about the age of seven years.

 

 Q. 1353. What sin does he commit who neglects to receive Communion during the Easter time? 

 A. He who neglects to receive Communion during the Easter time commits a mortal sin.

 

 Q. 1354. What is the Easter time? 

 A. The Easter time is, in this country, the time between the first Sunday of Lent and Trinity Sunday.

 

 

 Q. 1355. When is Trinity Sunday? 

 A. Trinity Sunday is the Sunday after Pentecost, or eight weeks after Easter Sunday; so that there are fourteen weeks in which one may comply with the command of the Church to receive Holy Communion between the first Sunday of Lent and Trinity Sunday.

 

 Q. 1356. Are we obliged to contribute to the support of our pastors? 

 A. We are obliged to contribute to the support of our pastors, and to bear our share in the expense of the Church and school.

 

 Q. 1357. Where did the duty of contributing to the support of the Church and clergy originate? 

 A. The duty of contributing to the support of the Church and clergy originated in the Old Law, when God commanded all the people to contribute to the support of the temple and of its priests.

 

 Q. 1358. What does the obligation of supporting the Church and school imply? 

 A. The obligation of supporting the Church and school implies the duty of making use of the Church and school by attending religious worship in the one and by giving Catholic education in the other; because if the Church and school were not necessary for our spiritual welfare we would not be commanded to support them.

   

Q. 1359. Does the fifth commandment of the Church include the support only of our pastors and the Church and school? 

 A. The fifth commandment of the Church includes the support also of our holy father, the Pope, bishops, priests, missions, religious institutions and religion in general.

 

 Q. 1360. What is the meaning of the commandment not to marry within the third degree of kindred? 

 A. The meaning of the commandment not to marry within the third degree of kindred is that no one is allowed to marry another within the third degree of blood relationship.

 

 Q. 1361. Who are in the third degree of blood relationship? 

 A. Second cousins are in the third degree of blood relationship, and persons whose relationship is nearer than second cousins are in closer degrees of kindred. It is unlawful for persons thus related to marry without a dispensation or special permission of the Church.

 

 Q. 1362. Are there other relationships besides blood relationship that render marriage unlawful without a dispensation? 

 A. There are other relationships besides blood relationship that render marriage unlawful without a dispensation, namely, the relationships contracted by marriage, which are called degrees of affinity, and the relationship contracted by being sponsors at Baptism, which is called spiritual affinity.

 

 Q. 1363. What should persons about to marry do, if they suspect they are related to each other? 

 A. Persons about to marry, if they suspect they are related to each other, should make known the facts to the priest, that he may examine the degree of relationship and procure a dispensation if necessary.

 

 

 Q. 1364. What is the meaning of the command not to marry privately? 

 A. The command not to marry privately means that none should marry without the blessing of God's priests or without witnesses.

 

 Q. 1365. What sin is it for Catholics to be married before the minister of another religion? 

 A. It is a mortal sin for Catholics to be married before the minister of another religion, and they who attempt to do so incur excommunication, and absolution from their sin is reserved to the bishop.

 

 Q. 1366. What is the meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at forbidden times? 

 A. The meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at forbidden times is that during Lent and Advent the marriage ceremony should not be performed with pomp or a nuptial Mass.

 

 Q. 1367. What is the nuptial Mass? 

 A. The nuptial Mass is a Mass appointed by the Church to invoke a special blessing upon the married couple.

 

 Q. 1368. Should Catholics be married at a nuptial Mass? 

 A. Catholics should be married at a nuptial Mass, because they thereby show greater reverence for the holy Sacrament and bring richer blessings upon their wedded life.

 

 Q. 1369. What restrictions does the Church place on the ceremonies of marriage when one of the persons is not a Catholic? 

 A. The Church places several restrictions on the ceremonies of marriage when one of the persons is not a Catholic. The marriage cannot take place in the church; the priest cannot wear his sacred vestments nor use holy water nor bless the ring nor the marriage itself. The Church places these restrictions to show her dislike for such marriages, commonly called mixed marriages.

 

 Q. 1370. Why does the Church dislike mixed marriages? 

 A. The Church dislikes mixed marriages because such marriages are frequently unhappy, give rise to many disputes, endanger the faith of the Catholic member of the family, and prevent the religious education of the children.

 

 

 LESSON THIRTY-SEVENTH: On the Last Judgment and the Resurrection, Hell, Purgatory, and Heaven 

  Q. 1371. When will Christ judge us? 

 A. Christ will judge us immediately after our death, and on the last day.

 

 Q. 1372. What is the judgment called which we have to undergo immediately after death? 

 A. The judgment we have to undergo immediately after death is called the Particular Judgment.

 

 Q. 1373. Where will the particular judgment be held? 

 A. The particular judgment will be held in the place where each person dies, and the soul will go immediately to its reward or punishment.

 

 

 Q. 1374. What is the judgment called which all men have to undergo on the last day? 

 A. The judgment which all men have to undergo on the last day is called the General Judgment.

 

 Q. 1375. Will the sentence given at the particular judgment be changed at the general judgment? 

 A. The sentence given at the particular judgment will not be changed at the general judgment, but it will be repeated and made public to all.

 

 Q. 1376. Why does Christ judge men immediately after death? 

 A. Christ judges men immediately after death to reward or punish them according to their deeds.

 

 

 Q. 1377. How may we daily prepare for our judgment? 

 A. We may daily prepare for our judgment by a good examination of conscience, in which we will discover our sins and learn to fear the punishment they deserve.

 

 

 Q. 1378. What are the rewards or punishments appointed for men's souls after the Particular Judgment? 

 A. The rewards or punishments appointed for men's souls after the Particular Judgment are Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell.

 

 

 Q. 1379. What is Hell? 

 A. Hell is a state to which the wicked are condemned, and in which they are deprived of the sight of God for all eternity, and are in dreadful torments.

 

 

 Q. 1380. Will the damned suffer in both mind and body? 

 A. The damned will suffer in both mind and body, because both mind and body had a share in their sins. The mind suffers the "pain of loss" in which it is tortured by the thought of having lost God forever, and the body suffers the "pain of sense" by which it is tortured in all its members and senses.

 

 

 Q. 1381. What is Purgatory? 

 A. Purgatory is the state in which those suffer for a time who die guilty of venial sins, or without having satisfied for the punishment due to their sins.

 

 

 Q. 1382. Why is this state called Purgatory? 

 A. This state is called Purgatory because in it the souls are purged or purified from all their stains; and it is not, therefore, a permanent or lasting state for the soul.

 

 

 Q. 1383. Are the souls in Purgatory sure of their salvation? 

 A. The souls in Purgatory are sure of their salvation, and they will enter heaven as soon as they are completely purified and made worthy to enjoy that presence of God which is called the Beatific Vision.

 

 

 Q. 1384. Do we know what souls are in Purgatory, and how long they have to remain there? 

 A. We do not know what souls are in Purgatory nor how long they have to remain there; hence we continue to pray for all persons who have died apparently in the true faith and free from mortal sin. They are called the faithful departed.

 

 

 Q. 1385. Can the faithful on earth help the souls in Purgatory? 

 A. The faithful on earth can help the souls in Purgatory by their prayers, fasts, alms, deeds; by indulgences, and by having Masses said for them.

 

 

 Q. 1386. Since God loves the souls in Purgatory, why does He punish them? 

 A. Though God loves the souls in Purgatory, He punishes them because His holiness requires that nothing defiled may enter heaven and His justice requires that everyone be punished or rewarded according to what he deserves.

 

 

 Q. 1387. If every one is judged immediately after death, what need is there of a general judgment? 

 A. There is need of a general judgment, though every one is judged immediately after death, that the providence of God, which, on earth, often permits the good to suffer and the wicked to prosper, may in the end appear just before all men.

 

 

 Q. 1388. What is meant by "the Providence of God"? 

 A. By "the Providence of God" is meant the manner in which He preserves, provides for, rules and governs the world and directs all things by His infinite Will.

 

 

 Q. 1389. Are there other reasons for the general judgment? 

 A. There are other reasons for the general judgment, and especially that Christ Our Lord may receive from the whole world the honor denied Him at His first coming, and that all may be forced to acknowledge Him their God and Redeemer.

  Q. 1390. Will our bodies share in the reward or punishment of our souls? 

 A. Our bodies will share in the reward or punishment of our souls, because through the resurrection they will again be united to them.

 

 Q. 1391. When will the general resurrection or rising of all the dead take place? 

 A. The general resurrection or rising of all the dead will take place at the general judgment, when the same bodies in which we lived on earth will come forth from the grave and be united to our souls and remain united with them forever either in heaven or in hell.

 

 Q. 1392. In what state will the bodies of the just rise? 

 A. The bodies of the just will rise glorious and immortal.

 

 Q. 1393. Will the bodies of the damned also rise? 

 A. The bodies of the damned will also rise, but they will be condemned to eternal punishment.

 

 Q. 1394. Why do we show respect for the bodies of the dead? 

 A. We show respect for the bodies of the dead because they were the dwelling-place of the soul, the medium through which it received the Sacraments, and because they were created to occupy a place in heaven.

 

 Q. 1395. What is Heaven? 

 A. Heaven is the state of everlasting life in which we see God face to face, are made like unto Him in glory, and enjoy eternal happiness.

 

 Q. 1396. In what does the happiness in heaven consist? 

 A. The happiness in heaven consists in seeing the beauty of God, in knowing Him as He is, and in having every desire fully satisfied.

 

 Q. 1397. What does St. Paul say of heaven? 

 A. St. Paul says of heaven, "That eye hath not seen. nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man what things God hath prepared for them that love Him." (I. Cor. ii., 9.)

   

Q. 1398. Are the rewards in heaven and the punishments in hell the same for all who enter into either of these states? 

 A. The rewards of heaven and the punishments in hell are not the same for all who enter into either of these states, because each one's reward or punishment is in proportion to the amount of good or evil he has done in this world. But as heaven and hell are everlasting, each one will enjoy his reward or suffer his punishment forever.

  

Q. 1399. What words should we bear always in mind? 

 A. We should bear always in mind these words of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: "What doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world and suffer the loss of his own soul, or what exchange shall a man give for his soul? For the Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels; and then will He render to every man according to his works."

  

Q. 1400. Name some of the more essential religious truths we must know and believe. 

 A. Some of the more essential religious truths we must know and believe are:

    1.(1) That there is but one God, and He will reward the good and punish the wicked.

2.(2) That in God there are three Divine Persons: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these Divine Persons are called the Blessed Trinity. 

3.(3) That Jesus Christ, the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, became man and died for our redemption. 

4.(4) That the grace of God is necessary for our salvation.

5.(5) That the human soul is immortal.

 

   


===== BOOK: bata.txt =====


    
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE BABYLONIAN

  

TALMUD

  

IN SELECTION

  

Edited and translated from the original

  

Hebrew and Aramaic by

  

LEO AUERBACH

  

Second Edition

  

PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY

  

NEW YORK

  

[1944]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion.

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

           

       PAGE

     
      Introduction--The Story of the Talmud

       <page 7>

     
      Fathers of the Mishna

       <page 23>

     
      The Portion of the Poor

       <page 49>

     
      Sabbath

       <page 57>

     
      Passover

       <page 79>

     
      The Day of Atonement

       <page 107>

     
      Days of Fasting

       <page 131>

     
      Childless Widows

       <page 151>

     
      The Marriage Contract

       <page 157>

     
      Adultery

       <page 171>

     
      Divorces

       <page 175>

     
      Betrothals

       <page 181>

     
      Civil Law

       <page 207>

     
      Law of Procedure

       <page 231>

     
      Flogging

       <page 261>

     
      Oaths

       <page 271>

     
      Glossary

       <page 285>

     
   
     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

THE STORY OF THE TALMUD

  

INTRODUCTION

THE word Talmud means study. The Talmud is a record of about a thousand years of accumulated Jewish learning and wisdom in all fields of endeavor: Law, religion, ethics, history, science and folklore.

This lore is called Oral Law, in contra-distinction to the Bible, which is the Written Law. Tradition has it that this Oral Law was indicated to Moses and handed down by him to future generations; in each generation the great teachers of the period in turn handed it down, amplified but still in oral form, to the next generation.

Early in the history of the Jewish people it was found necessary to expound and interpret the laws as given by Moses; this law-giver himself appointed judges throughout Israel for this very purpose. Particularly true was this after the return of the Jews from Babylonian captivity, when, through the effort of Ezra, the Torah became the law and the guiding spirit of all the people. Its reading in public three times a week, with explanations and translations into Aramaic (the vernacular of the people), was at this time made mandatory.

[p. 8]

The transgression of the laws was severely punished by the court or by "death at the hands of the Lord". However, life in this new Jewish society was more complex than in the olden days. Some of the laws became obsolete, while others had to be reinterpreted to conform to new conditions.

The Torah, however, was the Law, which could not be altered. Therefore the scribes and the members of the Great Assembly busied themselves in probing and searching every sentence and every word of the Scriptures, to find solutions to the vexing problems by interpretations of each law. This method of analysis and exposition was called from the Hebrew word darash, to search, to probe, Midrash.

The Midrashim are of two kinds. Some are concerned with the strict and terse interpretation of the laws and statutes as found in the Scriptures, mainly in Exodus, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy. These are called Halachoth. The others, called Haggadoth, are homiletic in style; they took as their topic the narrative parts of the Bible and used them as vehicles for the expounding of ethical precepts, proverbs, parables, and history.

It was the custom to recite a passage of the Scriptures, which served as a thread upon which the expounder could string all sorts of interpretations, and by skillful and often dialectic argumentation, make the law serve new essential purposes. Thus the Law was kept effective in the life of the community, its scope widened as society grew complex.

Particularly popular with the people were the Haggadic Midrashim. These were especially adaptable to preaching in the Synagogues or the great open-air gatherings.

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] On several occasions, however, the sages voiced opposition to the Haggadah, particularly to those parts that are given to exaggeration and triviality; nonetheless, they also recognized its charm for the masses and its great moral force, and accorded it to the same importance as the Halachah.

The great teachers of antiquity among the Hebrews were the scribes, to whom many of the earlier Midrashic interpretations could probably be traced. They flourished for some two centuries after 500 B.C. and were followed by the Pharisees who headed the Sanhedrin. The Pharisees were more lenient and liberal in their interpretations of the laws than the Saducees, the aristocrats who adhered to a more literal and strict interpretation of the Scriptures, and therefore the Pharisees were more popular with the people and exerted a greater influence as the dominating force in the life of Jewry. Their influence became even greater as the government and the degenerating  became corrupt and oppressed the people.

The first chapter of the tractate Aboth, Fathers of the Mishnah, traces the chronological order of these great teachers. The most prominent of them was Hillel, the Prince. He headed the contingent of the Sages who were known as the House of Hillel. These were opposed by Shamai and his colleagues. Their strife evoked a great interest in the contemporary Jewish world, but, as the rivalry was purely intellectual, it spurred them on to greater activity, and fostered learning.

Hillel, who advocated a wider and more liberal application of laws, was invariably successful in having his laws adopted. He was the author of the law known as

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] Prosbul (before the court). According to the "Law of the Seventh year" Deuteronomy XV, all indebtedness became automatically cancelled in the sabbatical year. Because of this law, the rich refused to lend money to the traders and that brought stagnation to business. By a very ingenious interpretation of the passages in the Scriptures referring to this law, Hillel was able to devise the enactment of the Prosbul, by which a document was executed transferring the debt to the court, thus making the law of the seventh year not applicable to the specified loan. In a similar manner he enacted a law by which a man who sold his house in a walled city could redeem it from the buyer before one year was over, by depositing its value with the court.

Hillel also inaugurated the seven standard methods of scriptural analysis, which were later, by Rabbi Ishmael, increased to thirteen. These methods served as a scientific basis for the study and analysis of the Torah. Hillel is also credited with being the first one to make an attempt to collect and arrange the laws in a systematic order.

With the domination of foreign powers and the consequent decline of the government, the Jews rallied more and more around the Sages and their academies. It was with Hillel that the presidency of the Sanhendrin was made hereditary.

Toward the end of the 1st Century B.C. the country was in a deplorable condition, under a weak and decadent government. The puppet kings were tools of the Roman leaders, who through them manipulated the election and controlled the office of the high priests.

The population was torn by the strife of many warring parties within and an enemy from without. The Jews

[p. 11]

fought bravely, many of their illustrious Sages and the flower of their youth fell on the fields of battle, but they were no match for the powerful and well organized Roman armies. The great Master of this period was Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakai. Foreseeing the tragic end of the struggle against the Romans, he counselled submission, but his advice was unheeded.

One night, smuggled out of the city by his disciples, he presented himself before the Roman commander to ask for permission to establish his academy in Yabneh, and to plead for the safety of its disciples. Upon the fall of Jerusalem, Rabbi Yohanan re-established the Sanhedrin in Yabneh, to which city and its academy the center of Jewish law and thought was transferred.

The Sages realized that with the Temple gone and the Hebrews leaving the world stage as a politically independent nation, it was encumbent upon them to find some standard around which to rally and bind the People of Israel. There were the Scriptures, which long ago Ezra and the scribes had made popular among the people, and the study and worship of which the Pharisees had endeared. Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakai and his followers made it their concern to emphasize the paramount importance of the Bible and its study in the life of the Jews. Rabban Gamaliel II, the legitimate heir to the presidency of the Sanhedrin, succeeded Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakai. With his accession, its authority was soon recognized by the Romans and accepted by Jewry within Palestine and without. Rabban Gamaliel II is remembered also for discarding the custom of lavish and excessively ceremonious and costly funerals; he inaugurated the use of the simple pine coffin and plain shroud that still predominate today.

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Turbulent conditions forced the seat of the Sanhedrin to move from place to place many times, but it survived as an institution until 425 A.D.

This was the most fruitful and far-reaching period in the post-Biblical history of the Jews. The Rabbis succeeded in moulding a unified and homogeneous people out of the remnants of scattered Jewry. They enacted laws, and fostered ideas and ideals. They compiled, arranged, and systematized their many laws, and bequeathed them to future generations in such a manner that most of them have survived and are valid to this day among the Jews throughout the world. Through the Romans and the early Christians these ideas, laws and customs likewise penetrated other cultures. Many of the laws inaugurated in those days form the basis of the laws by which we are guided today.

  

TALMUDIC LITERATURE

All the interpretations and commentaries on the Law were retained in oral form. Many of the scholars, however, in order to refresh their memories, privately made notes and jotted down some of these laws. There are many collections of the midrashim, attributed to different scholars whose names appear in the Talmud. The most important of these collections are:

1. The Mekilta, a commentary on the book of Exodus, beginning with chapter 12 and ending with the Sabbatical laws in Chapter 35. This is attributed to Rabbi Ishmael, who lived during the first century A.D. There is also a Mekilta attributed to Rabbi Yohai.

[p. 13]

2. Sifra, a midrashic interpretation of Leviticus. This was probably compiled in the school of Rabbi Akiba, the great sage who was born about 50 A.D. and died as a martyr in 136, during the rebellion of Bar Kochba.

3. Sifreh: Two commentaries, one on Numbers and one on Deuteronomy. These two books were not composed in the same school, but are found linked together from the earliest days. The commentary on Numbers is composed almost exclusively of Halachic Midrashim, and betrays the method and style of Rabbi Ishmael, while that on Deuteronomy is full of Haggadic Midrashim and is probably the product of the school of Rabbi Akiba.

As these commentaries grew and multiplied, attempts were made to collect, then to arrange them systematically so that they could be retained in the memory. The pioneer in this work was Rabbi Akiba, who divided the Halachoth according to subject: laws dealing with women; civil laws; etc. He also classified them into categories, such as the four primary causes of damage.

Many of the followers and disciples of Rabbi Akiba and Rabbi Ishmael made compilations of their own, the circulation of which brought on confusion.

The great work of compiling and arranging the laws was finally undertaken and accomplished by Rabbi Yehuda, the Prince, often referred to simply as Rabbi. Through his authority as the President of the Sanhedrin, he reduced them to writing, codified them and made them valid as the Mishna, which means "the repetition of the law." He visited many of the academies and gathered the collections and private notes that were circulated among the teachers of his day, and with the aid of a committee of his academy, established a definitive text.

[p. 14]

The Mishna was divided into six orders:

1. ZERAIM, dealing with agriculture.

2. MOED, dealing with festivals.

3. NASHIM, pertaining to women.

4. NEZIKIN, dealing with civil and criminal law.

5. KODASHIM, dealing with sacrifices.

6. TOHAROTH, dealing with cleanliness and purifications.

[paragraph continues] The orders were divided into tractates, sixty-three in all.

The codification of the Mishna did not preclude the further study of the Law. There were the Halachoth compiled by other Rabbis, which were not included in the Mishna. Many of these are cited in the Talmud, however, as Baraithoth "external."

Many of the disciples of Rabbi, some with his approbation, emulated him in compiling Mishnas of their own. One such compilation, ascribed to various of his followers, is the Thosafta, which means addenda, but is really an independent work arranged in six orders in the manner of the Mishna, containing new and different material.

  

THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD

Ever since the destruction of the First Temple and, even for some time preceding it, there was a large Jewish population in Babylonia (modern Iraq). It was concentrated in a few large cities, where they continued to live and prosper as a homogeneous community. Here developed some of the greatest lights of ancient Israel. The prophet Ezekiel lived in Babylonia; Ezra, Nehemiah, and

[p. 15]

the early scribes all came up from there to rebuild their country and the House of God. Hillel the Prince, together with some of the Sages, was also a Babylonian.

With the Roman conquest in 70 A.D., and later with the suppression of the rebellion of 135 A.D., many scholars were among those who fled thither from Palestine and the sword of the Romans.

Babylon was not despoiled by the Roman warriors. Remote from the war, the Jews remained there in comparative security as a recognized minority headed by the Exiliarch, a descendant of the house of David, empowered by the Babylonian government to decree laws and appoint judges.

The prosperity and liberty enjoyed by the Jews in Babylonia was conducive to intellectual growth; thus the academies established in Babylonia were renowned for their scholarship, and their learning was held in a higher esteem in the fourth and fifth centuries than that of the Palestinian Rabbis.

The most prominent of the Babylonian scholars was Abba Areka, commonly referred to as Rab. He studied under Rabbi Yehuda in Palestine for many years. Upon his return to Babylonia he founded the academy at Sura. Rab and his contemporary Mar Samuel, the head of the academy at Nehadrea, raised the scholarship and reputation of the Babylonian academies to the highest level. Though the supreme authority was vested in the Sanhedrin in Palestine, the Babylonian rulings and decisions were invariably accepted and followed. For the sake of national unity, however, the Jews of Babylonia elected to submit to the authority of the Prince and the rulings of the Palestinian Sanhedrin.

[p. 16]

With the abolition of the Office of the Prince, the dissolution of the Sanhedrin, and the disintegration of the Jewish community in Palestine in the 5th century, leadership and authority passed into the hands of the Babylonian Sages.

Towards the end of the fourth century Rab Ashi, the head of the academy in Sura, proceeded to collect the accumulated literature and learning of the post-Mishnaic period. Seminaries called Kalla were held at the academy twice a year; a tractate was selected and announced in advance for each Kalla. When the scholars and their disciples gathered at the academy, a passage from the Mishna tractate was read and discussed. These discussions, recorded, constitute the Gemara.

Rab Ashi began the Gemara as a literary undertaking for its own sake. Soon, however, Jews in Babylonia were subjected to religious persecution by the Sassanian Kings, who wished to introduce the teachings of Zoroaster. Rabina, the successor of Rab Ashi, concerned over the possible disappearance of the great rabbinic literature, hurriedly edited and codified the Gemara, giving it the form it has retained to this day.

In its narrower sense of the term, the word Talmud is applied to the Mishna and the Gemara. In its wider connotation it includes also the Midrashim, the Mekilta, the Sifra, the Sifreh, the Tosefta and several less important works, already referred to.

The Babylonian Talmud, as it has come down to us, is usually printed in its original languages, in Hebrew script, in 22 folio volumes.

The Palestinian, or Jerusalem Talmud, as it is often

[p. 17]

called, is printed in the same manner in from four to eight volumes.

There were very cordial relations and frequent interchange of teachers between the Palestinian and Babylonian academies, so that the names of the same teachers appear in both Talmuds. The Palestinian Talmud, however, smaller in scope, has exerted little influence on Jewish life as a whole. The Babylonian Talmud, on the other hand, has been a constant and basic force in world Jewry, down to this very day. So potent has its influence been, that Jewry has had to guard against a tendency to accept all its statements as law. As the noted Christian Talmudic scholar, Herman L. Strack points out: [**] "The Talmud is not a law book, not a code, in which every sentence is unconditionally valid. In the Mishna itself diverging opinions are, very frequently, placed in juxtaposition, and the Gemara almost throughout takes on the nature of a lecture hall or a collection of minutes of the discussions, in which the Amoraim cleared up that which had been said of the Tannaim. Direct statements as to what is Halacha, valid law, are rare in the Mishna. Accordingly it is highly preposterous to cause all the utterances of a single rabbi found in the Talmud to stand without further ado as teaching of the Talmud, or to hold Judaism responsible for such utterances."

The Mishna was written in what was then Modern Hebrew, quite unlike that of the Bible. It is not so flowery and picturesque, but rather terse, concise and clear, suited to the legal matters with which it mainly deals.

[p. 18]

The Gemara is written in the main in the vernacular, a mixture of Aramaic and Hebrew, with a sprinkling of Greek, Roman and Persian words. It is marked by a disregard of grammar, and is often awkward in its lack of style, retaining always the flavor of vernacular speech. The discussions sometimes seem lengthy and pointless; occasionally they indulge in hair splitting. They may jump from subject to subject. The records appear like informal discussions, interpolated with beautiful legends, anecdotes, parables, and ethical maxims. These were often cited for the purpose of illustration, of bringing out a point, or of proving the antiquity and ancient tradition of the law discussed. Often as not, however, they had no relation to the subject under discussion, but were brought in for the sole purpose of breaking up the monotony of the lengthy discourse, and as it were, to ease the tedious study of the dry subject by something sweet and palatable. Thus the Talmud served as a storehouse of folklore, history, ancient custom, and wisdom, which, undoubtedly, would have otherwise disappeared, and which, next to the Bible itself, have preserved and helped to shape the culture and spirit and life-ways of the Jew.

*    *   *

In preparing this anthology the editor has endeavored to present the material for a first-hand acquaintance with the monumental and much discussed work, the Babylonian Talmud. He has thus made, as it were, a cross-section of its copious volumes.

[p. 19]

The form and arrangement of the anthology adhere to the pattern of the Talmud. First the Mishna is cited, then follows its discussion, here kept within representative limits. The legends, stories and parables appear in the same places as in the Talmud, so that its character is here preserved. The tractates follow the original order, with one exception, that of the tractate Aboth (Fathers of the Mishna), here given in its entirety at the start. In the Talmud it is included within the order of Nezikin, which deals with raw and legal procedure.

As much as possible, the style and the linguistic mannerism of the original have been preserved. The King James version is followed for all Biblical quotations, save a few where that version alters the meaning of what is being discussed in the Talmud.

 

Thanks are due to Samuel K. Mirsky, professor of Rabbinics at the Yeshiva College of New York, who read the manuscript, for his helpful counsel and advice; to Dr. Joseph T. Shipley for his stylistic suggestions; to Sylvia Loeb, who assisted in preparing the typescript, and to Ruth Busch for the checking of the proofs.

LEO AUERBACH.           

Footnotes

^17:* Hermann L. Strack, Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash (English translation), Jewish Publication Society, 1931, p. 89.

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20] [p. 21]

  

FATHERS OF THE MISHNA

  

TRACTATE ABOTH

[p. 22] [p. 23]

  

Fathers of the Mishna

  

(TRACTATE ABOTH)

  

I

MOSES received the Torah (the Law) at Sinai and passed it on to Joshua, Joshua to the Elders, the Elders to the Prophets, and the Prophets passed it on to the men of the Great Assembly. They said three things: Be patient in rendering decisions; bring forth many disciples; and make a fence around the Torah.

Simon the Just was of the last of the Great Assembly. He used to say: The world exists because of three things: the Law, labor, and the performance of good deeds.

Antigonus, a man from Soco, received it from Simon the Just. He used to say: Be not as slaves, who serve the master for the reward that they receive, but be as the servants who wait upon the Rabbi without thought of recompense, and let the fear of the Lord be upon thee.

[p. 24]

Yosi ben Yoezer, a man of Zeredah, and Yosi ben Yohanan, a man of Jerusalem, received it from them. They would say: Let thy house be a meeting place of scholars and let thee be covered with the dust of their feet, and imbibe their words with thirst.

Yosi ben Yohanan of Jerusalem says: Let thy house be open wide and let poor people be members of thy household. Hold not lengthy discourse with the woman: this is said of one's own woman; so much the more does it apply to the woman of another man. Therefore the sages said: All of the time that a man spends in lengthy discourse with a woman, he causes evil unto himself and idles away precious time from the study of the Law, and his end shall be that he shall inherit Hell.

Joshua ben Prahiah and Nathai the Arbelite received it from them. Joshua ben Prahiah says: Take unto thyself a teacher, and acquire a friend, and judge every person in favorable light.

Nathai the Arbelite says: Keep away from a bad neighbor and associate not with an evil man, and despair not of misfortune.

Yehuda ben Tabai and Simon ben Shetah received the Law from them. Yehuda ben Tabai says: Do not constitute thyself an advocate and when litigants appear before thee let them be in thine eyes as evil men, but when they leave let them be in thine eyes as blameless, inasmuch as they have accepted the verdict.

Simon ben Shetah says: Cross-examine the witnesses thoroughly and be cautious with thy words, because from them they may learn to speak falsely.

Shemaiah and Abtalion received it from them. Shemaiah

[p. 25]

says: Love labor, detest officialdom, and seek not the acquaintance of the authorities.

Abtalion says: Scholars, be cautious of your words for they may cause you to be exiled to a place with polluted waters and your disciples who follow you will drink of the water and die, and the name of the Lord will be profaned.

Hillel and Shamai received the Law from them. Hillel says: Be of the disciples of Aaron; love peace and pursue peace, love humanity and bring them nearer to the Law.

He would say: A man who misuses his name shall soon lose his reputation. He who does not increase his knowledge shall lose it. He who abandons learning deserves death. He who curries favor of the Crown shall vanish.

He used to say: If I be not for myself, who shall be for me; and if I am by myself what am I? and if not now--when?

Shamai says: Make of your study a permanent habit. Say little and do much, and receive every person with courtesy.

Rabban Gamaliel used to say: Appoint a teacher for thyself, and eliminate doubt.

His son Simon says: Throughout my whole life I grew up amidst scholars and have found nothing more precious than silence; nor is the speech of importance, but the deed; and he who increases words causes sin.

Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel says: The world exists because of three things: truth, justice, and peace, as is said: (Zechariah viii, 16) Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.

[p. 26]

  

II

RABBI says: Which is the right road that a man should select for himself? That which is glory to its maker, and will bring honor to him from men; and be just as careful with a minor precept as with a major one, because thou knowest not the worth of a precept to reckon its loss against its worth, and the reward as against the loss. Be aware of three things and thou shalt keep away from sin: know what there is above thee;--an eye that sees, and an ear that hears, and all thy deeds are inscribed in a book.

Rabban Gamaliel, the son of Yehuda the Prince, says: The study of the Torah goes well with worldly occupation, for absorption in both fields keeps a man away from sin; and all learning with no menial occupation will avail a man naught and will cause him to sin. Those who occupy themselves with community affairs must do so in the name of the Lord. The glory of their fathers sustains them, and their righteousness shall endure forever. And as for you, I bestow upon you many rewards as if you yourself had accomplished it.

Be careful in your dealings with authorities--they do not befriend you unless for their own sake; they appear as friends when it suits them, but forsake one as soon as good fortune fails him.

[p. 27]

He would say: Make the Lord's will thy will, so that He will make your wish His wish; sacrifice your will before His will so that He shall sacrifice the will of others for yours.

Hillel says: Do not stand aloof in thy community, and do not trust in thyself till the day of thy death, and do not judge thy friend until thou findest thyself in his position. Do not say a thing can not be understood which could be understood later. Say not, I shall study later when I am at leisure, because thou mayest not have the opportunity later.

He would say: A boor does not fear to commit sin; an ignorant man cannot be pious; he that is bashful shall not learn; he that is impatient cannot teach; he that is entirely taken up with trade cannot be wise; and in a place where there does not seem to be a man, endeavor thou to be a man.

He saw a skull floating upon the surface of the water and exclaimed to it: Since thou hast drowned, someone has drowned thee, and those who are responsible for thy drowning shall be drowned in turn.

He would say: He that increases his flesh, increases vermin; he that accumulates possession increases worry; he that increases his womenfolk increases witchcraft; he that increases maidservants increases whoring; he that increases slaves increases thievery; he that increases learning increases life; he that increases study increases wisdom; he that increases council increases understanding; he that increases charity increases peace; he has secured for himself a good name, he has secured for himself the teachings of the Law and has secured life in the world to come.

[p. 28]

Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai received the Law from Hillel and from Shamai. He used to say: If thou hast devoted much time to learning do not pride thyself upon it, because for that purpose thou hast been created. Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai had five disciples and they were: Rabbi Eliezer ben Hurcanus, Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah, Rabbi Yosi Hacohen, Rabbi Simon ben Nathaniel and Rabbi Eleazer ben Arack. He would recount their praise: Rabbi Eliezer ben Hurcanus is a plastered cistern that loses not a drop; Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah brought happiness to his bearer; Rabbi Yosi is pious; Rabbi Simon ben Nathaniel is without sin; and Rabbi Eleazer is like a spring that gathers force. He used to say: If one puts all the sages of Israel on one side of the scale and Eliezer ben Hurcanus on the other side, he will outweigh them all. Aba Saul says in his name: If you put all of the sages of Israel on one side of the scale and Eliezer ben Hurcanus be among them, and Eleazer ben Arack on the other side, he will outweigh them all.

He said to them: Go forth and see which is the right road for a man to choose? Rabbi Eliezer says: A good eye. Rabbi Joshua says: A good companion. Rabbi. Yosi says: A good neighbor. Rabbi Simon says: He that can foresee the outcome of things. Rabbi Eleazer says: A good heart. He answered them: I prefer the words of Eleazer ben Arack, for his words contain all the words of every one of you. Then he said to them: Go forth and see which is wrong, which a man should shun? Rabbi Eliezer says: An evil eye. Rabbi Joshua says: A bad colleague. Rabbi Yosi says: An evil neighbor. Rabbi Simon says: He who borrows and does not repay, for he is as if he had borrowed from the Lord, as it

[p. 29]

was said: (Psalms xxxvii, 21) The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again; but the righteous showeth mercy and giveth. Rabbi Eleazer says: An evil heart. He said to them: I prefer the words of Eleazer ben Arack, for his words contain all of your words.

They said three things. Rabbi Eliezer says: Let the honor of thy friend be as dear to thee as thy own. Arouse not thy anger easily. Repent a day before thou diest. Warm thyself by the light of wise men, but be cautious of their glow, lest thou be scourged; their bite is the bite of a fox; their sting is the sting of a scorpion; their hiss is the hiss of a serpent, and all their words are as burning coal.

Rabbi Joshua says: An evil eye and an evil impulse, and the hatred of mankind, put a man out of the world.

Rabbi Yosi says: Let the money of thy friend be as valuable to thee as thy own, and set thyself to learn the Law which is not thy heritage, and all thy deeds shall be for the sake of Heaven.

Rabbi Simon says: Be careful in the reading of the Shema (Hear, Oh Israel) and in thy prayers, and when thou sayest thy prayers make not thy prayer a routine, but pray with compassion and supplication before the Lord, as was said: (Jonah iv, 2) Thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. And be not wicked in thine own eyes.

Rabbi Eleazer says: Be diligent in thy study of the Law, and know what to answer to the unbeliever, and know for whom thou strivest, and be confident of thy master that he will reward thee for thy effort.

Rabbi Tarphon says: The day is short, and the task

[p. 30]

is great; the workers are lazy; the fee is large, and the master is persistent.

He would say: It is not for thee to complete the work, but neither art thou free to abandon it. If thou hast learned much of the Torah thou shalt be rewarded for it; thy master is sure to reward thee justly for thy work, and know that the reward of the righteous is in the future to come.

[p. 31]

  

III

AKABIAH ben Mahalalel says: Consider three things before thou committest a transgression: whence cometh thou, and whither art thou going, and before Whom thou shalt give an accounting. Whence cometh thou? from a putrid drop; and where art thou going? to dust and vermin; and before Whom shalt thou give an accounting? before the King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He.

Rabbi Hanina the priest says: Pray for peace of the rulers, because if it were not for the fear of them, each would devour the other alive. Rabbi Hanina ben Tardion says: Two who sit without words of learning between them are as a session of scoffers, as was said: (Psalms i, 1) Nor sitteth in the seat of the scoffers. But two who sit and entertain words of the Torah,--the spirit of the Lord rests among them, as was said: (Malachi iii, 16) Then they that feared the Lord spake often, one to the other and the Lord hearkened, and a book of remembrance was written before Him for them that feared the Lord and that thought upon His name. Of two it is spoken, but even one who sits by himself and studies the Law, the Lord, blessed be He, designates his reward, as was said: (Lamentations iii, 28) He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him.

[p. 32]

Rabbi Simon says: Three that ate at a table and spoke not the words of the Law are as if they ate of the sacrificial offerings of the death, as it was spoken: (Isaiah xxviii, 8) For all the tables are full of vomit and filthiness so there is no place clean. But three who are at one table and spoke the words of the Torah there, are as if they ate from the table of the Lord, as was said: (Ezekiel xli, 22) And he said unto me, "This is the table that is before the Lord."

Rabbi Haninah ben Hachinai says: He that awakens in the night, who walketh on the road alone and turns his heart to vanity, he is liable with his life.

Rabbi Nehonia ben Hachinah says: He who accepts upon himself the burdens of the Law receives exoneration from the duties of the Government and the duties of worldly care.

Rabbi Halafta from the village of Haniniah says: Ten that sit and study the Torah, the spirit of the Lord hovers among them, as was spoken: (Psalms lxxii, 1) God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; And even if five, as was said: (Amos lx, 6) And hath founded his troops in the earth; and even if three, as is said: (Psalms lxxxii, 1) He judgeth among the gods; and even if two, as is said: (Malachi iii, 16) Then they that feared the Lord spoke often to one another and the Lord hearkened and heard it; and even if one, as is said: (Exodus xx, 24) In all places where I record my name I will come unto thee and I will bless thee.

Rabbi Eleazar from Bartutha says: Give unto Him of His own, because thou and all thou possess are from Him; and thus spoke David: (I Chronicles xxix, .14) For all things come of Thee and of Thine own have we 

[p. 33]

given Thee. Rabbi Simon says: He that walketh in the road and interrupts his study and says, "How beautiful is this tree and how beautiful are these fields," the Scriptures reckon it as if he were liable with his life.

Rabbi Dostai ben Rabbi Jana says in the name of Rabbi Meir: He that forgets one word of his studies brings upon himself the Scriptures as if he were guilty of his life, as is said: (Deuteronomy iv, 9) Only take heed to thyself and keep thy soul diligently lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen. Does this refer to one even if his study was too difficult for him? The Scriptures say: (Deuteronomy iv, 9) Lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life.

Rabbi Haninah ben Dosa says: He that puts the fear of sin above his wisdom, his wisdom will endure, but he that puts his wisdom above the fear of sin, his wisdom will not endure. He would say: He whose deeds are greater than his wisdom, his wisdom will endure, but he whose wisdom is greater than his deeds, his wisdom will not endure.

He used to say: He that gives satisfaction to men, satisfied the Lord, but he with whom mankind is not satisfied, does not satisfy the Lord. Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinus says: Morning sleep, midday wine, childish talk, and sitting in the company of ignorant men, put a man out of the world.

Rabbi Eleazar of Modeim says: He that desecrates that which is holy, that profanes the feast days and shames his fellowman in public, that breaks the covenant of our father Abraham; he that interprets the Law not in accordance with the statutes--even if he possesses

[p. 34]

learning and good deeds--shall not have a share in the world to come.

Rabbi Ishmael says: Be swift before a superior, be kind to the young, and receive every person with cheerfulness.

Rabbi Akiba says: Laughter and light-headedness bring a man to lewdness. Tradition is a fence around the Law. Taxes (Tithes) are a fence around riches, vows are a fence around purity; a fence around wisdom is silence.

He would say: Blessed is man because he was born in the image of the Lord; blessed, indeed, is man because he was born in the Image, as is said: (Genesis ix, 6) For in the image of God, made he man. Beloved are the children of Israel because they were called children of the Lord, as was said: (Deuteronomy xiv, 1) Ye are the children of the Lord, your God. A greater love is bestowed upon them because they were favored with a precious instrument. It is known to them that they were given an instrument with which the world was created. As it is said: (Proverbs iv, 2) For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not My law.

All is foreseen but freedom of choice is granted, and the world is judged with charity and all is measured by the number of good deeds.

He would say: All is given against a pledge and a net is spread over all living, and the shop is open, and the storekeeper allows credit, and the ledger is open, and the hand inscribes, and whosoever wants credit shall come and borrow. But the collectors make their rounds regularly each day and exact payment from each man whether he is aware of it or not, and they have the things on

[p. 35]

which to rely, and the judgment is a true judgment, and everything is ready for the banquet.

Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah says: If there is no learning, there is no good breeding. If there is no good breeding, there is no learning. If there is no wisdom, there is no fear. If there is no fear, there is no wisdom. If there is no understanding, there is no knowledge. If there is no knowledge, there is no understanding. If there is no bread, there is no learning; and if there is no learning, there is no bread. He used to say: He whose wisdom is in excess of his deeds is likened to the tree whose branches are many and its roots are few. A wind comes and uproots it and turns it over, as is said: (Jeremiah xvii, 6) For he shall be like the heat in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, and in a salt land and not inhabited. But he whose deeds are in excess of his wisdom is like a tree whose branches are few but its roots are many. Though all the winds of the world may come and blow at it, they shall not stir it from its place, as is said: (Jeremiah xvii, 8) For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green and shall not be careful in the year of draught, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

Rabbi Eliezer ben Hisma says: Nests, and the onset of menstruation: those are the essentials of law; calculations of the calendar and geometry are the sweetmeats of wisdom.

[p. 36]

  

IV

BEN Zoma says: Who is wise? He who learns from every man, as was said: (Psalms cxix, 99) I am learned beyond any of my teachers. Who is mighty? He who can master his passions, as was said: (Proverbs xvi, 32) He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city. Who is rich? He that is happy with his portion, as was said: (Psalms cxxviii, 2) For thou shalt eat the labor of thine hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. Happy in this world and happy in the world to come. Who is honored? He that honors his fellowman, as was said: (I Samuel ii, 30) For them that honor Me, I will honor, and they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.

Ben Azzai says: Run to fulfill a minor precept as if it were a major precept, and run away from transgression, for a precept draws another precept, and a transgression draws another transgression. The reward of a precept is another precept, and the reward of a transgression is another transgression.

He used to say: Despise no one and discriminate not against a thing; for there is not a man but has his hour, and there is not a thing but has its place.

Rabbi Levitas of Yabne says: Be lowly in spirit, for the expectation of a man is but the worm. Rabbi Yohanan

[p. 37]

ben Berocca says: Whosoever profanes the name of God in secret, shall have the penalty exacted from him in public. Whether one errs, or whether one profanes deliberately.

Rabbi Ishmael says: He who learns in order to teach is given the opportunity to learn and to teach. He who learns in order to practice is given the opportunity to learn, to teach, to observe and to practice.

Rabbi Zaddok says: Make not thy learning a crown wherewith to boast of thyself, and make it not a spade wherewith to dig, for Hillel used to say: He who maketh use of the crown shall vanish. Thou mayest know that he that benefits from his learning removes his life from the world.

Rabbi Yosi says: He that honors the Torah is honored by mankind. He that profanes the Torah shall be scorned by mankind.

His son, Rabbi Ishmael says: He who refrains from passing judgments avoids enmity, robbery and false swearing; and he who is ill-mannered is a fool, wicked and haughty.

He used to say: Pass not judgment by yourself; there is only One who may; and say not: Accept my opinion; for they may do it, but not thee.

Rabbi Jonathan says: Whosoever fulfills the Torah in poverty, shall finally fulfill it in riches; and whosoever neglects the Torah in riches shall finally neglect it in poverty.

Rabbi Meir says: Occupy thyself less with trade, and devote thyself to the Torah. Be meek before all men. If thou hast neglected the Law many things shall be

[p. 38]

neglected for thee, but if thou hast labored for the Torah, many rewards are in store for thee.

Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says: Whosoever fulfills one precept secures for himself one defender. Whosoever commits one transgression secures for himself one accuser. Repentence and good deeds are a shield against misfortune.

Rabbi Yohanan, the shoemaker, says: A society that has been consecrated in the name of the Lord shall endure, but a society that is not consecrated in the name of the Lord shall not endure.

Rabbi Eleazar ben Shamua says: Let the honor of thy disciple be as dear to thee as thine honor, and the honor of thy colleague as respected as thy teacher's, and the honor of thy teacher's as respected as the honor of the Lord.

Rabbi Yehuda says: Be careful in thy studies, for errors in study cause presumptuousness.

Rabbi Simon says: There are three crowns: the crown of the Torah, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of kingdom; but the crown of a good name is greater than any of them.

Rabbi Nehorai says: Exile thyself to a place of learning and say not that the Torah will follow thee, that thy colleagues will establish it for thee; and rely not on thine own judgment.

Rabbi Yanai says: It is not in our power to explain the security of the wicked, nor the suffering of the righteous.

Rabbi Mathia ben Heresh says: Be first to every man; and be a tail unto the lion, and be not a head to the fox.

[p. 39]

Rabbi Jacob says: This world is like a vestibule before the world to come. Prepare thyself in the vestibule, so that thou mayest enter the banquet hall.

He would say: One hour of repentence and good deeds in this world is worth more than all life in the world to come; and better is one hour of contentment in the world to come than all life in this world.

Rabbi Simeon ben Eleazer says: Pacify not thy friend in the moment of his anger, and comfort him not while his deceased lies before him; question him not while he is making his vow, and endeavor not to see him at the moment of his disgrace.

Samuel the Younger says: (Prov. xxiv, 17) Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth: Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him and he turn away his wrath from him.

Elisha ben Abuyah says: He that learns as a child is like ink written on new paper, he that learns while he is old is like ink written on a blotted paper.

Rabbi Yosi bar Yehuda from Kfar-Babli says: He who learns from the young is like one who eats unripe grapes and drinks wine out of the wine press. He who learns from the old is like one who eats ripe grapes and drinks old wine. The Rabbi says: Look not at the jug but at what it contains. There may be a new jug that containeth old wine, and an old jug that containeth not even new wine.

Rabbi Eleazar Hakappar says: Envy, lust and ambition put a man out of the world.

He used to say: Those who were born are to die, and those who are dead are to be born again; those who are alive are to be judged, to know, to proclaim, and to

[p. 40]

make known that He is the Lord, the Master, the Creator; He, the Discerner; He, the Judge; He, the Witness; He, the Complainant; and He shall surely judge. Blessed be He. Before Him there is no injustice and no forgetting, nor regard for persons, nor taking of bribes, for all is His, and everything will accord with the reckoning. And let thy impulse not assure thee that the grave is thy refuge, for without thy will hast thou been created, and despite thy will art thou alive and despite thy will shalt thou die, and despite thy will art thou bound to give a reckoning before the King of Kings, the Holy One. Blessed be He.

[p. 41]

  

V

WITH ten maxims was the world created. The learned may say: It could have been created with one. This was done in order to punish the wicked who destroy this world that was created with ten maxims, and to give many rewards to the just who sustain this world that was created with ten maxims. There were ten generations from Adam to Noah; to show how patient the Lord is. So many generations had vexed Him till He brought upon them the deluge. There are ten generations from Noah to Father Abraham; to show how patient the Lord is, for ten generations had vexed Him till Father Abraham appeared and received the reward of all of them. Ten times was Father Abraham tried, and came through each time to show how great was the love of the Lord in Abraham. Ten miracles were performed to our fathers in Egypt and ten at the sea. Ten plagues were brought upon the Egyptians and ten at the sea. Ten times have our fathers tempted the Lord in the desert, as was said: (Numbers xiv, 22) And ye have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice. Ten miracles have been performed for our fathers in the temple. No woman has miscarried because of the odor of the sacred flesh, and the sacred flesh never became putrid, and never was a fly seen in the slaughter house, and never has pollution come upon the High Priest

[p. 42]

on the day of Atonement, and the rains have not  the fires of the fuel pile, and no wind has prevailed against the pillar of smoke, no defect was found in the Omer or in the two loaves of bread. People stood together yet prostrated themselves in comfort. And no snake or scorpion ever stung anyone in Jerusalem, and no man ever said to his fellow: (Isaiah xlix, 20) I cannot find lodging in Jerusalem. Ten things were created at twilight on the eve of the Sabbath: the mouth of the earth, the mouth of the well, the mouth of the she-ass, the rainbow, manna, the rod of Moses, the diamond, letters, and writing, and the Tablets. Some say also the evil spirits and the grave of Moses, and the ram of Abraham, our father.

Some say also, the tongs made with tongs.

There are seven types of fool and seven of wise man. A wise man does not speak before one who is greater than he in wisdom and in years, does not interrupt the conversation of his fellows. He is not hasty with his answers, inquires what is pertinent, and answers in accordance with the Law, speaks of the first subject first, and of the last, last. If he does not know, he says: I know it not, and accepts the truth. The opposite are the characteristics of the fool.

Seven kinds of punishments are meted out to the world for seven kinds of transgressions. If some give the tithe, and others do not give it, there comes a famine from drought; some go hungry and some have plenty. When all decide not to give the tithe, a famine, the result of chaos and drought, comes upon the world. If the people set not apart the offering of dough, there comes the famine of extermination.

[p. 43]

Pestilence comes upon the world for capital crimes mentioned in the Torah, that are not referred to the court, and for not letting the ground lie fallow in the seventh year.

The sword comes upon the world when justice is suppressed or perverted. And because of them who teach the Torah not in accordance with the Law. Wild beasts come upon the world because of false swearing and the profanation of the name of the Lord. Exile comes upon the world because of idolatry, for incest, for bloodshed, and for not letting the land lie fallow in the sabbatical year.

At four periods does pestilence increase; at the fourth year, at the beginning and at the end of the seventh, and at the ending of the Fast of Tabernacles each year. At the fourth year, because of the tithe for the poor that is due in the third year. At the seventh because of the tithe for the poor due in the sixth. At the end of the seventh because of the produce from the fields that should have lain fallow. At the conclusion of the Fast because of the stealing of the gifts for the poor.

There are four types of men. The one that says: Mine is mine and thine is thine; this is the common type. And some say this is the attitude of Sodom. The one that says: Mine is thine and thine is mine; this is the ignorant. Mine is thine and thine is thine:--a pious man. Mine is mine and thine is mine; this is the attitude of the wicked.

There are four types of temperament. Quick in anger, and as soon appeased. His gain is voided by his loss. Slow to anger but hard to appease. His loss is voided by his gain. Slow to anger but easy to appease. He is

[p. 44]

kindly. Quick to anger but hard to appease. He is wicked.

There are four types of students. Quick to absorb and quick to forget. His gain is voided by his loss. Slow to absorb and slow to forget. His loss is voided by his gain. Quick to absorb and slow to forget. He is smart. Slow to absorb but quick to forget. This is bad.

There are four ways of giving charity. One wishes to give but wants no one else to give. This is unjust towards others. One wishes others to give but himself refuses. This is evil on his part. One gives and wishes others to give. He is pious. One will not give and wants no one else to. He is wicked.

There are four types who enroll in the House of Study. He that attends but does nothing. He gets the benefit of attendance. He that studies but does not attend. The reward of study is his portion. Attends and studies--he is pious. Attends not and studies not--he is wicked.

There are four types who sit at the feet of the sages; a sponge, a funnel, a strainer and a sieve. The sponge absorbs everything indiscriminately. The funnel takes in at one end and lets out at the other. The strainer lets through the wine and retains the lees. The sieve lets off the bran and retains the flour.

All love based on ulterior motives will cease when the motives cease. But love that depended not on ulterior motives will never cease. Love that is based on ulterior motives is as the love of Amnon and Tamar. Love that is not based on ulterior motives is as the love of David and Jonathan.

[p. 45]

A controversy that is for the sake of the Lord will at the end bring forth something of permanent value. A controversy that is not for the sake of the Lord shall come to naught. What is a controversy for the sake of the Lord? The controversy of Hillel and Shamai. And what is not for the sake of the Lord? That is the controversy of Korah and all of his congregation.

Whosoever bestirs others to do the right, shall himself never cause sin. Whosoever leads others to commit sin, shall himself never find repentance. Moses was righteous and bestirred others to do right. The righteousness of others was added to his account, as was said: (Deuteronomy xxxiii, 21) He executed the justice of the Lord, and his judgment with Israel. Jeroboam sinned and led others to sin. The sin of others is accredited to him, as was said: (1 Kings xv, 30) Because of the sins of Jeroboam, which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin.

Whosoever possesses three certain things, is of the disciples of our father, Abraham; whosoever, three other things, is of the disciples of Balaam, the wicked. A benevolent eye, a meek spirit, and a humble heart--is of the disciples of Father Abraham. A wicked eye, a bold spirit, and a proud heart is of the disciples of Balaam, the wicked. What is the difference between the disciples of Father Abraham and the disciples of Balaam, the wicked? The disciples of Father Abraham benefit in this world and shall inherit the world to come, as was said: (Proverbs viii, 21) That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures. But the disciples of Balaam shall inherit Hell and go down to the depths of desolation, as was said:

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] (Psalms ii, 23) But Thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will trust in Thee.

Yehuda ben Tema says: Be as fierce as the panther, lightwinged as the eagle, swift as the deer and strong as the lion, to do the bidding of thy Father in Heaven.

He used to say: The insolent shall go to Hell and the modest to Heaven. Lord, our God, may it be Thy will to build our City soon in our days, and let our lot be Thy Torah.

He would say: Age of five is for reading, ten for Mishna, thirteen for precepts, fifteen for Talmud, eighteen for marriage, twenty for pursuits, thirty for strength, forty for wisdom, fifty for council, sixty of ripe age, eighty of power, ninety of decline. A man of one hundred is as dead and gone out of this world.

Ben Bag-Bag says: Turn the Law this way and that way, everything can be found therein. Thou shalt get old and gray, but turn not away from the Torah. There is no better rule for thee.

Ben He-He says: The reward is commensurate with the effort.

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

  

AGRICULTURE

  

ZERAIM

[p. 48] [p. 49]

  

The Portion of the Poor

  

(TRACTATE PEAH)

THE following have no prescribed measure: Peah, [**] First-Fruits, Festival-Offerings, deeds of kindness, and the study of the Law. And the following are the things the fruit of which a man enjoys in this world, but the capital fund of which remains for him in the world to come: The honoring of father and mother, deeds of kindness, and the making of peace between one man and another, but the study of the Law is greater than any of them.

One should not leave Peah less than one-sixth of the field. And although there is no prescribed measure it should be fixed according to the size of the field, the number of the poor, and the need.

One may leave Peah in the beginning or in the middle of the field. Rabbi Simon says: As long as he leaves at the end the prescribed measure. Rabbi Yehuda says:

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] If he leaves but one stalk at the end, he has fulfilled his obligation as to Peah; but if not, whatever he left at the beginning or at the end is regarded as abandoned property.

A ruling has been established as regards Peah: whatever is used as food, and has to be tended, and is raised from the soil, and is reaped at one time, and is brought in for storage, requires the leaving of Peah; and this includes grain and pulse.

Of the trees, sumach, carob, nut trees, the almond, vines, the pomegranate, the olive, and date palm are all subject to Peah.

 

THE following serve as boundaries for a field, in all that concerns Peah: A river, a pond, a private road, a public road, and a public path. Also a private path that is used during the summer and during the rainy-season, uncultivated soil, fallow-land, and a different variety of crop. If one cuts the produce of one field for fodder, he makes thereby a boundary, this is according to Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say: It does not act as a boundary unless he ploughed it up.

A stream, both sides of which cannot be cut in one operation serves as a boundary, according to Rabbi Yehuda. The hills that can be ploughed by a mattock, though the oxen cannot go through them with their plough, is considered one field, and is subject to only one Peah.

Everything serves as a boundary for a sown field, but for trees a fence only serves as a boundary, but if the branches of the trees intertwine, then the fence does not

[p. 51]

constitute a boundary, and all is subject to only one Peah.

FROM CHAPTER I

 

PEAH is given from what is attached to the soil. From vines and date palms, the owner takes down some fruit and distributes it to the poor. Rabbi Simon says: This applies also to nut trees.

If ninety-nine of the poor vote that Peah be distributed, and one says that it should be left for them to help themselves, it is to be done according to the one because the law is in agreement with him.

But it is not so with vines and date palms; if ninety-nine vote for helping themselves and one says it should be distributed, he is followed, because the law is in agreement with him.

If one took some of the Peah and threw it over the rest, none of it belongs to him. If he fell upon it or spread his cloak over it, it must be taken away from him. The same applies to Gleaning and to Forgotten Sheaf.

Peah must not be cut with a sickle and must not be uprooted with a hatchet, so that one will not hurt his neighbor.

If a heathen reaped his field and then became a proselyte, he is exempt from Gleaning, from Forgotten Sheaf, and from Peah. Rabbi Yehuda says: He is subject to the Forgotten Sheaf, because this is given at the time of binding.

What constitutes Gleaning? Whatever falls down at the time of reaping. If one cut a handful, or pulled up a handful, and a thorn pricked him and it fell from his hands to the ground, it belongs to the owner. If it fell on the inside of the hand or the inside of the sickle, it belongs

[p. 52]

to the poor; if it fell on the outside of the hand or the back of the sickle, it belongs to the owner. If it fell over the top of the hand or the top of the sickle, Rabbi Ishmael says: It belongs to the poor. Rabbi Akiba says: It belongs to the owner.

FROM CHAPTER II

 

FROM a stack of sheaves beneath which no Gleaning has been taken, everything that touches the ground belongs to the poor. If the wind scattered the sheaves from the stack, one must estimate the amount of gleanings that would be gathered from the field and give it to the poor. Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel says: One gives in proportion to the yield of the field.

If a man sells a field the seller may take the gleanings, but the buyer must not take any. One must not hire workers with the stipulation that the worker's son shall gather the gleanings behind him. One who does not allow the poor to gather, or allows one, and does not allow another; or if he aids one of them, he is robbing the poor. Of such a one it was said: (Proverbs xxii, 28) Remove not the ancient landmark which thy fathers have set. (The Mishna reads the word "Olam" as "Olim" and translates the second part of the verse: for those that come up.)

FROM CHAPTER VII

 

A POOR man who goes from one place to another should be given not less than a loaf worth one Pandion, and one Selah's worth of grain. If he stays for the night, he should be given his needs for the night. On the Sabbath he should be given three meals.

If a man has food for two meals, he should not take any food from the public kitchen. If he has food enough

[p. 53]

for fourteen meals, he should not take anything from the charity chest. Money for the charity chest is to be collected by two, and should be distributed by three.

If a man has two hundred Zuz, he must not take Gleanings, Forgotten-Sheaf, Peah, and Poor-man's Tithe. But if he has two hundred less one Denar, even if a thousand was given to him at one time, he may still take everything that is allowed to a poor man. If his money is pledged to a debtor, or for his wife's marriage contract, he may take of the poor man's portions. A man must not be compelled to sell his house or his tools.

If one has fifty Zuz, and he trades with them, he must not take of the poor man's portions. He who does not need and takes will not die of old age, until he has been compelled to seek the aid of his fellow man. But one who needs and does not take any, will not die of old age, till he shall be in a position to aid others. Of him it was said: (Jeremiah xvii, 7) Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. And this applies also to the judge who renders a true verdict according to the evidence. And every person who is not lame, blind or dumb, but pretends that he is; shall not die of old age before he does become like one of them, for it was said: (Proverbs xi, 27) He that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him. And it was also said: (Deuteronomy xvi, 20) That which is altogether just shalt thou follow. A judge who accepts a bribe and perverts a decision shall not die from old age until his eyes have become blinded, for it was said: (Exodus xxiii, 8) And thou shalt take no gift, for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.

FROM CHAPTER VIII

Footnotes

^49:* Peah: corner of the field, the portion of the crop that must be left by the owner to the poor. See Leviticus xix, 9, xxiii, 22.

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54] [p. 55]

  

HOLY DAYS

  

MOED

[p. 56] [p. 57]

  

Sabbath

  

(TRACTATE SHABBATH)

ONE does not sit down before the barber, close to the time of the afternoon prayer, unless he has already said his prayer. Neither shall he enter the bath house or a tannery, or sit down to eat or begin a law suit; but if they have begun it, they need not interrupt it. One interrupts for the reading of "Hear, O Israel", but not for the prayer.

A tailor should not take his needle on Sabbath eve just before nightfall; he may forget and go out with it. Nor the scribe take his pen. One should not begin to clean his clothes, and one does not read at the lamplight (because he may tilt it) . But the schoolmaster may supervise the reading of the children, but he himself should not read.

Similarly a man that is in heat should not eat together with a woman that is in heat, because it may lead them to sin.

(Mishna)

[p. 58]

AFTER all we speak here of the usual haircut. Why may not one sit down at the beginning? Because the shears may be broken. Thus one may not enter the bathhouse if only for sweating. Why not at the outset? Because one may faint. Nor a tannery if only to inspect it. Why not at the outset? Because one may notice that his goods are being spoiled, and that will worry him; nor sit down to eat, not even a small meal. Why not in the first place? Because one may prolong the meal. Nor to a law suit, even if at the end of it. Why not in the first place? Because he may find a new plea for changing the decision.

What constitutes the beginning of haircutting? Rabbi Abim says: When the sheet is spread on one's knee. What constitutes the beginning of a bath? Rabbi Abim says: When one takes off his coat. And what is the beginning of tanning? When one tied his apron round his shoulders. When does the meal begin? Rabbi says: When one washed his hands. Rabbi Hanina says: When one loosened his girdle. There is no disagreement here. One speaks of the Babylonians and the other of the Palestinians.

 

SAID the Holy One, blessed be He, to Moses: I have a precious gift in my treasure and its name is "Sabbath" and I wish to give it to Israel. Go and inform them of it. From this remark I infer, said Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel, that if one gives a piece of bread to a child, he must inform the mother of it. How does one do it? He dabs him with oil and paints him with Kohl. But how about these days, when we are afraid of witchcraft? Rab Pupa says: One does the same.

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] But it is not so. For Rabbi Hama ben Rabbi Hanina says: If one makes a gift to his neighbor one does not have to inform him for it was said: (Exodus xxxiv, 29) Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him. There is no contradiction here. In one instance, the fact will be evident in any case. In the other instance it may not be known. The Sabbath, too, was bound to be known. But its reward was not bound to be known.

Raba ben Mehasia said, in the name of Rabbi Hama ben Goria, in the name of Raba: One should never single out one of his children. Because Jacob gave Joseph two Selah weight more of silk than to his other children, Joseph's brothers became jealous of him, and this finally caused our forefathers to go to Egypt.

Raba ben Mahasia, also, said in the name of Rabbi Hama ben Goria in the name of Rab: Any city whose roofs are higher than the Prayer House, will, at the end, be destroyed. As it was said: (Ezra ix, 9) To set up the house of our God to repair the desolation thereof. This refers only to regular houses, but towers and turrets are different. Rabbi Ashi said: I saw to it that the city of Mehasia was not destroyed. How so? But indeed it was destroyed. Well, it was not destroyed because of that sin.

Said Raba ben Mehasia, in the name of Rabbi bar Goria in the name of Rab: One should rather be subjected to an Ishmaelite than to a foreigner; under a stranger but not under a Parsee; under a Parsee, but not under a scholar; under a scholar but not under an orphan or a widow.

[p. 60]

Rabbi ben Mehasia, also, said in the name of Rabbi Hama bar Goria in the name of Rab: Any sickness but not that of the bowels; any pain but not that of the heart; any ache but not that of the head; anything evil, but not an evil wife.

Rabbi bar Mehasia, also, said in the name of Rabbi Hama ben Goria in the name of Rab: If all the seas were ink and all the reeds were pens, and all the skies were parchment, and all men could write, they would not suffice to write down all the red tape of government. What in the Scriptures refers to this? Rabbi Meshershia said: (Proverbs xxv, 3) The heaven for height, the earth for depth, and the heart of Kings is unsearchable.

 

RABBI Simon ben Eleazer said in the name of Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel: One does not arrange for the betrothal of children; one does not engage a teacher for his son, nor does he make arrangements to teach him a trade; one does not comfort mourners, nor does one visit sick people on the Sabbath. This is according to the House of Shamai, but the house of Hillel permits it.

The Rabbis taught: When one visits a sick person on the Sabbath, he says: It is Sabbath; tears are forbidden. A speedy recovery. Rabbi Meir says: One may have compassion. Rabbi Yehuda says: The Lord may have mercy on you and on the sick in Israel. Rabbi Yosi says: May the Lord have mercy on you among the sick of Israel. Shebna, a man of Jerusalem, said upon entering: Peace, and upon departing, he said: Sabbath. Tears are forbidden. A speedy recovery. His mercy is abundant; rest in peace.

(Gemara)

[p. 61]

THE House of Shamai says: Ink, dyes and vetches must not be soaked on Sabbath eve, unless there is time for them to be thoroughly soaked before the Sabbath sets in. But the House of Hillel permit it. The House of Shamai says: Nets and traps must not be set to catch fish or birds or animals, unless they will be caught before sundown. But the House of Hillel permit it.

The House of Shamai says: One must not sell anything to a Gentile or help him load his beast, or put a burden on his shoulder, unless he can reach a nearby place soon, before sundown. But the House of Hillel permit it.

The House of Shamai says: Hides must not be given to a tanner, nor clothes to a Gentile launderer, unless they can be done on Sabbath eve before sundown. But the House of Hillel permit it.

Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel said: In my father's house they used to give the linen to a Gentile launderer three days before the Sabbath. Both houses agree, however, that one may set the beams of the oil press and the rollers of the wine press.

One must not put bread in the oven on Sabbath eve before darkness, nor may cakes be put on the coal unless there is time for the crust to form. Rabbi Eliezer says: In time for the crust to form on the bottom. But the Passover offering may be put in the oven just before darkness. One may, also, kindle the fire in the chamber of the hearth, but in the country only if most of it will catch fire before darkness. Rabbi Yehuda says: If one burns coal, if any amount at all will catch fire, it is well.

(Mishna)

[p. 62]

THE Rabbis taught: One may open a water canal into the garden on Sabbath eve, so that the water will flow all day. One may put a perfumed sachet under the clothing on Sabbath eve so that it will penetrate the clothing all day. One may put sulphur under utensils on Sabbath eve so that the process of sulphuring will go on all day. One may put a salve on the eye, a plaster on a wound so that the healing goes on all day. But one must not put more wheat in the water mill than can be ground before sundown. What is the reason?

Said Rabba: Because of the noise that it makes. Rabbi Joseph said to him: May not the Master say: Because the utensils have to rest too? For we were taught: (Exodus xxiii, 13) And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect. That means, also, the resting of the utensils. Rabbi Joseph said: You may say: On account of the resting of the utensils.

The Rabbis taught: The House of Shamai says: One must not sell anything to a Gentile, nor lend him money, nor make a loan to him of anything, nor make a gift of it, unless he can get with it to his house before sundown. The House of Hillel says: If he can reach a house near the city wall, it is permitted. Rabbi Akiba says: As long as he can leave the house of the Jew before sundown. Said Rabbi Yosi ben Rabbi Yehuda: The words of Rabbi Akiba are the same as the words of the House of Hillel. Rabbi Akiba came only to amplify the words of the House of Hillel.

The Rabbis taught: A man must not sell his leaven bread to a non-Jew, unless he knows that the Gentile will eat it before the Passover. This is the opinion of the

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] House of Shamai, but the House of Hillel says: As long as the Jew may eat it, he may sell it.

The Rabbis taught: A man must not rent his utensils to a non-Jew on Sabbath eve. However, on the fourth and fifth day of the week he may do it. One does not send a letter to a Gentile on Sabbath eve, but one sends it on the fourth or fifth day of the week.

The Rabbis taught: One must not send a letter through a Gentile on Sabbath eve, though one has arranged to pay him for it, unless he can reach the house before sundown. This is according to the House of Shamai. The House of Hillel, however, says: If he can reach a house near the city wall, it is permitted. But isn't the messenger getting paid for it? Rabbi Shesheth says: This is the meaning: He must have time to reach the house. According to the House of Shamai; or according to the House of Hillel, he must reach a house near the city wall. But we learned in the first place, that one does not send at all. There is no contradiction here. One speaks of a town where there is a Post Office and the other speaks of a town where there is no Post Office.

The Rabbis taught: One must not ship on a boat less than three days before Sabbath. This refers to a pleasure trip. But if the voyage is undertaken for a good deed, it is permissible, and one should stipulate that the ship will rest on the Sabbath; but if it does not rest, it is well. Thus the word of Rabbi. Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel says: It is not necessary. A trip from Tyre to Sidon is permitted even on Sabbath eve.

The Rabbis taught: One must not besiege a city less than three days before Sabbath, but if the siege has begun,

[p. 64]

it is not necessary to stop. And thus did Shamai say: (Deuteronomy xx, 20) Until it be subdued even on the Sabbath day.

Said Rabbi Zadok: Thus was it customary in the House of Rabbi Gamaliel. The white garments were given to the launderer three days before the Sabbath, but colored garments even on Sabbath eve. And from this we learn that white garments are harder to launder than colored garments.

Abaya said: When one gives a garment to a launderer he should give it to him by measure and take it back by measure. If he finds it larger the launderer spoiled it by stretching. If he found it smaller, he spoiled it by shrinking.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

WHAT may one use for lighting on the Sabbath, and what must one not use? One must not use cedar fibre, nor oakum, nor silk, nor a bast wick, nor a desert wick, nor seaweed, nor pitch, nor wax, nor castor oil, nor burnt oil, nor tail fat, nor tallow. Nahum the Mede says: One may use boiled tallow, but the Sages say: Whether boiled or not one may not light with it.

One does not light on festival days with sanctified oil that has been defiled. Rabbi Ishmael says: One must not light with tar because of the respect for Sabbath. The Sages permit all oils: Sesame oil, nut oil, radish oil; cucumber oil, tar and Naptha. Rabbi Tarfon says: Only olive oil may be used for lighting.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: All the things that we were told are not to be used for lighting on the Sabbath, one may

[p. 65]

use them to make a large fire to warm oneself by, or to use for light, whether it is used on the hearth or in the stove. It was only forbidden to make a wick of it, nothing else.

Rabbi Huna said: All wicks and oils which are forbidden to be used on the Sabbath are, also, forbidden to be used on Hanukah whether on the Sabbath or on a weekday.

The Rabbis taught: The precept of Hanukah demands a light for each man and his house. The zealous light a candle for each one. And the very zealous? The House of Shemai says: They light eight candles the first day and one candle less each day. The House of Hillel says: The first day they light one candle and each day they add one.

Said Raba ben Bar Hanai, in the name of Rabbi Yahanan: There were two Elders in Sidon, one acted according to the House of Shamai, and one acted as the House of Hillel. The first gave his reason that it should correspond to the offerings of the festival. While the other said: One progresses in Holy things but one does not retrogress.

The Rabbis taught: It is decreed that the Hanukah light be placed near the door on the outside, but if one lives in an upper story one puts it at the window nearest the street. But if there is danger one may put it on a table. Raba said: An additional candle is needed if it is to be used for light.

What is Hanukah? The Rabbis taught: On the twenty-eighth day of Kislev begins the festival of Hanukah. It lasts eight days. On these, no lamentations for

[p. 66]

the dead nor fasting is allowed. For when the Greeks entered the Temple they defiled all the oils. When the Hashmoneans overpowered and defeated them, they searched and found only one vial of oil which was lying with the seal of the High Priest, and there was not more in it than enough for one day, but a miracle was performed, for it burned eight days. The following year these days were decreed a festival with rejoicing, Hallelujah and thanksgiving.

It was taught: If a spark from the anvil caused a damage, the smith is liable for it. If a camel laden with flax passed through the street and some of the flax got into a store and was ignited by the storekeeper's lamp and burned the building, the camel driver is liable for the damage. But if the storekeeper put the lamp on the outside, then the storekeeper is liable.

Rabbi Yehuda says: If it were a Hanukah light, he is not liable. Rabbina said in the name of Rab: This shows that a Hanukah lamp must be put ten feet from the ground. If you think it should be more than ten, then he could have said: He should put it higher than the camel and its driver. Yet, if we put one to too much trouble, he may not observe the precept altogether.

Rabbi Kahana said: Rabbi Nathan bar Minyomi explained in Rabbi Tanhum's name: A Hanukah lamp that is put higher than twenty ells is unfit, the same as a Sukah or a marquee over an entrance.

Said Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Ashi in the name of Rab: One must not count money by the light of a Hanukah lamp. When I said this before Samuel, he answered: Is there any sanctity attached to the lamp?

[p. 67]

RABBI Joshua ben Levi was asked: May one make use of the decorations of the Sukah during the seven days of festival? He answered: Indeed, we were told that one must not count money at the light of the Hanukah lamp. Said Rabbi Joseph: Lord of Abraham! he makes what was taught hinge upon what was not taught. As for the Sukah, we were explicitly taught, while as for Hanukah, it was not taught. It was taught: If the roof is according to the law, decorate it with hangings and rugs and suspend from it nuts, peaches, almonds, pomegranates, grape-clusters, garlands of ears of corn, wines, oils and flowers. It is forbidden to use them before the festival. But if one made a condition, all is in accordance with the condition.

 

RABBI Joshua ben Levi said: All the oils are fit to be used for a lamp, but olive oil is the best. Abaya said: At first the Master used to search for the sesame oil. He would say that the light lasts longer, but when he heard of what Rabbi Joshua ben Levi taught, he looked only for olive oil. This, he said, gives a clearer light.

Rabbi Joshua ben Levi, also, said: All oils are good for ink, but the best is olive oil. Someone asked him: For kneading or for smoking? Come and hear: Rabbi Samuel ben Zutra discoursed: All oils are good for ink, but olive oil is the best, also for kneading and for smoking. Rabbi Samuel ben Zutra taught as follows: All soots are good for ink, but olive oil is the best. Rabbi Huna said: All resins are good for ink, but balsam resin is the best.

(Gemara)

[p. 68]

IF A man puts out the light because he is afraid of a stranger, or robbers, or an evil spirit, or because of a sick person who cannot sleep; he is exonerated. But if he puts it out because he wants to save the oil or the wick, he is guilty of transgression. Rabbi Yosi exonerates him in every case, except if he does it to save the wick, because he makes charcoal.

(Mishna)

 

SAID Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Samuel ben Shi-lath in the name of Rab: The sages wished to hide the book of Ecclesiastes, because the words of it contradicted one another. But why didn't they hide it? Because in its beginning are the words of the Torah and in its end are the words of the Torah. In the beginning come the words of the Torah, because it is written: (Ecclesiastes i, 3) What profit hath a man of all his labor which he taketh under the sun? And in the school of Rabbi Yanai they said: Under the sun he has none, but above the sun, he has it. And at the end come words of divine teaching. For it is written: (Ecclesiastes xii, 13) Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter. Fear God and keep his commandments for this is the whole duty of man. Which are the words that contradict one another? It was written: (Ecclesiastes vii, 3) Sorrow is better than laughter, and it is written: (Ecclesiastes viii, 15) Then I commanded mirth and it is written: (Ecclesiastes ii, 2) and of mirth, what doeth it?

There is no difficulty here. Sorrow is better than laughter. This is the sorrow that the Lord expresses for the righteous in this world, which is better than the laughter that he laughs over the evil in this world. And of laughter I said, (ibid.) which is to be praised, refers to

[p. 69]

the laughter the Lord, blessed be He, will enjoy with the righteous in the world to come. Then I commanded mirth refers to the mirth that ensues from the performance of a precept. And of mirth, what doeth it? Refers to mirth that is not the result of a precept, to teach you that the Shekinah does not rest upon sorrow, nor indolence, nor frivolity, nor gossip, nor triviality, nor joy, as it was said: (II Kings iii, 15) But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of the Lord came upon him.

And the book of Proverbs, too, they wished to hide because its words contradict one another. And why did they not hide it? They said: We reflected as to the book of Ecclesiastes, and we found a reconciliation. So here, too, we may find a reconciliation. Let us search. It is written: (Proverbs xxvi, 5) Answer a fool according to his folly; and it is written: (Proverbs xxvi, 4) Answer not a fool according to his folly. There is no contradiction here. The first speaks of matters of Law and the other speaks of matters worldly.

Once a man came before Rabbi and said to him: "Your wife belongs to me and your children they are mine." "Would you like to drink a glass of wine?" The man drank and burst. This proved that the man lied.

Rabbi's prayers were effective so that his sons were not declared bastards. When the Rabbi prayed he used to say: May it be Thy will, O Lord, our God, that you protect me this day from the insolent and from insolence.

 

WORDS of learning, what does it mean? For instance: One day Rabbi Gamaliel lectured: Woman is

[p. 70]

destined, in the future, to conceive every day, for it was said: (Jeremiah xxxi, 8) The woman conceived and beareth simultaneously. One of his pupils laughed at him and said: (Ecclesiastes i, 9) There is no new thing under the sun. Come and I will show you something like it in this world. He went out and showed him a hen.

The Rabbis taught: A man should always be as patient as Hillel, and not be hot tempered as Shamai. There is a story that two men made a wager to the effect that whoever will succeed in making Hillel angry would receive four hundred Zuz. Whereupon one said: I will make him angry. It was just Sabbath Eve, and Hillel was washing his hair. The man went to Hillel's house and at the door shouted: Is Hillel in? Is Hillel in? Hillel dressed himself and confronted the man and said: My son, what wishest thou? The man answered: I wish to ask you a question. You may ask it, my son. Why are the heads of Babylonians round? You have asked a great question, my son, answered Hillel. Because the midwives of the Babylonians are not very experienced. The man waited an hour and came back and shouted: Is Hillel in? Is Hillel in? Hillel dressed again and went out to him: What wishest thou, my son? I wish to ask a question, he said. Ask, my son, ask. Why are the eyes of the Tadmorenes inflamed? Thou hast asked a great question. Because they live in sandy places. The man waited another hour, went back and again shouted: Is Hillel in? Is Hillel in? Hillel dressed again and went out to him. What wishest thou, my son? I have t question to ask. Ask, my son, ask. Why are the feet of the Africans broad? Thou hast asked a great question, my son, answered Hillel. Because they live in

[p. 71]

watery marshes. Then the man said, I have many questions to ask of you, but fear that you will become angry. Whereupon Hillel adjusted his robes and sat down near him and said: Ask all the questions thou hast to ask. Then the man said: Art thou the Hillel that is Prince of Israel? If it is thee, then there should be no more men like thee in Israel. Why? asked Hillel. Because I lost four hundred Zuz through thee. Said Hillel, Be careful of thy temper. Hillel is worth that because of him thou shouldst lose four hundred Zuz and many times four hundred. But thou canst not make Hillel lose his patience.

 

THE Rabbis taught: There is the story of a Heathen who came before Shamai and said: How many Torahs have you? Shamai answered: Two, the written law and the oral law. The Heathen said: I believe you as regards the written law but not as regards the oral law. Convert me, but on condition that you teach me the written law only. Shamai scolded him and sent him away with an insult. He went to Hillel, and Hillel received him with courtesy. The first day he taught him: Aleph, Beth, Gimmel, Daleth. The next day Hillel reversed the order. The Heathen said: Yesterday you did not teach me this way. Hillel replied: You see that you have to rely on me, so you must rely on me as regards the oral law, too.

There is another story of a heathen who approached Shamai and asked that he convert him and teach him the law for as long as he could stand on one foot; he repulsed him with a ruler that was in his hand.

[p. 72]

The heathen went to Hillel. Hillel said to him: What is not right for thee, do not unto thy neighbor. This is the whole Torah. All the rest is only a commentary on this; go and learn it. Thus Hillel converted him.

Then there is the story of a heathen who passed near the Academy and heard one of the teachers recite: (Exodus xxviii, 4) And these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod. Then he asked for whom are these garments. He was told that these are for the High Priest. Then he said: I'll go and become a Jew, so that I shall be made High Priest. He went to Shamai and said: Convert me to Judaism, so that I may be appointed High Priest. But he repulsed him with the ruler. He then went to Hillel. Hillel converted him, and said to him: Does a man become a King unless he knows the rules and conduct of government? Go and study the rules and laws of government. He went and read. When he came to: (Numbers i, 51) And the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death, he asked, to whom does this refer? Even to King David, he was answered. So the proselyte reasoned it out for himself. If this refers to the Jews who are called the children of the Lord, and because of his love towards them he called them: (Exodus iv, 22) Israel is my son, even my first born, and still it is written: And the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death. How much more an unworthy proselyte, who comes from nowhere with his walking stick and his bag. He came before Shamai and said: Am I fitted to become a High Priest? Isn't it written in the law: And the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death? He came before Hillel and said: Patient Hillel, may blessings come

[p. 73]

upon thee, that you brought me under the wings of the Shekinah.

Some time later, the three men met in one place and they said: Shamai's hot temper was ready to drive us out of this world, but Hillel's patience brought us under the wings of the Shekinah.

(Gemara)

 

FOR three transgressions women die at childbirth: For laxity during the period of menstruation, for laxity in the Dough Offering, and for laxity in lighting of the Sabbath candles.

(Mishna)

 

WHY just at childbirth? Raba answered: If the ox fell, then sharpen the knife. Abaya said: The bond-maid may increase her disobedience, she will be punished with the same rod. Rab Hisda said: Let the drunkard alone, he will fall of himself. Mar Ukba said: When the shepherd is lame, and the sheep run fast, there will be words at the gate, and in the barn there is the reckoning. At the gate of the shop there are brothers and friends aplenty, but at the toll gate there are neither brothers nor friends.

And when are men taken to task? Resh Lakish said: When they pass over a bridge. Only when they pass a bridge, no other time? Say, instances similar to a bridge. Rab would never cross a bridge when a pagan was on it. He said: Perhaps the judgment of the Lord will come upon him at this moment, and I shall be taken along. Samuel, on the other hand, would never cross a bridge unless a pagan was on it. He said: Satan has no power over two nations at one and the same time. Rabbi Yanai would examine the bridge first, and then

[p. 74]

he would cross it. Yanai expounded his opinion. He said: A man should never put himself in a dangerous position and say that a miracle will be performed for him, lest it be not performed. And if a miracle is performed, it will be deducted from his merited rewards.

The Rabbis taught: If one becomes ill and is near death, he is told to make his confession, for all who are sentenced to death are told to make their confession. If he goes out in the street, he should imagine that he is given into the custody of an officer. If he has a headache, he should imagine that he is put in irons. If he is confined to bed, he should feel as if he is put on a scaffold to be judged. For whoever is judged at the scaffold, if he has a great advocate he is saved, but if he has none, he is not saved. And these are a man's advocates: Repentence and good deeds. And if nine hundred and ninety-nine vote for his punishment, while one favors him, he is saved. For it was said: (Job xxxiii, 23) If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness; Then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER II

 

WITH what may a woman go out on the Sabbath, and with what may she not go out? A woman shall not go out with braids of wool or braids of linen, or with straps on her head. And she must not take a bath with them, unless she has loosened them. And she must not go out with frontlets or hair ornaments unless they are sewed on. Nor shall she go into the street in a hairnet, nor with a gold tiara on her head, nor with necklaces,

[p. 75]

nor with earrings or a finger ring without a seal, nor with a needle that has no eye; but if she did go out with them, she need not bring the sin offering.

A man shall not go out with a nail-shod sandal, nor with one sandal if his foot is not injured, nor with phylacteries, nor with an amulet that has not been made by an expert, nor in armor, nor in a helmet, nor with greaves; but if he did go out with them, he need not bring a sin offering.

A woman shall not go out with a needle that has an eye, nor with a ring that bears a seal, nor with a brooch, nor a compact, nor with a bottle of perfume; and if she did go out with them, she must bring the sin offering. This is the opinion of Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say that in the case of a compact or a bottle of perfume she need not bring the sin offering.

A man shall not go out with a sword, nor with a bow, nor a shield, nor a lance, nor a spear; and if he did go out with them, he is guilty and must bring a sin offering. Rabbi Eleazer says: They are only his ornaments, but the Sages say these are a disgrace to him. For it was said: (Isaiah ii, 4) And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. A garter is clean, and one may go out with it on the Sabbath; ankle bracelets are unclean and one must not go out with them on the Sabbath.

A woman may go out with braids made of hair, whether they are her own or the hair of another, or made of animal hair, or with frontlets or head ornaments if they are sewed on; she may go out with a hair net or with

[p. 76]

false locks if she does not venture beyond the court yard. She may go out with the wool in her ears or the wool in her sandals, or with the wool that she prepared for her menstruation, or with a peppercorn or salt tablet, or anything that is taken in her mouth, but she must put it in her mouth before the Sabbath, and if it should rail out of her mouth, she must not put it back. Rabbi permits a false tooth or a gold tooth, but the Sages forbid it.

She may go out with a coin on her bunion. Young girls may go out with threads or even chips in their ears. Arabian women may go out veiled and Medean with their cloaks over their shoulder, and so may anyone. The Sages had in their mind the customs of the time.

A woman may knot her cloak over a stone or a nut or a coin so long as she does not knot it on the Sabbath.

Boys may go out with bindings, princes with bells, and so may anyone; the Sages referred, here, to the customs of the time.

One may go out with a locust's egg, or a fox's tooth, or a nail from the gallows as a charm. This is the opinion of Rabbi Meir, but the Sages forbid it even on weekdays because these are the ways of the pagan Amorites.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER VI

 

THE main labors are forty less one: Sowing, ploughing, reaping, binding sheaves, threshing, winnowing, sorting, grinding, sifting, kneading, baking, shearing of wool, or bleaching, or shredding and dyeing, spinning, weaving, making two lintzen, weaving two threads, splitting two threads, knotting and unknotting, sewing two

[p. 77]

stitches, and ripping in order to sew, hunting a deer, slaughtering and skinning or salting, or curing its skin, scraping or cutting, writing two letters, erasing in order to write two letters, building or demolishing, extinguishing and lighting, hammering and carrying out things from one domain into another. These are the main labors, forty less one.

(Mishna)

 

A TANNA taught: Sowing, pruning, planting, bending, and grafting, all are one kind of labor.

Ploughing, digging, trenching, they are all one class of work. Rabbi Shesheth said: If one has a mound and takes it down, if he removes it to his house, he is guilty of building; if in the field he is guilty of ploughing. If one fills in a ditch in the house, he is building; if in 'the field, he is ploughing.

We learned: Reaping, wire-making, sheaf-binding, are all one class of work.

Raba said: He who takes out salt of a salt pit is guilty of sheaf-binding. Abaya says: Sheaf-binding applies only to produce of the earth.

Threshing: We learned: Threshing, beating, scattering, they are all one class of work.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER VII

 

RABBI Yehuda said, in the name of Rab: Of all the things that the Holy One, blessed be He, created in His world, He did not create a thing for naught. He created the snail as a cure for a wound, the fly against the wasp, the mosquito against the snake, the snake against the eruption, the spider against the scorpion. How do you

[p. 78]

proceed with it? You take a black one and a white one and cook them together and you rub with it.

The Rabbis taught: There are five fears that the weak exert on the strong. The maphgia (an African gnat) over the lion, the gnat over the elephant, the fear of the scorpion for the spider, the eagle for the swallow, and the fear of the Leviathan for the Kilbith. Said Rab Yehuda in the name of Rab: What verse refers to this? (Amos v, 9) That strengthen the despoiled over the strong.

Rabbi Zera met Rab Yehuda at the door of his father-in-law and noticed that he was in a very cheerful mood, and if he would ask him all the secrets of the world he would be answered. So he asked him: Why do the goats go in front and the sheep in the rear? He told him: It is according to creation, first it was darkness and then there was light. Why is it that one species are covered and the other are not? Those which cover us are themselves covered, but those that cover not us are uncovered. Why is the tail of a camel short? Because it eats thorns. Why is the tail of an ox long? Because it grazes in the meadows and must beat off the gnats. Why is the proboscis of a locust soft? Because it lives among the willows, and if it were hard it would break off, and the locust would be blind.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER VIII

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

Passover

  

(TRACTATE PESSAHIM)

ON THE eve of the fourteenth (of Nisan) a search for leavened matter is conducted by the light of a candle. Any place where leavened matter is not brought in does not require searching. Why was it said that in the cellar, two rows must be searched? Because it is a place where leavened matter might be brought in. The House of Shamai says: Two rows of the whole cellar must be searched. But the House of Hillel says only the two outer rows, the top rows.

(Mishna)

 

RABBI Nahman ben Isaac said: We learned; every one is relied upon for the search for leavened matter, even women, slaves, and children. Why is that? For it is taken for granted that the house has been searched. It is the view of the learned that all are brothers as regards the searching for leavened matter. And we learned that if a brother dies and leaves a storehouse full of produce even if it be but one day old, it is presumed that the produce has been tithed.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

[p. 80]

AS LONG as one is permitted to eat leaven, one may feed it to the cattle, to beasts and to birds, and one may sell it to a stranger, and may enjoy any benefit of it. But if the time of eating leaven has passed, he is barred from enjoying it. He may not heat an oven or a stove with it. Rab Yehuda says: "There is only one way of disposing of leaven--burning it." But the sages say: It can be shredded and scattered to the winds or thrown into the sea.

(Mishna)

 

AND he may sell it to a stranger. This is obvious. It contradicts the view of the Tanna who said: The House of Shamai taught: A man must not sell his leaven matter to a stranger unless he knows that it will be eaten before the Passover. But the House of Hillel says: As long as one may eat it, he may sell it.

(Gemara)

 

The leaven of a Gentile that has remained after Passover is permitted to a Jew. But one must not use the leaven of a Jew that has remained over Passover. Because it was said: (Exodus xiii, 7) Neither shall be leaven seen with thee.

These are the things with which a man discharges his duties with regard to leavened bread on Passover: Wheat, barley, spelt, rye and oats.

And these are the herbs with which a man discharges his duties on Passover: lettuce, chicory, mimosa, endive, and bitter herbs whether they are fresh or dried, but not if they are pickled or stewed or cooked. He fulfills his obligations who consumes the stalks only.

Bran for the chickens must not be soaked, but may be scalded.

[p. 81]

One may not chew wheat and put it on his wound, because it will ferment. The Passover sacrifice may not be boiled in liquids or in fruit juices, but it may be basted with them, or dipped in them. Water that was used by a baker must be poured out, because it will ferment.

(Mishna)

 

ONLY with these, but not with rice and millet. Why these? Rabbi Simon ben Lakish answered: And thus taught the schools of Rabbi Ishmael and of Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob. It was written: (Deuteronomy xvi, 3) Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith. With foods that come to be leavened, one discharges his duty by eating unleavened bread made thereof, but those that do not become leavened, but decay, are excluded.

Thus the Mishnah does not agree with Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri, who teaches that rice is a species of corn, and if one eats it in the leavened state, one is found guilty. For it was taught: Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri forbids rice and millet because it is near leaven. A question was asked: Does near leaven mean that it becomes leavened quickly, or is it meant that it is near leaven, but never becomes leaven?

Rabbi Akiba is of the opinion that dough kneaded with milk, wine, oil or honey may not be used. Indeed, we were taught: Dough must not be kneaded on the Passover with wine, oil or honey; if it was kneaded, in accordance with Rabbi Gamaliel, it must be burned at once. But the sages say it may be eaten. Rabbi Akiba related: When I spent a week with Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua, I kneaded for them dough with wine, oil and

[p. 82]

honey, and they said nothing. Though one must not knead, one may smooth the surface with them. This is in accordance with the first Tanna. The sages say: With that milk which one may knead, one may smooth; and they all agree that one must not knead with warm water. There is no controversy here; one speaks of the first day of the Festival while the other speaks of the second day. Thus said Rabbi Joshua to his sons: On the first, knead not for me with milk, but from then on you may knead for me with milk. But it was taught: One must not knead dough with milk, and if one kneaded with milk, the whole loaf is forbidden. This is a precaution because one may get the habit of transgression. Rather, he said thus: Knead not for me with honey on the first day, and knead not for me with honey from then on. If you wish you may say that he spoke thus of milk.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER II

 

THESE are the things that must be removed on Passover: Babylonian curds, Medean beer, Edomite vinegar, Egyptian beer, dyer's brew, cook's starch, and the paste of scribes. Rabbi Eliezer says: Women's ornaments also. And this is the rule: Everything that was made of any grain must be removed for Passover. These are forbidden as a precaution but they do not incur death penalty.

(Mishna)

 

THREE things were said about Babylonian curds: It stupefies the mind, blinds the eye and weakens the body. It stupefies the mind through the acid; it blinds the eye through the salt, and it weakens the body through the mould.

[p. 83]

The Rabbis taught: Three things accelerate the bowels, bend the stature, and take away five-hundredths of, the eyesight. These are: Coarse bread, raw alcohol and raw cabbage. The Rabbis taught: Three things decrease the movement of the bowels and straighten the stature, and light up the eyes, and these are: Light bread, fatty meat, and old wine. Light bread from fine flour; fatty meat from a goat that was mated; old wine, very old. Everything that may be good for one organ may be harmful for another, and what is harmful for one organ may be good for another. But ginger, long peppers, light bread and fat meat are good for the whole body. "Medean beer" because barley is mixed into it. "Edomite vinegar" because grain is mixed with it. Rabbi Nahman ben Isaac said: At first, when wine for libation was brought from Judea, it never turned to vinegar, unless grain was mixed into it, and that was known as plain vinegar. But now the wine of the Edomites does not turn into vinegar unless grain is mixed into it, and it is called "Edomite vinegar." This. is to fulfill the scripture: (Ezekiel xxvi, 2) I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste. If one is full, the one is waste. If the other is waste, this one is full. Rabbi Nahman ben Isaac used to say: (Gen. xxv, 23) And the one people shall be stronger than the other people.

(Gemara)

 

IF THE fourteenth falls on the Sabbath, the leaven is removed before the Sabbath. Those are the words of Rabbi Meir. But the sages say: They are removed in their usual time. Rabbi Eliezer bar Zadok said: Heave-offering is removed before Sabbath, but ordinary food in its usual time.

(Mishna)

[p. 84]

IT WAS taught: Rabbi Eliezer bar Zadok said: Father once spent a Sabbath, on which the fourteenth fell, in Yabneh. When Zonin, one of Rabbi Gamaliel's officers, came in and announced: The time has come to remove the leaven, I went along with father and we removed the leaven.

(Gemara)

 

IF ONE is on his way to slaughter his Paschal-Offering, or to circumcise his son, or to partake of the betrothal feast at his father-in-law's house, and he remembered that he left the unleavened in his home, if he has time to go back and remove it, and then return to fulfill the precept, he should go back and remove the leaven; but if he has not time enough to fulfill both, he should annul the leaven in his heart. If he is on the way to rescue someone from an enemy troop, from a flood, from robbers, from a fire, or from a collapsing structure, he should annul it in his heart. But if he went out just for the enjoyment of the Sabbath he must return at once.

(Mishna)

 

I WILL point out a contradiction. If he is on the way to partake of the betrothal feast in his father-in-law's house, or for the enjoyment of the Sabbath, he must go back at once. Rabbi Yohanan said: There is no contradiction here: One speaks of the view of Rabbi Yehuda, the other of the view of Rabbi Yosi. For we were taught: The betrothal meal is a voluntary function. These are the words of Rabbi Yehuda; but Rabbi Yosi says: It is a precept. However, Rab Hisda says: The argument here refers only to the second feast, because as to the first feast, all agree that it is a religious precept. You

[p. 85]

may, even, say that both views are those of Rabbi Yehuda, for there is no contradiction here; one refers to the first feast while the other refers to the second. It was taught: Rabbi Yehuda said: I heard only of the betrothal feast, but not as regards the feast of the gifts. Rabbi Yosi said: I heard as regards the betrothal feast and the feast of the gifts.

It was taught: Rabbi Simon said: A scholar must not enjoy himself at a feast which is not of a religious character. What is a feast of this kind? Said Rabbi Yohanan, for instance: The betrothal of a daughter of an Israelite to the daughter of a Priest, or the daughter of a scholar to that of an ignoramus. For Rabbi Yohanan said: The marriage of the daughter of a priest and the daughter of an Israelite will not bring good results. How so? Rab Hisda answered: She will either become a widow, or a divorcee, or she will have no children. We learned in a Baraitha: Either he will bury her or she will bury him, or she will bring poverty upon him. But this is not so. For Rabbi Yohanan said: If one wants to become rich, he should join the seed of Aaron, for the Torah and the priesthood will enrich them. There is no controversy here. One refers to a scholar and the other to an ignoramus.

Rabbi Joshua was married to a priest's daughter. When he fell sick once, he said: Aaron is not pleased that I joined his seed and that he should have a son-in-law like me. Rabbi Idis ben Abin was married to a daughter of a priest, and he had two ordained sons: Rabbi Shesheth ben Rabbi Idis and Rabbi Joshua ben Idis. Rab Papa said: Had I not married a priest's daughter, I would not have become rich. Rabbi Kahana said: Had I not

[p. 86]

married the daughter of a priest, I would not be exiled, but he was answered: You were exiled to a place of learning. He answered: But I was not exiled the way other people were exiled.

Rabbi Isaac said: Whoever partakes of general feasts, will eventually be exiled, for it was said: (Amos vi, 4) And eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall. And it was said: (Amos vi, 7) Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive.

The Rabbis taught: A scholar that makes it a habit of eating in every place, will at the end destroy his home, bring widowhood upon his wife, and make his children orphans. He will forget his learning, will be given up to many quarrels. His words will be unheard. He will desecrate the Name of Heaven, the name of his teacher, and the name of his father, and will attach a bad name to himself, to his children and to his children's children, to the end of all generations. In what way? Abaya said: He will be called the son of the glutton. Rabbi said: He will be called a son of a "Tavern Dancer." Rab Papa said: He will be called the son of a "Plate Licker." Rabbi Shemaiah said: The son of a man who sleeps in his clothes.

The Rabbis taught: A man should sell all he possesses and marry the daughter of a scholar, for if he dies or goes into exile, he may be sure that his children will become scholars. But he should not marry the daughter of an ignoramus, for if he dies or goes into exile, his children will be ignorant.

The Rabbis taught: A man should sell all he possesses and marry the daughter of a scholar, or marry

[p. 87]

off his daughter to a scholar. This compares to the grafting of grapes with grapes--a good and acceptable thing. But he should not marry a daughter of an ignoramus. This compares to the grafting of grapes with thorny berries, which is a detestable and an unacceptable thing.

The Rabbis taught: A man should sell all he possesses, and he should marry a daughter of a scholar. If he can not find the daughter of a scholar, he should marry a daughter of a distinguished man of his generation; if he can not find the daughter of a distinguished man, he should marry the daughter of the head of a synagogue; if he can not find a daughter of the head of a synagogue, he should marry the daughter of a head of a charitable organization; if he can not find a daughter of a head of a charitable organization, he should marry the daughter of an elementary school teacher, but he should never marry the daughter of an ignoramus. For they are detestable, their wives are vermin, and of their daughters it was said: (Deuteronomy xxvii, 21) Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast.

Rabbi Akiba said: When I was an ignoramus, I used to say: Who would give a scholar into my hands, I would bite him like an ass. His disciples said to him: Rabbi, say like a dog. He answered: The first bites and breaks the bone, while the other bites, but does not break the bone.

Rabbi Meir used to say: If one marries off his daughter to an ignoramus, it is as if he bound her and laid her before a lion. A lion falls on his prey and devours it, and has no shame. So an ignoramus beats her and mates with her and has no shame.

[p. 88]

Rabbi Eliezer said: If they did not need us for trading with us, they would kill us. Rabbi Hiya taught: If one studies the Torah before an ignoramus, it is as if he mated with his wife in front of him. For it was said: (Deuteronomy xxxiii, 4) Moses commanded us a law the inheritance (MORASHAH) of the congregation of Jacob. Read not MORASHAH but ME'ORASHAH (betrothed) . The hatred of the ignorant towards the learned is greater than the hatred of the Gentiles toward the Jews, and their wives are even worse.

We learned: He that studied and foresook his studies, hates the scholar with more hate than anyone else.

Six things were said of the ignorant: One does not commit testimony to them, and one does not take their testimony; one does not reveal a secret to them; one does not appoint them as guardians for orphans; one does not appoint them as guardians of charity chests, and one does not join their company on a trip.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER III

 

WHERE the custom is to work on Passover eve until midday one may work until midday, but in a place where the custom is not to work, one must not work.

If a man went from a place where the custom is not to work to a place where the custom is to work, or from a place where the custom is to work to a place where the custom is not to work, he is bound by the stricter custom of the place whence he came, or to the stricter custom of the place to which he has come. But on no account must he act differently from the local custom, because it may lead to strife.

(Mishna)

[p. 89]

WHY only on Passover eve? This should refer even to Sabbath eve, or the eve of other festivals. For we learned: Whoever does work on Sabbath eve or on the eves of Festivals, from afternoon prayers onward, shall never see a sign of blessing. There it is said: Only "after" the afternoon prayer he is forbidden to do work, but not "near" the afternoon prayer. But here it is said: From midday on. Then, there he merely sees no sign of blessing, but he is not banned, but here he is placed under the ban.

The Rabbis taught: Some are industrious and profit by it, but others are industrious and incur a loss. One is lowly and profits by it, another is lowly and incurs a loss. One is industrious and profits when he works the whole week but not on Sabbath eve. But another is industrious and incurs a loss, when he works the whole week and on Sabbath eve. A lowly man who profits is he who does not work the whole week and does not work on Sabbath eve. A lowly man who incurs a loss is one who does not work the whole week but works on Sabbath eve.

The Rabbis taught: Whosoever looks for his wife's earning and working at the mill, shall never see a sign of blessing. "The earnings of his wife" means through peddling. "At the mill" Means through hiring her out. But a woman who makes things and sells them is praised in the Scripture, for it was written: (Proverbs xxxi, 24) She maketh fine linen and selleth it.

The Rabbis taught: Street peddlers and breeders of small cattle, and those who cut down good trees, and those who grab the best portion, will never see a sign

[p. 90]

of blessing. Why? For people will always gaze at them.

In four instances there is no sign of blessing to be found: The earnings of scribes, the earnings of interpreters, and the earnings of orphans, and moneys that come from overseas. Why the interpreter? The reason is that it is like earnings for Sabbath work. So are also the wages of orphans, for these cannot be legally renounced. So are the moneys that come from overseas, because a miracle cannot be performed every day. But why of the scribes? Rabbi Joshua ben Levi answered: The sages of the great assembly spent twenty-four days in fasting and prayer, so that the scribes should not grow rich. For if they become rich they will stop writing.

Those who write books, phylacteries and Mezuzoth, their traders, and their traders' traders, and all who deal in sacred articles, and this includes traders in blue wool for praying shawls, never see a sign of blessing, but if they engage in them for the sake of the Lord, they will see a sign of blessing.

(Gemara)

 

IN A place where the practice was to eat roast meat on Passover night, one should eat roast meat; where the custom is not to eat, one must not eat it.

In a place where the custom is to light the candles on the eve of the Day of Atonement, one may light them; wherever the custom is not to light them, one does not light them. But one lights the candles in the synagogue, in the house of study, in dark alleys and near a sick person.

Where it is the custom to work on the ninth of Ab,

[p. 91]

one may work. In a place where the custom is not to work, one must not work. And in all places scholars must not work. Rabbi Gamaliel says: A man should always make a scholar of himself. The sages said: In Judea, they worked on Passover eve till noon; but in Galilee, they did not work at all. As to work on the night of the fourteenth, the House of Shamai forbid it, but the House of Hillel permit it until dawn.

The men of Jericho inaugurated six things; for three they were not reproved; for three they were reproved; and these are the things for which they were not reproved: They grafted date palms all day long; they pattered the "Hear O ," and they reaped and stacked the produce before the Omer Offering. And for the following they were reproved: They were permitted the fruit of sanctified trees, they ate fallen fruit from under the trees on the Sabbath, and they gave tithes from green vegetables. For these the sages reproved them.

(Mishna)

 

KING Hezekiah did six things. With three, the sages agreed; and with three, they disagreed. He dragged the bones of his father on a bier made of ropes, and the sages approved of it. He demolished the copper serpent, and they approved of it. He hid away the book of cures and they approved of it. And of three things they did not approve. He took down the doors of the Temple and sent them to the King of Assyria, and they did not approve of it. He dammed the waters of the Upper Gihon, and they did not approve of it. He lengthened the month of Nisan, and they did not approve of it.

(Baraitah)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

[p. 92]

THE Passover offering is slaughtered in three divisions. For it was said: (Exodus xii, 6) And the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it. "Assembly", "Congregation", and "Israel". The first division entered; the Temple court was filled. Whereupon the gates of the court were closed. Then they sounded the horn, first sustained, then stacatto, and then sustained. The priests stood in rows, and in their hands they held silver basins and basins of gold. A row that was of silver was entirely of silver, and a row that was of gold was entirely of gold. They did not mix them. The basins had round bottoms, so that they could not be set down, so that the blood would not congeal. An Israelite slaughtered his offering, the priest took the blood and passed it to the next one, and this one to the next. He received the full one and returned the empty. The priest that was nearest the altar tossed it in one throw at the base of the altar.

When the first division came out, the second division entered, when the second came out, the third entered. As the procedure was with the first group, so it was with the second, and so with the third. They recited "Hallelujah". If they finished it they repeated it and if they finished it a second time, they recited it a third time, although they never completed it a third time. The third division never reached as far as: (Psalms cxvi, 1) I love the Lord because he hath heard. For the people were not many. As the procedure took place on week days, so it was also on the Sabbath. Except that the priest swilled the Temple court; this against the wishes of the Sages. Rabbi Yehuda said: They would fill a cup of the

[p. 93]

mixed blood and make one toss at the altar. But the Sages did not approve of it.

When the carcass was opened, the Israelite removed the portion to be sacrificed. He put it on a tray and handed it to the priest to be burned at the altar. The first division went out and sat on the Temple mount. The second sat on the rampart, and the third remained where they were. When it got dark, they went out and roasted their Paschal Offering.

(Mishna)

 

SAID Rabbi Isaac: The Paschal offering is not slaughtered unless there are three groups of thirty men. What is the reason? "Assembly", "Congregation" and "Israel" are mentioned. We are not sure whether it means all together or one after the other. Therefore, we need three groups of thirty each, so that we will have at the same time three groups, and three following each other. In that case, fifty are also sufficient. First thirty enter and perform the ritual, then ten enter, and ten follow them.

No one was ever crushed in the Temple court on Passover, except once in the time of Hillel. An old man was crushed, and this was known as the Passover of the Crushed.

King Agrippa once wanted to count the host section of Israel. So he said to the High Priest: Count the Paschal Offerings. Whereupon the priest took a kidney from each lamb. And there were six hundred thousand pairs of kidneys, double the number of those that went out of Egypt. And that excluded those who were away on a journey and those who were unclean. And at least ten

[p. 94]

people were registered for each sacrificed lamb. This was called the Passover of the Throngs.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER V

 

HOW is the Paschal lamb roasted? One brings a skewer of pomegranate wood, and inserts it through the mouth to the buttocks and puts the knees and the entrails inside of it. These are the words of Rabbi Yosi, the Galilean. Rabbi Akiba said: This is not roasting, it's boiling; the knees and the entrails are hung outside of it.

The Paschal offering must not be roasted on a metal spit, nor on a grill. Rabbi Zadok said: It happened once that Rabbi Gamaliel said to his slave Tabi: Go out and roast the Paschal lamb on a grill, but if it touched the earthen ware of the oven, he had to cut off that part.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER VII

 

THE word of the Lord that came unto Hosea, the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, Kings of Judea. (Hosea i, 1.)

Four prophets prophesied in one period and Hosea was the eldest of all of them. For it was said: (Hosea i, 2) The Lord spake first to Hosea. Indeed, did he speak to Hosea first? Were there not many other prophets from Moses to Hosea? Said Rabbi Yohanan: First of the four prophets that were prophesying in that period. These were: Hosea, Isaiah, Amos and Micah. Said the Holy One, blessed be He, to Hosea: Thy children have sinned. He should have replied: These are Thy children, the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Favor them with Thy mercy. Not only did he not say this, but he said to the Lord: Lord of the universe, the

[p. 95]

whole world is Thine. Exchange them for another Nation. The Lord, blessed be He, said to him: What shall I do to this old man? Shall I tell him: Go and take a harlot and she will bear thee children of harlotry, and then I shall tell him: Send them away from thy presence. If he will be able to send them away, then I, too, shall send Israel away; as it was said: (Hosea i, 2) And the Lord said to Hosea, go take unto thee a wife of whoredom and children of whoredom. And it was written (Ibid. 3): So he went and took Gomer, the daughter of Diblain. Gomer explained Rab: All completed their lust with her; Gomer means finished. The daughter of Diblain means the daughter of ill repute from the word diba, (talk). Samuel said: She was sweet to everyone like a fig. (Debelah.) Rabbi Yohanan said: That all pressed upon her like a pressed fig. Another interpretation of Gomer is that of Rabbi Yehuda. He said: In those days they wanted to make a finish (Gomer) of the wealth of Israel. Rabbi Yohanan said: Indeed, they robbed and made a finish. For it was said: (2 Kings xiii, 7) Syria had destroyed them, and had made them like the dust by threshing.

Conceived and bare him a son, and the Lord said unto him, Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Je-hu, and will cause to cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel. And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel. And she conceived again, and bare a daughter. And God said unto him, call her name Lo-ruhama (no mercy) for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I will utterly take them away.

[p. 96]

She conceived and bare a son. Then said God, call his name Lo-ami (not my people): for ye are not my people, and I will not be your God. (Hosea i, 3-9.)

After two sons and a daughter were born to him, the Lord, blessed be He, said to Hosea: Thou shouldst learn from Thy teacher, Moses. For when I spoke to him, he separated from his wife. Thou, too, shouldst separate from thine wife. Said he: Lord of the Universe, I have children by her, and I cannot send her away nor divorce her. Said the Holy One, blessed be He: Now thou, whose wife is a harlot and thy children are children of harlotry, and thou knowest not whether they are thine children or children of other men: thou art so. Now Israel, who are my children whom I have tried, the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, one of the three possessions that I treasure in this world--One possession is the Torah. For it is written: (Proverbs viii, 22) The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way. Heaven and earth is one possession, as it was written: (Gen. xiv, 19) Possessor of heaven and earth. Israel is one possession, for it is written: (Exodus xv, 16) People--which thou has purchased--And thou sayest: Exchange them for another nation. When Hosea saw that he had transgressed, he arose and begged for mercy for himself. Said the Lord to him: Instead of begging for mercy for thyself, thou shouldst ask mercy for Israel, against whom I decreed three decrees because of thee. Hosea arose and pleaded for mercy for Israel, and the Lord voided the decrees. Then He blessed them.

 

RABA said: The world is six thousand parsangs, and the density of the skies is one thousand parsangs. The

[p. 97]

first is a tradition: the second is logic. This is in accord with Rabbi ben Bar Hanah, who said in the name of Rabbi Yohanan: An average man travels ten parsangs in one day; from dawn to the rising of the sun five miles; from sunset to the appearance of stars also five miles. Thus we find that the thickness of the skies is one sixth of a day's journey.

Come and hear: Egypt is four hundred square parsangs. Now Egypt is one sixtieth of Ethiopia, and Ethiopia is one sixtieth of the world, and the world is one sixtieth of the Garden, and the Garden is one sixtieth of Eden, and Eden one sixtieth of Hell. Thus we find that the whole world is like the lid of a pot to Hell. Though this is not so.

Come and heap: Rabbi Nathan said: The whole continent is situated under one star. We know that a man looks at a star while he is walking east. He finds himself opposite the star, and when he walks in the direction of the four corners of the world, it is also opposite him. Therefore, the whole continent must be under one star. This, too, can be disproved.

The Rabbis taught: The circle is fixed, while the constellations revolve. While the Sages of the world maintain that the circle revolves while the constellations are fixed. Rabbi said: Their view is wrong. We never find the Waggon in the south and Scorpio in the north. Rabbi Aha ben Jacob remarked: Perhaps this is like the axis of a millstone, or a socket of a door.

The Sages of Israel say: The sun travels beneath the sky during the day, and above the sky during the night, while the Sages of the world maintain that the sun travels beneath the sky by day, and beneath the earth by

[p. 98]

night. It seems that their opinion is better than ours because during the day the wells are cool, but at night they are warm.

Rabbi Nathan said: During the summer the sun travels at the top of the sky; therefore the whole world is hot, but the wells are cool, but during the rainy season the sun travels at the lower ends of the sky; the whole world is cool, but the wells are warm.

The Rabbis taught: The sun travels over four courses. During Nisan, Eyar and Sivan, it travels over the mountains, so that it can melt the snows. During Tamuz, Ab and Elul it travels over the earth, so that it can ripen the fruits. During Thishri, Marheshvan, and Kislev, it travels over the waters, so that it can dry up the rivers. During Tabath, Shebath and Adar, it travels over the desert, so that it won't dry up the seeds.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER VIII

 

ON THE eve of Passover, from close to the afternoon offering, one must not eat a thing until nightfall. Even the poorest in Israel then must not eat without reclining. And he must be allotted not less than four glasses of wine, even if these have to come from the charity kitchens.

The first cup of wine is served and according to the House of Shamai one pronounces first the benediction over the day, and then the benediction over the wine, but the House of Hillel says first one pronounces the benediction over the wine, and then the benediction over the day.

Then lettuce is set before one, and one eats the lettuce

[p. 99]

dipped in vinegar or salt water, until he comes to the breaking of bread. The matzoh, lettuce and haroseth (a mixture of nuts, fruit, and wine) and two dishes are brought before him, though haroseth is not a religious precept. Rabbi Eliezer ben Zadok says: It is a religious precept; and in the days of the Temple they used to set before him the Paschal lamb.

Then the second glass of wine is poured out, and the son asks of his father; if the son has no understanding the father instructs him what to ask: Why is this night different from other nights? Every other night we eat either leavened or unleavened bread; tonight we eat only unleavened bread. Every other night we eat all kinds of green vegetables; tonight, only bitter greens. Every other night we eat meat either cooked, roasted or stewed; tonight, only roasted. Every other night we dip once; tonight we dip twice. And according to the understanding of the son, the father answers him. He begins with the disgrace and ends with the praise. He expounds: (Deuteronomy xxvi, 5) A Syrian ready to perish was my father, till he finishes the whole section.

Rabbi Gamaliel used to say: Whoever does not pronounce three things on Passover, does not discharge his obligations, and these are: Passover, Matzoh, and Bitter herbs. Passover--because the Lord passed over the houses of our fathers in Egypt. Matzoh--because our fathers were redeemed from Egypt. Bitter herbs--because the life of our fathers was made bitter in Egypt.

The third cup is poured out and one pronounces the benediction after the meal. Over the fourth cup one recites "Hallelujah", and then the benedictions over song. Between the cups if one wishes to drink, one may drink;

[p. 100]

but one does not drink between the third and the fourth cup.

One must not feast again after partaking of the Paschal lamb.

If some fell asleep and awoke, they may eat, but if all fell asleep they may not eat again. Rabbi Yosi says: If they dozed off they may eat; but if they fell asleep, they must not eat again.

(Mishna)

 

WHY just mention on the eve of Passover? The same applies to the eves of Sabbath and Festivals: We were taught: On the eves of Sabbath and Festivals one must not eat after the Afternoon Offering, so that he may enter the Sabbath with an appetite. These are the words of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosi says: He may keep on eating until nightfall. Rab Huna said: This exposition was necessitated because of Rabbi Yosi who taught: He may keep on eating until nightfall. This applies only to the eves of Sabbath and other Festivals, but as to the eve of Passover, it is distinctly understood that one must refrain, because of the obligation of eating unleavened bread. Rab Papa taught according to the view of Rab Yehuda: On the eves of Sabbath and Festivals one may not eat after the Afternoon Offering, while on the eve of Passover one is forbidden to eat close to the Afternoon Offering. Now, may one eat on the eves of Sabbath and Festivals close to the Afternoon Offering? Indeed we learned A man must not eat on the eves of Sabbath and Festivals from the ninth hour on, so that he may enter the Sabbath with an appetite.

The Rabbis taught: Everyone is obligated to drink the four cups of wine--men, women, and children. What

[p. 101]

satisfaction do children get from wine, asked Rabbi Yehuda? They are given the roasted ears of corn and nuts so that they won't fall asleep, and will ask the questions. Rabbi Akiba used to give children roasted ears of corn and nuts on the eve of Passover, so that they would not fall asleep and would ask the questions.

Rabbi Eliezer said: One eats the Matzoh hurriedly on the night of Passover so that the children will not fall asleep. It was told of Rabbi Akiba, that he never said in the house of study: It is time to stop, except on the eves of Passover and the Day of Atonement. On the eve of Passover because of the children, so they would not fall asleep; and on the eve of the Day of Atonement so that the children may be fed.

The Rabbis taught: It is a man's duty to make his children and his household happy on the Festival, for it was said: (Deuteronomy xvi, 14) And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow that are within thy gates.

With what does he make them happy? With wine. Rabbi Yehuda said: Men with what is right for men and women with what is proper for women. Men with what is proper for them--wine. And women with what? Rabbi Joseph said: In Babylonia they used to give brightly colored garments. In Palestine--linen garments beautifully starched and ironed.

Rabbi Yehuda ben Bathyra said: When the Temple was in existence, there was no rejoicing, but with meat, for it was said: (Deuteronomy xxvii, 7) And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shall eat there, and rejoice 

[p. 102]

before the Lord thy God. But now that the Temple is no more, there is no rejoicing except with wine. For it was said: (Psalms civ, 15) And wine that maketh glad the heart of man.

 

HE WHO suspends his bread basket in his house, brings about poverty. For people say: He who suspends his bread basket, brings his food in suspense. However, this refers only to bread. Meat and fish are not harmed. For that is the way to keep them. Bran in the house leads to poverty. Crumbs in the house cause poverty. On Sabbath nights and on Wednesdays the demons rest upon them.

The genius of plenty is called "Cleanliness". The genius of poverty is "Filth". Dirt in the spout of the pitcher causes poverty. If one drinks from a saucer, he is liable to a sty. If one eats cress without washing his hands, he will experience fear for thirty days. If one lets blood without washing his hands, he will experience fear for seven days. If one cuts his hair without washing his hands, he will experience fear for three days. If he cuts his nails without washing his hands he will be afraid one day, without knowing why he is afraid.

Evil spirits rest on food and drink that is put under the bed, even if it be covered with iron lids.

A man must not drink water from rivers and cisterns at night. If he drinks, his blood is upon his own head, because of the danger. What kind of danger? The danger of the Shabriri, the demons of blindness. What shall he do if he is thirsty? If there is someone with him he says: So-and-so, the son of the So-and-so, I am thirsty. But if there is no one, he says to himself: So-and-so,

[p. 103]

my mother told me "Beware of the Shabriri". Shabriri Briri, riri, yiri, ri. I want water in the white cup.

 

"EVEN from the charity kitchen." Obviously. This is necessary because of Rabbi Akiba who said: Make your Sabbath like a weekday, but depend not on another man. But in this instance he agrees because of the publicity of the miracle.

Rabbi Akiba bequeaths seven things to his son Rabbi Yehoshua. Do not dwell at the highest point of the town, because of your studies. Do not dwell in a town whose heads are scholars. Do not enter thine house suddenly, and surely not the house of thy neighbor. Do not leave shoes off thy feet. Arise early and eat; in the summer before it gets hot, and in the winter before it gets chilly. And make thy Sabbath like a weekday, but do not ask aid of other people. And be on good terms with a man on whom fortune smiles. Rabbi Papa said: This does not mean that one buys from him or sells to him, but that he enters into partnership with him.

 

SAID Rab to Rabbi Assi: Dwell not in a town where no horses neigh, and no dogs bark. And dwell not in a town whose head is a physician. And marry not two women; but if you have married two, marry a third.

Said Rab to Rabbi Kahana: Turn an ass around in the market place but turn not your words around. Skin an ass in the market place, and earn your living; do not say: I am a priest, I am a distinguished personage, and this is beneath my dignity. If you ascend to the roof, take provisions with you.

[p. 104]

Melons may be a hundred for a Zuz in the town, but have them under your cloak.

Said Rab to his son, Hiya: Drink not medicines. Leap not over streams. Do not have teeth extracted, and provoke not a serpent nor a Syrian woman.

The Rabbis said: These three must not be provoked: A little heathen, a little snake, and a little pupil. Because they have their kingdom behind their ear.

Three things, said Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi in the name of the men from Jerusalem: Frequent not the roofs, because of immoral scenes. If your daughter has attained puberty; free your slave and give her to him. And take heed of your wife and her first son-in-law. What is the reason? Rabbi Hisdu said: because of incest. Rabbi Kahana said: because of money. They are both right.

Of three, the Lord, blessed be He, proclaims every day: Of a bachelor who lives in a large city and does not sin; of a poor man who returns lost property to its owner; of a rich man who pays his tax without grumbling.

There are three who are beloved by the Holy One, blessed be He. He who never gets angry; he who never gets drunk, and he who does not insist on all his rights.

Three are hated by the Holy One, blessed be He: He who says one thing with his mouth, and another thing in his heart; he who possesses evidence in favor of his neighbor and does not testify for him; and he who saw an indecent act of his neighbor and is the only one to testify against him.

The Rabbis taught: The life of these three is no life: the compassionate, the hot-tempered and the fastidious.

[p. 105]

[paragraph continues] Said Rabbi Joseph: all these qualities are to be found in me.

Three hate one another: Dogs, chickens and partners. Some say: also prostitutes, and some say: The Babylonian scholars, too, hate one another.

Three love each other: The proselytes, the slaves, and the ravens. Four are impossible to put up with: A proud beggar, a rich man who lies, an old man who whores, and an Elder who lords it over the community. Some say: also one who divorces his wife and then remarries her.

(Gemara)

 

"ONE does not feast again after partaking of the Paschal Offering" (Apikoman).

(Mishna)

 

WHAT is meant by Apikoman? Rab says: One must not go from one Passover feast to another. Samuel says: It means, for example, eating mushrooms for me and young pigeons for Abba. Rabbi Hanina ben Shila and Rabbi Yohanan say: For example: Eating dates, roasted ears of corn, and nuts. It was taught according to Rabbi Yohanan: After the Paschal meal, one must not partake of dates, roasted ears of corn, or nuts.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER X

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106] [p. 107]

  

The Day of Atonement

  

(TRACTATE YOMA)

EVEN days before the Day of Atonement the High Priest was moved from his home into the Chamber of the officials. And a substitute was prepared, lest something happen to him and disqualify him. Rabbi Yehuda said: Another wife was also prepared for him, lest his wife die. For it was said: (Lev. xvi, 6) And make atonement for himself, and for his house. "His house"--this is his wife. Said they to him: If so, there is no end to the thing.

They appointed for him Elders from the Elders of the Court, who read before him of the order of the day, and they said to him: My Master, High Priest, read with thine own mouth, you might have forgotten, or you might have never learned. On the eve of the Day of Atonement, early in the morning they put him at the Eastern Gate, and they passed before him oxen, rams, and sheep, so that he might get acquainted with and used to the service.

[p. 108]

For the whole seven days they did not withhold from him any food or drink. But on the eve of the Day of Atonement, toward nightfall, they did not let him eat much, because too much food brings on sleep.

The Elder of the Court delivered him to the Elders of the priesthood and took him up to the House of Abtinas, and adjured and took leave from him and left. They said to him: My Master, High Priest, we are the delegates of the Court and thou art our delegate, and the delegate of the Court. We adjure you by Him who made His name dwell in this House, that thou change not aught of what we have told thee. He turns aside and weeps and they turn aside and weep. If he was a scholar he would preach, but if not, disciples of the Sages preached for him. If he was used to reading he would read, if not, they read for him. And what do they read for him? From Job, from Ezra and from Chronicles. Zecharaiah ben Kabutal said: Many times I have read for him from Daniel.

(Mishna)

 

"HE TURNS aside and weeps and they turn aside and weep." He turned aside and wept because he was suspected of being a Saduccee, and they turned aside and wept, for as Rabbi Joshua ben Levi said,--When someone suspects another who is guiltless, he will be punished bodily. What was all this about?--so that he would not arrange the incense outside and then bring it into the Holy of Holies, as the Saduccees were apt to do. The Rabbis taught: There was once a Saduccee who arranged the incense outside and then brought it in. As he was departing he was very joyous. His father met him and said: Though we are Saduccees, we are afraid

[p. 109]

of the Pharisees. Answered the son: My whole life I was aggrieved over this verse. (Lev. xvi, 2) For I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat. I thought, when shall I have the opportunity to fulfill this? Now that the opportunity has presented itself to me; should I not have fulfilled it? It was related, that only a few days later he was found dead, lying on a heap of refuse, and worms were coming out of his nose. Some say he was smitten as he was coming out. Rabbi Hiya said: A noise was heard in the Temple Court. An angel came and smote him in the face. When his brethren, the priests, came upon him, they found imprints of a calf's foot between his shoulders. For it was said: (Ezekiel i, 7) And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot.

The Rabbis taught: Three sounds are heard from one end of the world to the other, and these are: The sound of the revolutions of the sun; the sound of the noise of Rome, and the sound of the soul as it departs from the body. Some say also the sound of birth. Some say also of Ridya, the angel of rain. The Rabbis prayed for mercy on the soul as it leaves the body, and so the sound has stopped.

In accordance with Rabbi Shila it was stated: If one starts on a journey before the cock crows, his blood is upon his own head. Rabbi Josiah said: Not until he has crowed a second time; and some say, till he has crowed three times. What sort of a cock? They said, an average cock.

Rab Yehuda said in the name of Rab: When the Israelites gathered into the temple for the festivals they stood tightly pressed, but when they prostrated themselves

[p. 110]

they did it in comfort. They extended eleven ells beyond the Holy of Holies--What does he mean by this?--He means as follows: Though they extended eleven ells beyond the Holy of Holies, when they stood tightly pressed, when they prostrated themselves they did it and there was plenty of space. This was one of the ten miracles that were performed in the Temple. . . .

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

NO MAN enters the Temple Court to do service until he immerses himself, even if he be clean. The High Priest immersed himself five times and made ten sanctifications of his hands and his feet on that day.

Between the Priest and the public there was spread a linen sheet. He took off his clothes, went down and immersed himself. He then came up and dried himself. They brought him gold garments, and he put them on, and sanctified his hands and his feet. They brought him the Daily-Offering. He made the incision in the neck while another priest finished the slaughtering. He received the blood and sprinkled it. He went in to burn the morning incense and to arrange the candles, and then to offer the head and the limbs, the pancakes, and the wine.

The morning incense was offered between the sprinkling of the blood and the offering of the limbs; that of the evening between the offering of the limbs and the Drink-Offering. If the High Priest was old or frail they used to prepare for him hot water. They poured it into the cold so as to take away the chill.

They brought him into the Parvah Chamber, which

[p. 111]

belonged to the Holy ground. They spread a linen sheet between him and the public; he sanctified his hands and feet and took his garments off. Rabbi Meir says: He took off, sanctified his hands and feet, went down, immersed himself, came up and dried himself. They brought him white garments, he put them on and sanctified his hands and his feet.

In the morning he put on garments made of Pellusin linen worth twelve minahs. In the afternoon he wore clothes of India worth eight hundred zuz. This according to Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say: At dawn he put on garments worth eighteen minahs while in the afternoon his garments were worth twelve minahs. Altogether, thirty minahs. These were provided at the cost of the people, but if he wanted to spend more he could do so out of his own pocket.

He then went to his bullock. The bullock stood between the Hall and the Altar, its head was to the south and its face to the west. The Priest stood in the east and his face was to the west. He put his hands on the bullock and made his confession. And so he used to say: Oh, Lord, I have sinned; 1 have transgressed; I have committed iniquity before Thee. I and my house. O Lord, forgive the sins, the transgressions and the iniquities that I have sinned, transgressed and committed before Thee--I and my house, as it is written in the Laws of Moses, Thy servant: (Lev. xvi, 30) For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord. And they answered after him: Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom forever and ever.

He then came to the east, to the north of the Altar,

[p. 112]

the deputy priest at his right, and the chief of the house of the Fathers of the Temple at his left. There were the two he-goats. There was also an urn with two straws, for drawing lots. They were made of boxwood, but ben Gamla later made them of gold, for which his name is remembered with praise.

 

BEN Katin made twelve corks for the washbasin that originally had only two. He also made a device for the basin, so that the water would not be contaminated during the night. King Monabaz made all the handles of the vessels of the day of Atonement out of gold. His mother, Helena, made a golden candelabra over the entrance to the Temple. She also made a tablet of gold, on which was written the paragraph of Sotah. A miracle happened to the gates of Nicanor, and he was remembered in honor.

But these were remembered in dishonor: Those of the House of Garmu--they would not teach how to make the Shew-bread; those of the house of Abtinas--for they would not teach how to make the incense; Hygros ben Levi, who knew how to sing, but would not teach it to anyone; Ben Kamtzar, who would not teach the art of writing. Of the first they said: (Prov. x, 7) The memory of the just is blessed. Of the latter it was said: (Prov. x, 7) The name of the wicked shall rot.

(Gemara)

 

"IN THE morning he put on garments made of Pellusin linen worth eighteen minahs, etc." Does the author wish to teach us anything by this? He teaches us that the sum total must not be changed, but one may spend

[p. 113]

more on one and less on the other. But all are of the opinion that the morning is more important than the afternoon. Whence is this? Said Rabbi Huna ben Elai: We read (Lev. xvi, 4) Linen, linen, linen, linen. This means the best linen. An objection: (Ezek. xliv, 19) And they shall put on other garments: and they shall not sanctify the people with their garments. "Others"; probably better than the ones?--No; "other" means inferior ones.

 

WHEN the Public service is over, then a priest for whom a mother made a garment may perform his personal offering in it, but after the service he should donate it to the community. Is not this self-evident? One could think that perhaps the priest may not donate it to the community. Therefore he teaches us thus: They related about Rabbi Ishmael ben Phabi that his mother made him a garment worth a hundred minahs. He put it on and performed the personal offering and then donated it to the community. They said of Rabbi Eleazar ben Harsom that his mother made for him a garment worth two thousand minahs, but his brethren, the priests, would not let him put it on for he looked in it as if he were naked.--How could this be possible? Did not the master say that the threads were six-ply?--Abaya answered: As transparent as the wine in a glass.

The Rabbis taught: The poor, the rich, and the evil come before the Court of Heaven. They ask of the poor, Why did you not occupy yourself with the study of the law? If he says. I was poor and busy with my livelihood, they answered him: Were you poorer, then, than Hillel? It was related about Hillel, the elder, that every

[p. 114]

day he worked and earned a tropaik. Half of it he would give to the gate-keeper at the house of learning, and half was for his food and that of his household. One day he could not find his earnings, and the gate-keeper would not let him in. He hoisted himself up and sat on the window sill, so that he could hear the word of the living God from the lips of Shemaya and Abtalion. They say it was Sabbath eve in the fall of the year and snow came down upon him. When the dawn rose Shemaya said to Abtalion: Every day it is light in the house, while today it is dark. Is it a cloudy day? They looked up and saw the figure of a man in the window. They went up and found him covered with three cubits of snow. They brought him down, bathed him, rubbed him with oil and set him before the hearth. They said: He is worthy to have the Sabbath desecrated for his sake.

To a rich man they say: Why didn't you occupy yourself with the study of the Torah? If he says, I was rich and was busy with my possessions, they say to him: Were you richer than Rabbi Eleazar? They related of Rabbi Eleazar ben Harsom that his father left him a thousand villages on the mainland and a thousand ships on the oceans. But every day he would take a sack of flour on his shoulder and wander from town to town and from countryside to countryside in order to learn the Torah. One day his servants found him and drafted him for public work. He said to them: Please let me go, and let me study the law. Said they to him: By the life of Rabbi Eleazar ben Harsom, we shall not let you go. He never saw them again in his life, but all his life long he sat and studied the Torah, day and night.

To the wicked they say: Why didn't you occupy

[p. 115]

yourself with the study of the Law? If he said: I was handsome and because of my passion I had no time for it, They would say to him: Were you, then, more handsome than Joseph? They said of Joseph, the righteous, that every day the wife of Potiphar tried to lure him with words. The clothes that she put on for his sake in the morning, she would not wear in the evening. The clothes that she wore in the evening, she would not wear in the morning. She entreated him: "Listen to me", but he said: "No." She said to him: "I shall put you in prison." He said: (Psalms cxlvi, 7) The Lord looseth the prisoners.--"I shall bend thy stature."--He answered: (Psalms cxlvi, 8) The Lord raiseth them that are bowed down.--"I shall blind your eyes."--(Ibid.) The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind. She then gave him a thousand silver pieces, so that he should hearken to her: (Gen. xxxix, 10) to lie by her, or to be with her. But he would not submit to her, to lie with her in this world, and to be with her in the world to come. In this way Hillel condemns the poor, while Rabbi Eleazar ben Harson condemns the rich, and Joseph condemns the wicked.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER III

 

HE SHOOK the urn and brought up two lots. On one was written: "For the Lord," and on the other was written: "To Azazel." The deputy was to his right, and the Chief of the Fathers to his left. If the lot "For the Lord" was in his right hand, the deputy priest would say: My Master, High Priest, lift thy right hand; if the lot "For the Lord" was in his left hand, the Father of the House of the Temple would say: My Master, High

[p. 116]

[paragraph continues] Priest, lift thy left hand. He put them on the two he-goats, and said: "A Sin-offering for the Lord." Rabbi Ishmael said: He does not have to say: "A Sin-Offering", but only "For the Lord," and they answered after him: "Blessed be the Name of His glorious Kingdom for ever and ever."

He bound a bright red wool ribbon on the head of the scape-goat and turned it the way it would be sent out. And the goat that was to be slaughtered he turned towards the place where it would be slaughtered. Then he came again upon his bullocks, put his hands on them and made his confession.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

 

THE ladle and the pan were handed to him. He took two hands full of the incense and put it into the ladle, which was large if his hand was large, and it was small if his hand was small, for that was the measure. He took the pan in his right hand and the ladle in his left hand. He walked through the Temple till he came between the two curtains that separate the Holies from the Holy of Holies. There was the space of an ell between them. Rabbi Yosi says, there was only one curtain, for it was said: (Exodus xxvi, 33) And the veil shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy. The outer curtain was tied back from the south side, while the inner was tied back on the north side. He walked between them until he reached the north side; when he  the north he turned his face to the south, and  to the left of the curtain, till he reached the Ark. When he reached the Ark, he put the pan between the two poles. He heaped up the incense on the coals,

[p. 117]

and the whole house was filled with smoke. He went out the way he came in, and said a short prayer in the corridor. He did not prolong his prayer, so as not to terrify Israel.

When the Ark was taken away, there was a stone-left there from the days of the early Prophets and it was called the "foundation stone"; it was three finger-breadths high, and on this he put the pan.

He took the blood from the one who was stirring it. He entered the place where he was supposed to enter, and he stood in the place where he was supposed to stand, and sprinkled the blood once upwards and seven times downwards, he did not do it as though he were bent on sprinkling it upwards and downwards, but as though he were switching a whip, and he would count thus: One, one and one, one and two, one and three, one and four, one and five, one and six, and one and seven. Then he would go out and put it on the golden stand in the Temple. The he-goat was then brought to him. He slaughtered it, received the blood in a basin, and entered the place where he was supposed to enter. . . . Then he would come out and put it on the second golden stand. Rabbi Yehuda says: There was only one stand. He then took the blood of the bullock and then the blood of the he-goat and sprinkled it on the curtain outside, opposite the Ark, once upwards and seven times downwards, etc. He then poured the blood of the bullock into the blood of the he-goat and poured the full basin into the empty.

And he shall go out unto the Altar that is before the Lord (Lev. xvi, 18) This is the golden Altar. He began to sprinkle downwards. Where does he begin? From the north-east corner to the north-west, then south-west,

[p. 118]

then south-east, where he began the sin-offering on the outer Altar. Then he completed the sprinkling of the inner Altar. . . .

He then sprinkled over the clean part of the Altar seven times, and poured the rest of the blood at the western foundation of the outer Altar, and the blood remaining from the outer Altar he poured over the southern foundation. Both were mixed in the channel and then flowed out into the Kidron, and were sold to gardeners as fertilizer.

 

THE whole service of the Day of Atonement must be performed according to the order here related. If he perform one act before one that should precede it, it is void. If he sprinkle the blood of the he-goat before the blood of the bullock, he must go back and sprinkle the blood of the bullock before he sprinkles the blood of the he-goat. If the blood was poured out before he had finished the sprinkling in the inner Temple, he must get other blood and start anew: sprinkling first in the inner Temple, and so on, in the Temple, and on the golden Altar. For each of them is a separate atonement. Rabbi Eleazar and Rabbi Simon say: In the place where he stopped there he begins again.

(Mishna)

 

"AND said a short prayer." What did he pray for? Raba ben R. Ada and Rabin ben R. Ada both related in the name of Rab: "May it be Thy will, O Lord our God that the coming year be full of rains and hot"--Is then a hot year beneficial?--Rather he said: If it is hot, let there be plenty of rain. Rabbi Aha the son of Raba said the prayer according to Rabbi Yehuda: "May

[p. 119]

there not depart a ruler from the house of Judah. And may the People of Israel not require sustenance one of another. And hearken not to the prayers of travellers." Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa was travelling once, when a rain came down. He prayed: "Lord of the Universe, the whole world is comfortable, while I am suffering." The rain stopped at once. When he arrived home he said: "The whole world is suffering, while Hanina is comfortable." Immediately it began to rain. Rabbi Joseph said: Of what use is the prayer of the High Priest as against Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa?

The Rabbis said: There was once a High Priest who prolonged his prayer. His brethren the priests decided to go in and fetch him. They were about to enter when he came out. They said to him: Why have you prolonged your prayer? He answered: Is it so uncomfortable for you, that I prayed for you and for the Temple, that it may not be destroyed? Said they: You must not do so again, for we have learnt: "He did not prolong his prayer, so as not to terrify Israel."

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER V

 

THE High Priest then came to read. If he wanted, he read wearing the linen garments; but if he wished, he could wear his own white cloak. The beadle of the synagogue would then take the scroll of the Torah and hand it to the Chief of the synagogue, the Chief of the synagogue would hand it to the deputy priest, and the deputy priest would hand it to the High Priest. The High Priest received it standing and read: (Lev. 16) After the death . . . and (Lev. xxiii, 27) Also on the tenth day. . . . Then he rolled up the scroll of the Torah

[p. 120]

and put it in his bosom and spoke: More than I have read before you is written here, And on the tenth which is in the Book of Numbers, he recited by heart. And he pronounced upon it eight benedictions: For the Torah, for the Service, for Thanksgiving, for the forgiveness of sin, and for the Temple separately, and for the People of Israel separately, and for Jerusalem separately, and for the priests separately, and for all others he said a prayer.

Who so saw the High Priest read, saw not the bullock and the he-goat being burnt. And he who saw the bullock and the he-goat burn, saw not the High Priest when he read. Not because this was forbidden, but because the distance was too great, and both acts were performed at the same time.

If he read in the linen garments, he sanctified his hands and his feet, took off his clothes, went down, immersed himself, came up and dried himself. Then his golden garments were brought to him, he put them on, sanctified his hands and his feet. Then he went out and performed his Ram Offering, and the Ram Offering for the people, and the seven young lambs. Thus according to Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Akiba says: These were offered with the morning Daily-Offering. While the bullock for the Whole-Offering, and the he-goat that are offered outside, were offered with the Daily-Offering of the afternoon.

He then sanctified his hands and feet, went down, immersed himself, came up and dried himself. The white linen garments were brought to him, he put them on and again sanctified his hands and feet. He then went in to get the ladle and the pan. He sanctified his

[p. 121]

hands and his feet, took off his garments, went down, immersed himself, came up, dried himself. His golden garments were brought to him, he put them on, sanctified his hands and his feet, and went in to burn the afternoon incense and to fix the candles. Again he sanctified his hands and his feet, and took the garments off. His own clothes were then brought to him; he then dressed; and they accompanied him to his home. And he was wont to prepare a feast for his friends, because he had returned safely from the Temple.

The High Priest performs the service in eight vestments, while the ordinary priest performs in four;--in a robe, trousers, a mitre and a girdle. The High Priest adds a breast plate, an apron, a cloak, and a frontlet; in these were the Urim and Thummim of which inquiries were made. But they inquired only for the King, or for the Chief of the Court, or for one who was indispensable to the community.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER VII

 

ON THE Day of Atonement it is forbidden to eat, drink, wash, anoint, put on sandals, and to have marital relations. The King and the bride may wash their faces and a woman who is just after childbirth may put on her sandals. Thus according to Rabbi Eliezer, but the Sages forbid it.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: (Lev. vii, 23) Ye shall afflict your souls. One may think that he must sit in the sun or in a cold place so that he shall cause suffering to himself. Therefore we learned (Lev. xvi, 29) And ye shall do no manner of work. Just as no work means: sit and

[p. 122]

do nothing, so does affliction mean: sit and do nothing--Perhaps this means that if one is sitting in the sun, and is hot he must not change his place and sit down in the shade, or if he is sitting in the shade and is cold; he must not sit down in the sun?--Just as with work: Just as we make no distinction between work and work, so there is no distinction between affliction.

Who fed in the wilderness with Manna . . . that he might humble thee (Deut. viii, 16). Rabbi Ammi and Rabbi Assi are discoursing. One says: One that has a piece of bread in his basket cannot be likened to one who has no bread in his basket. The other said: One that eats and sees what he eats cannot be likened to one who eats and cannot see what he is eating. Said Rabbi Joseph: This refers to the blind who eat and are never fully satisfied. Said Abaya: If one possesses only one meal he should eat during the daytime. Rabbi Zera said: Which verse refers to this? (Eccl. vi, 9) Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire. Resh Lakish said: It is more pleasant to look at a woman than the act itself, for it was said: Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire.

When it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. (Prov. xxiii, 31.) Rabbi Ammi and Rabbi Assi are discoursing. One says: When a man fixes his eye on the cup, all incest laws are as smooth as a plain to him. The other says: A man who fixes his eye on the cup, the whole world appears to him like a plain.

Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop. (Prov. xii, 25.) Rabbi Ammi and Rabbi Assi. One says: One should take it off his mind. The other says: One should tell it to another.

[p. 123]

And dust shall be the serpent's meat. (Isaiah lxv, 25.) Rabbi Ammi and Rabbi Assi. One says: If the serpent would eat the finest delicacies of the world, he would taste in them the taste of earth. The other says: If he ate all the finest delicacies in the world, he would not be satisfied until he had eaten earth.

Said Rabbi Yosi: Come and see, how different are the methods of the Lord, blessed be He, from those of flesh and blood. If one of flesh and blood becomes angry at his neighbour, he annoys him to death, but the Holy One, blessed be He, is not like that. He cursed the serpent, but if the serpent goes up to the roof it finds its food there; if it comes down, its food is there, too. He cursed Canaan, but he eats what his master is eating, and he drinks whatever his master is drinking. He cursed the woman, but everyone is running after her. He cursed the earth, but everyone is being nourished from it.

(Gemara)

 

SMALL children are not permitted to fast on the Day of Atonement. But they should be initiated a year or two before they become of age, so that they may become used to fulfilling the precepts.

If a pregnant woman smelled food, she should be given to eat till she is satisfied. One that is sick should be given food at the advice of an expert person. But if there is no expert, one gives him food if he wishes it, until he says: "Enough".

If one is overcome because of hunger he may be given even unclean food to eat, till his eyes lighten up. If a mad dog has bitten one, he may not be given the lobe of its liver to eat, but Rabbi Matithiah ben Heresh permits

[p. 124]

it. And furthermore Rabbi Matithiah ben Heresh said: If one has a sore throat, they may drop medicine into his mouth, because this may be a matter of life and death. And in a matter of life and death, Sabbath is overridden.

(Mishna)

 

IF A pregnant woman smelt holy meat or the meat of a swine, one puts a spindle in the broth and places it on her mouth. If this satisfies her it is well; if not, one lets her eat the broth; if that satisfied her it is well; if not, one gives her some fat meat because there is nothing that may stand in the way of saving a life except idolatry, incest, or bloodshed. Whereof do we know of idolatry? For it was taught: Rabbi Eliezer said: It was written: (Deut. vi, 5) With all thy soul. Why was it said: (ibid) With all thy might? And if it was said: With all thy might, why was it said: With all thy soul? This was said for a person to whom his life is dearer than his gold, therefore it was said: With all thy soul. But in case there is a man to whom his gold is dearer to him than his life, it was said: With all thy might.

Whereof do we know of incest and bloodshed?--We learned: Rabbi said: (Deut. xxii, 26) For when a man riseth against his neighbor, and slayeth him, even so is this matter. Why this comparison between bloodshed and the rage of a betrothed maiden? This was meant to teach us, and indeed it does teach: Just as we are obligated to save the betrothed maiden even if we have to kill the man that is trying to rape her, so is it also in the case of a murderer. And just as we should rather be killed than murder another person, so also in the case of a betrothed maiden, one should rather allow himself

[p. 125]

to be killed than commit rape. But wherefrom do we deduce that this applies to murder?--This is simple. A man came once to Raba and said to him: The Chief of my village instructed me to kill some one. He said, if I do not kill the man, he will kill me. Raba answered: Let him kill you; but you must not commit murder. Do you believe that your blood is redder than his? The blood of that man may be redder than yours.

Once a pregnant woman smelt food. They inquired of Rabbi. He said: Go and whisper into her ear that this is the Day of Atonement. They did it, and she was quite satisfied. Whereupon Rabbi proclaimed this verse: (Jeremiah i, 5) Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee. Her offspring was Rabbi Yohanan.

Then there was the case of another pregnant woman who smelt food; when they inquired of Rabbi Hanina, he too said: Go and whisper into her ear that this is the Day of Atonement. They did it, but she was not satisfied. The Rabbi then pronounced the verse: (Psalms lviii, 3) The wicked are estranged from the womb. Her offspring was Shabbatai, the hoarder of provisions.

(Gemara)

 

IF SOMEONE is caught beneath a fallen structure, and there is doubt whether he is there or not, whether he is alive or dead, whether he is a Jew or a Gentile, they must clear away the debris. If the man is found alive they may continue the clearing, but if he is dead, they must leave him there.

(Mishna)

 

IF ONE is overcome with hunger he should be given honey and all sorts of sweets, for honey and sweet food

[p. 126]

enlighten the eyes; though there is no proof of this, there is an intimation of it, for it was said: (1 Samuel xiv, 29) See, I pray you how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey. Why is this no proof?--Because here there are no words of being overcome with hunger. Abaya said: This refers only to eating after the meal; but before the meal such things stimulate the appetite, for it is written: (1 Samuel xxxii, 12) And they found an Egyptian in the field and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water. And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins; and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him; for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.

Rab Nahman said in the name of Samuel: If one is overcome with hunger, he should be given a piece of fat tail-meat with honey. Rab Huna ben Rabbi Joshua said: Also pure flour with honey. Rab Papa said: Even barley flour with honey. Rabbi Yohanan said: I was once overcome by hunger. I ran to the eastern side of a fig tree, and thus have myself fulfilled the verse: (Eccl. vii, 12) Wisdom giveth life to them that have it. For Rab Joseph taught: If one wants to experience the real taste of a fig, he should turn to the eastern side, for it was said: (Deut. xxxiii, 14) And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun.

Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosi were walking once, when Rabbi Yehuda was suddenly overcome by hunger. He overpowered a shepherd and ate his bread. Rabbi Yosi said to him: You have robbed a shepherd. When they arrived at the town, Rabbi Yosi was seized by a ravenous hunger. They brought before him all kinds of

[p. 127]

foods and dishes. Then said Rabbi Yehuda to him: I robbed only one shepherd but you have robbed a whole city.

 

RABBI Meir, Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosi were once on a journey. Rabbi Meir was always particular about the names of people, but Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosi never bothered about them. They once came to some place and looked for lodgings, which they found. They asked the innkeeper what was his name and he said: Kidor. Then said Rabbi Meir, I gather that he is an evil man, for it was said: (Deut. xxxii, 20) For they are a very forward generation (Kidor). Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosi entrusted to him their money, but Rabbi Meir did not. He hid it in the grave of that man's father. The innkeeper dreamed that some one said to him: Go and take the purse that is lying under that man's head. The next morning he told them about his dream. Said they to him: A dream of a Sabbath night has no meaning. Thereupon Rabbi Meir waited the whole day and took away his purse. The next morning they said to the innkeeper: Give us our purses. He answered that he knew nothing about them. Then Rabbi Meir said to them: Why didn't you pay any attention to the name? They answered:--Why didn't you call our attention to it, Master? He replied: I considered that one ought to be suspicious, but I did not consider it a certainty. Thereupon they asked the innkeeper to go with them to a shop where they noticed lentils in his beard. Whereupon they went to his wife and gave her this as a sign that he had ordered them to return the purses, and they received their purses. When he returned home he killed his wife. This

[p. 128]

is whereby we learned about the washing of hands after the meal, the second water, which causes one to commit murder. From then on they too paid attention to names. Once they came to the house of a man named Balah, they did not enter the house, for they said: He must be an evil man, for it is written: (Ezek. xxiii, 43) Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries (Balah).

 

THE Rabbis taught: A life must be saved on the Sabbath, and the faster one goes about it the more praiseworthy he is; he does not need the permission of the Court for it. If one saw a child fall into the water, he should spread a net and pull it out; the faster the more praiseworthy, and he needs no permission of the Court to do it, even though he should catch fish while doing it. If a child fell into a pit one may tear out a joint and pull it up; the quicker he does it the better, and he needs no permission of the Court for it, even though by doing it he builds a stair. If one sees a door closing upon a child he may chop it down in order to get the child out quickly; and the faster he does the more praiseworthy he is, and he needs no permission of the Court for it, though by doing this he deliberately splits the wood. One extinguishes and isolates a fire during a conflagration on the Sabbath; and the faster one works the more praiseworthy he is, and he needs no permission of the Court for it, though while performing this he deliberately makes charcoal.--And all these cases are mentioned advisedly, for if it were spoken only of the case of a child falling into the water one would think it was only because the water may carry away the child, but it does not apply to a child that falls into a pit. For the child may remain in

[p. 129]

the pit till the man obtain permission from the court. Therefore this case is mentioned too. But since one might say that in this case it is permitted because the child may be terrified, therefore the case of the door is mentioned, because one could sit on the other side of the door and amuse the child by making a noise with nuts. But why is the instance of the fire and isolation mentioned?--This is to indicate that it also applies to a fire in the court of a neighbor.

(Gemara)

 

SIN-OFFERING and Guilt-Offering bring forgiveness for certain transgressions. Death and the Day of Atonement bring forgiveness, if there is repentance. Repentance brings forgiveness for sight transgressions. Positive and negative commandments and severe transgressions must wait till their forgiveness is brought about on the Day of Atonement. If one says: I will sin and repent, sin and repent, he is not given the opportunity to repent. If he says: I will sin and the Day of Atonement will bring about my forgiveness--he is not forgiven on the Day of Atonement. Sins that are committed against Heaven, the Day of Atonement brings their forgiveness, but sins committed as between one person and another, the Day of Atonement does not bring their forgiveness until the person sinned against grants his forgiveness. This was explained by Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah: (Lev. xvi, 30) That you may be clean from all your sins before the Lord.

Rabbi Akiba said: Fortunate are the people of Israel. Before whom do you become clean, and who cleanses you? Your Father, Who is in Heaven, for it was said: (Ezek. xxxvi, 25) Then I will sprinkle clean water upon 

[p. 130]

you and ye shall be clean. And it also says: (Jeremiah xvii, 13) O Lord, the hope of Israel. Just as the fountain of waters purifies the unclean, so will the Holy One, blessed be His name, cleanse the House of Israel.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER VIII

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

Days of Fasting

  

(TRACTATE TAANITH)

RABBI Yohanan said: There are three keys which the Holy One, blessed be He, has not entrusted into the hands of any messenger, but keeps in his own hand. These are: The key of rain, the key of birth, and the key of the resurrection of the dead. The key of rain, for it is written: (Deut. xxviii, 12) The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto the land in his season. The key of birth, for it is written: (Gen. xxx, 22) And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb. The key of the resurrection of the dead, for it is written: (Ezek. xxxvii, 13) And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves. In the West they said, also the key of sustenance, for it is written: (Psalms cxlv, 16) Thou openest thy hand, etc. Why did not Rabbi Yohanan include this?--Well, he can say that "Rains" includes sustenance also.

It was taught: The clouds and the winds are only secondary to the rain. Which ones are they? Ulla, and

[p. 132]

some say it was Rab Yehuda, said: Those that follow the rain, are these then beneficial? Is it not written: (Deut. xxviii, 24) The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust. To this Ulla, and some say it was Rabbi Yehuda, said: Does this mean the wind that comes after the rain?--There is no contradiction here. One speaks of a gentle rain, while the other means a downpour. This latter throws up dust, while the first does not.

Further Rabbi Yehuda said: The wind that comes after the rain is as good as the rain; clouds that come after the rain are as good as the rain; sunshine after the rain is doubly beneficial. What is excluded here? The glow of the evening and sunshine between the clouds.

Raba said: Snow is as beneficial to the mountain as five-fold rain to the earth, for it was said: (Job xxxvii, 6) For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth, likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength. And Raba also said: Snow for the mountains, hard rain for the trees, a gentle rain for fruit of the fields, and even a drizzle is good for the seeds under the hard sod.

Further Raba said: A young scholar is like a seed under the hard sod; if he begins to sprout, he will shoot forth. Raba also said: If a young scholar falls into a rage, it is only because the Torah has enraged him, for it was said: (Jeremiah xxiii, 29) Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord.

(Gemara)

 

IF ON the seventeenth of Marheshwan no rain has as yet fallen, then some individuals begin to fast three days. They eat and drink after sundown, they may

[p. 133]

work, wash themselves, anoint themselves, put on sandals, and they may have marital relations. If the first of Kislev came and no rain has fallen, the court then orders the public to fast three days; they may eat and drink after sundown. They may work, wash themselves, anoint themselves, put on sandals, and they may have marital relations.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: When the people of Israel find themselves in trouble, and one of them separates himself from the people, then the two angels of service, who accompany every person, come and lay their hands on his head and say: So-and-so, who has separated himself from the people, shall not see the consolation of the people. In another place we learned: When the people find themselves in trouble, let not a man say, I will go into my home and eat and drink, and all will be well with me. If he does so, it is of him that was written: (Isaiah xxii, 13) And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink for tomorrow we shall die. . . . A man should share in the sorrows and troubles of his community, for thus we found our master Moses, that he shared in common with the community its sorrows and troubles, for it was said: (Exodus xvii, 12) But Moses' hands were heavy, and they took a stone, and put it under him and he sat thereon. Did not Moses have a cushion or a bolster to sit upon? This is to teach us that Moses wished to say: "All of Israel find themselves in trouble, I too will suffer with them." And every person who shares in the sorrows of the community, lives to see also the consolation of the community. And perchance there

[p. 134]

will be one who will say: "Who is there that will testify against me?"--The stones of one's own house and the beams of his roof testify against him, for it was said: (Habakkuk ii, 11) For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it. In the school of Rabbi Shila it was said that the two angels of service who accompany each person will testify against him, for it was said: (Psalms xci, 11) For he shall give his angels charge over thee. Rabbi Hidka said: A man's own soul testifies against him, for it was said: (Micah vii, 5) Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.

(Gemara)

 

IF THESE days passed and rain had not fallen, the court orders the community to fast another three days. They may eat and drink while it is still day, but they are not permitted to work, to wash themselves, to anoint themselves, to put on sandals, nor to have marital relations; and the bathhouses must be kept closed. If these days passed and rain had not come, the court orders a further fast of seven days, making it thirteen all together. These surpass the first day, for on these days they blow the horn and they close the shops. On Mondays they are permitted to open the shops partially, but on the fifth day they are permitted to open the shops because of the honor of the Sabbath. If these days passed, and no rains had fallen, men refrain from their business affairs, they also refrain from building, and from planting; no betrothals or marriages are arranged, and people do not greet one another, as should be with men who have merited the scorn of the Lord. Certain individuals fast till the end of Nisan. If the rains came

[p. 135]

after Nisan has passed, it is a sign of a curse, for it was said: (1 Samuel xii, 17) Is it not wheat harvest today? etc. . . .

(Mishna)

 

IT IS logical that they would forbid the pleasures of bathing, anointing and intercourse; but why forbid work that is drudgery? Rabbi Hisda answered, in the name of Rabbi Jeremiah ben Abba: The Scriptures say: (Joel i, 14) Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders. This means that a fast day is as a solemn assembly; just as one is not permitted to work during a solemn assembly, so one must not work on a fast day. . . .

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

WHAT is the ritual of the days of fasting? They take out the Ark into the public place in the town, they put wood ashes on the Ark, on the head of the Prince and on the head of the Chief Justice of the Court, and everyone puts ashes on his own head. The eldest among them recites before them words of admonition: "My brethren, it was not said of the people of Nineveh that the Lord saw their sackcloth and their fasting, but (Jonah iii, 10) And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil ways and it is further said: (Joel ii, 13) Rend your heart and not your garments."

They stood in prayer, and they sent down to the Ark an old man who knew how to recite the prayers, a mar, who had children, and who was in want, so that his heart would be filled with his prayers. He would recite before them twenty-four benedictions, the eighteen of the daily ritual, and he would add six more.

[p. 136]

During the first three days of fasting the priests on duty would fast, but not throughout the day; but the priests of the House of Fathers did not fast at all. On the second three days, the priests on duty would fast throughout the whole day, while the priests of the House of Fathers would fast part of the day. On the last seven days they all fasted throughout the whole of the day. These are the words of Rabbi Joshua, but the Sages say: On the first three days none of the priests were fasting, on the second three days, the priests on watch duty fasted part of the day, but the priests of the House of the Fathers did not fast at all. On the last seven days, the priests of the watch fasted throughout the day while the priests of the House of the Fathers fasted, but only part of the day.

A public fast must not be ordered to begin on a Thursday, so as not to disrupt the prices in the market; but they order a three day fast to begin Monday to be followed by fasting again Thursday and then Monday.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER II

 

IF THERE is an epidemic of pestilence in a city, or houses collapse in it, that city fasts and causes the sounding of horns, and in all the surrounding places they fast, but do not sound the horn. Rabbi Akiba says: they sound the horn, but they do not fast. What is termed an epidemic? If in a city that can furnish five hundred infantry men three deaths occur there in three consecutive days, it may be defined as a city in which an epidemic rages. If it is less than this, then there is no epidemic.

On the following occasions the horn is sounded: A

[p. 137]

blight; mildew; locusts; crickets; wild beasts; and the danger of the sword of an enemy. They sound the horn because this is a spreading calamity.

It happened that the Sages went down from Jerusalem to their own towns and ordered a fast because a blight the size of an oven's mouth was seen in Ashkelon. And they also ordered a fast because wolves devoured two children on the other side of the Jordan. Rabbi Yosi said not because they devoured the children, but because they were seen.

For the following they sound the horn on the Sabbath: If a city is surrounded by an enemy, if it is flooded by a river, or if a ship is sinking in the harbor. Rabbi Yosi says: They sound the horn to summon help, but not as a call to God. Simon the Yemenite said: They also sound the horn in the case of pestilence, but the Sages did not agree with him.

They sound the horn for any affliction that befalls the public, excepting for an oversupply of rain.

It happened once that they said to Honi the circle-maker: "Pray for rain to fall." He replied, go and fetch the Passover-ovens from the open so they won't dissolve. He prayed but the rains did not come. What did he do? He made a circle and stood within, and said: Lord of the Universe, thy children have turned to me for I am as one of Thy household. I swear by Thy great name that I shall not move from my place till Thou hast compassion upon Thy children. Then rain began to fall in small drops. Then he said: Not for that sort of rain did I pray, but for rain to fill cisterns, pits and caves. Then rain began to fall in great violence. Whereupon

[p. 138]

he said: Not for this sort of rain did I pray, but for a rain of good will, of benevolence and bounty. Then rain began to fall in the usual way, and it rained till the people of Israel had to leave Jerusalem and go up to the Mount of the Temple. Then they came to Honi and said to him: As thou has prayed for the rain to come, go now and pray for the rain to leave us. He said to them: Go and see if the stone of the Strayers has been washed away. Simon ben Shetah sent word to him: "Hadst thou not been Honi, I would have declared a Ban against thee. But what shall I do to thee? Thou petitionest the Lord and He does as thou askest him, as if thou wert a son who petitions a father, and the father fulfills his will. It is of thy kind that it was written: (Proverbs xxiii, 25) Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice."

(Mishna)

 

WHAT is a plague of drought?--Rab Yehuda said in the name of Rab: A plague which causes drought. Rab Nahman said: When to a field that is situated on a stream we have to bring water from another stream, then we call it drought. But when it has to be brought from another land, then it is a famine. Rabbi Hanina said: If one seah of grain costs a sela, but it is not to be had, then it is called famine. Rabbi Yohanan said: This is spoken only of the time when money is cheap, but produce is dear, but when money is dear while produce is cheap, then they sound the horn forthwith. For Rabbi Yohanan said: I remember distinctly a time when four seah of grain cost only one sela, but people in Tiberias were swelling from hunger, because there was not an issar to be had.

[p. 139]

Rabbi Eleazar ben Perata said: From the day that the Temple was destroyed the rainfalls were reduced. In some years there was plenty of rainfall, while in other years there was little. In some years the rain came in season, while in other years it came out of season. The year in which the rains came in season is to be compared to a servant to whom the master gave the food allowance on the first day of the week. Then we find that the dough is baked well and can be eaten with satisfaction. The year in which rains came out of season is compared to a servant to whom the master gave the allowance on the eve of Sabbath; we then find that the dough is not baked well. The year in which rain is plentiful is compared to a servant to whom the master gave the whole yearly allowance at one time, so that in the mill the loss in the grinding of a kor is the same as the loss in grinding of a kab and in the kneading the same waste entails in the kneading of a kor as in kneading a kab. A year in which the fall of rain is small may be compared to the servant to whom the master gives the allowance in small doses, we then find in the mill the loss in grinding a kab the same as that in a kor, and likewise the waste in kneading a kab is the same as that in a kor. Another comparison: When the rainfall is plentiful it may be compared to a man who kneads clay. If he has plenty of water, he does not use up all of it and the clay is well kneaded, but if he has little water, he will use up all that he has and the clay will not be kneaded properly.

 

THE Rabbis taught: Once the Israelites came for the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and there was no water for drinking purposes. Nakdimon ben Gurion went to a

[p. 140]

heathen magnate and said to him: Lend me twelve reservoirs of water for which I will return to you twelve wells of water, or if I fail to give you the wells, I shall give you twelve silver pieces, and he set a time limit for the return of the payment. When the day of repayment came, and rain had not fallen, the magnate sent word to Nakdimon that morning: "Return to me the water or the money that I have with you," but Nakdimon replied: "I have time the whole day." At midday he again received word to return the water or the money. Nakdimon replied: "I still have time to-day." Toward sundown again he received the message: "Return to me the water or the money that I have with you." But Nakdimon replied: "I still have time till the day is over." Whereupon the magnate sneered at him. He said: "Now that rains had not fallen the whole year, you expect them to fall now?" and in a cheerful mood he went down to the baths. Nakdimon went to the temple very depressed. He covered himself with his shawl and prayed before the Lord. He said: "Lord of the Universe. It is revealed and known to Thee that I have not done this for my glory and not for the glory of my father's house, but I have done this for Thy glory so that the pilgrims shall have water for drinking." At once the skies were darkened with clouds, and rain fell so that the twelve wells were filled with water and there was even an overflow. When the magnate was coming out of the bath-house, Nakdimon was emerging from the Temple. When they met Nakdimon said to the magnate: "Pay me for the overflow that I have with you." This one answered him: "I know that the Holy One, blessed be He, disturbed the world only for your sake, but I still have a claim against you, for

[p. 141]

the sun had already set, therefore the rains fell when the matter was already out of your hands." Nakdimon then returned to the Temple, covered himself with his shawl and stood in prayer and said: "Lord of the Universe! Make known that thou hast beloved ones in Thy world." At once the clouds were dispersed and the sun shone again.

 

FOR the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water (1 Kings xiv, 15) . Rab Yehuda said in the name of Rab: This is a blessing. For Rabbi Samuel ben Nahmani said in the name of Rabbi Yohanan: Why is it written: (Proverbs xxvii, 6) Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. Better is the curse of Ahiyah the Shilonite with which he cursed the people of Israel, than the blessing with which the wicked Balaam blessed them. Ahiyah the Shilonite cursed them by, comparing them to a reed, he said to Israel: For the Lord shall smite, etc. As the reed grows by the water, its stem grows new shoots and its roots are many, and though all the wind of the universe blow upon it, they cannot move it from its place, for it bends with the wind; if the winds stop, it goes back to its upright position. But the wicked Balaam blessed them by comparing them to the cedar, as it was said: (Numbers xxiv, 6) As cedar trees beside the waters. Now, the cedar does not grow by the water and its stock does not bring forth new shoots and its roots are not many, and all the winds in the universe cannot move it from its place. However if a south wind should blow at it, it uproots and turns it over. And not this alone, but the reed was honored so that pens are made of it for

[p. 142]

the writing of the Law, the Prophets and Hagiographa.

 

THE Rabbis taught: A man should always be as tender as the reed, and he should not be as hard as the cedar. It happened once that Rabbi Eleazar ben Simon was coming from Migdal Gedor, from the home of his teacher. He was riding an ass, sauntering on the banks of a river. He was very happy and in an elated mood, for he had done well in his studies. He met a man who was very ugly. The man greeted him: "Peace be with you, Master", but he did not return the greeting to him, but said instead: How ugly you are. Are all your townspeople as ugly as you are? The man replied: I do not know, but go and tell my Maker and say to him: "How ugly is the vessel which thou hast made." Rabbi Eleazar realized at once that he had sinned, he dismounted from his ass and prostrated himself before the man and said to him: "I beseech you to forgive me." The man replied: I will not forgive you till you have gone to the Master that created me and say to him: How ugly is the vessel that thou hast made. Rabbi Eleazar walked behind him till they arrived at the city. Here the townspeople came out and said to him: Peace be with you, our teacher, our master. The man said to them: Whom are you addressing as our teacher, our master? They answered: The one that is walking behind you. Whereupon he said to them: If this is our teacher, then may there be no more like him in Israel. They asked him what was the reason, and he told them: "So-and-so he did to me." Just the same, they said to him, you must forgive him, because he is truly a great man and a great scholar. He then replied: For your sake I shall forgive

[p. 143]

him, with the understanding that he shall never do the like again.

 

SAID Raba to Rabbi Rafrom ben Papa: Will the master, kindly, tell us some of the good deeds that Rab Huna was in the habit of doing? He answered: I do not remember much of his childhood days, but well do I remember the deeds of his later life. On cloudy days he would be driven in a golden carriage and he would inspect the whole city. He would have every weak wall pulled down. If the owner was able to rebuild it, he would do so; otherwise Rab Huna would rebuild it for him at his own expense. On every Sabbath eve, he would send his servant into the market place, who would there buy off all the vegetables that remained in the hands of the gardeners and would have them thrown into the river.--Why? He could have given them away to the poor.--The poor would then come to rely upon him, and would not buy anything in the market.--Well, he could have given them to some animals.--He was of the opinion that food which was fit for humans should not be given to animals.--Then he should not have bought them up.--Then the gardeners would not bring enough into the market.

When he had some good medicine he would fill a jar with it and suspend it above his door, and would announce: Whoever may have need of it let him come and help himself. Some say he knew of a cure for sibetha and he suspended a jar full of water and announced: Whoever suffers from sibetha, let him come and wash his hands with it and save his life thereby. Whenever he was at meal, he would open his door and announce:

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] Whoever wishes let him come in and partake of my meal. Rabba said: I could do all these things myself, except the last one, because there are too many people in Mahuza.

 

Ilfa and Rabbi Yohanan studied the Law together, and they were both very poor. They once talked it over and decided that they would engage in business and fulfill the text: (Deut. xv, 4) Save when there shall be no poor among you. Then they sat down against a weak wall and ate their meal. Then two angels came, .and Rabbi Yohanan heard one of them say: Let's throw the wall over upon these two men and kill them, for they forsook the eternal for things earthly. However, one of the angels said: No, leave them alone, for one of them has a great future before him. Whereupon Yohanan said to Ilfa: Master, have you heard anything? but Ilfa answered: No. Rabbi Yohanan thought: Since I heard it and Ilfa did not, it must be I who am destined to do great things. He then said to Ilfa: I will go back and fulfill the verse: (Deut. xv, 11) For the poor shall never cease out of the land. Whereupon Rabbi Yohanan was installed as rector of the Academy, and the scholars said to Ilfa: Had you remained here to study, you would have been rector of the Academy.

 

IT IS related of Nahum of Gamzu that he was totally blind, that both of his arms and legs were amputated, and his whole body was covered with boils. He was lying in a dilapidated house, and the legs of his bed were standing in basins of water, so that the ants would not crawl up on him. His disciples came to take him out

[p. 145]

from the house, and then they intended to take out his things. Whereupon he said to them: take the things out first, and then take me out in my bed, for I assure you as long as I am in it the house will not collapse, but as soon as you take me out, the house is sure to collapse. They took the things out first and then they took him out in his bed. No sooner was he out than the house collapsed. His disciples said to him: Master, since you are so wholly righteous, why should all this have happened to you? He answered then: My children, I brought it all upon myself. Once, on a journey to the house of my father-in-law, I had with me three asses, one laden with food, one with liquids, and one with costly delectables. A poor man came upon me on the road and stopped me and said to me: Master, give me some food: I replied, Wait till I unload one of the asses. Before I had time to unload the ass, the man expired. I fell upon the man and exclaimed: My eyes that have had no pity upon you shall be blinded, my arms that had no pity upon your arms shall fall off, and my legs that had no pity upon your legs shall be cut off. I was not satisfied till I said: My whole body shall be covered with sores. His disciples cried: Woe to us that we see you in such a state. He replied, It would have been woe to me had you not seen me in such a state. Why was he called Nahum Gamzu? Because whatever happened to him he would say: this too (gam-zu) is for the best.

Once the Israelites wished to send gifts to Caesar. After a consultation they decided to send Nahum of Gamzu, because so many miracles had happened to him. They entrusted into his hand a chest full of precious stones and pearls: He then started on his journey; but

[p. 146]

when he stayed overnight in one of the inns, robbers came and pilfered his chest and filled it with earth. The next day when Nahum discovered the loss, he said: This too is for the best. When he arrived at the palace, the king wanted to kill him and all his men, for he said: The Jews are jesting with me. Nahum, however, said: This too is for the best. Then Elijah appeared, disguised as one of them, and said: Perhaps this is some of the earth of their father Abraham, which turns into swords when it is thrown against the enemy, for it is written: (Isaiah xli, 2) He gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. They tried it against the enemy of a province that could not be conquered, but with the earth it was conquered this time. Whereupon they brought Nahum into the palace, filled his chest full of precious stones and pearls, and sent him home full of honors. On his return trip, when he stopped again at the same inn he was asked: What did you bring to the Emperor, that you were sent back with such great honor? He answered: The things that I had taken with me from here. The people of the inn then razed their house to the ground, and took the earth to Caesar and said to him. The earth which that man brought you was ours. They tested it and found it was worthless. Whereupon they put the innkeeper and his men to death.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER III

 

FIVE things befell our ancestors on the seventeenth of Tamuz, and five on the ninth of Ab. On the seventeenth of Tamuz the Tablets were broken, and the Daily-Offering ceased, and the city was taken by assault, and

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] Apostomus burned the Torah, and he put an image into the Temple. On the ninth of Ab it was decreed that our ancestors be forbidden from entering the Land of Israel, and the Temple was destroyed for the first and also for the second time, and the City of Bethar was conquered, and the city was ploughed up. When the month of Ab comes in, happiness should disappear.

 

RABBI Simon ben Gamaliel said: There were no better days in Israel then the fifteenth of Ab and the Day of Atonement, for on them the daughters of Jerusalem would go out in white garments that were borrowed, so as not to shame those that had none of their own. All the garments had to be washed first. And the daughters of Jerusalem would go out and dance in the vineyards. And what would they say? Young man, lift up your eyes and see what you would choose for yourself. Do not fix your eyes on grace, but look to the family, for (Proverbs xxxi, 30) Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148] [p. 149]

  

WOMEN

  

NASHIM

[p. 150] [p. 151]

  

Childless Widows

  

(TRACTATE YEBAMOTH)

IF BRETHREN dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without, unto a stranger: her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife (Deuteronomy xxv, 5) .

And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his brother's wife go up to the gate unto the Elders, and say: My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel; he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother.

Then the Elders of his city call him, and speak unto him; and if he stand to it, and say: I like not to take her. Then shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the Elders and (perform the Halizah) loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say: So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brother's house (Deuteronomy xxv, 7-8-9). [These words from the Bible make clear the basis of this tractate.]

[p. 152]

A WOMAN whose husband went to a land beyond the sea, was advised that he had died. She remarried and subsequently her husband returned. She must leave one and the other, and must get a divorce from each one of them. She has no claim on either of them for her marriage settlement, her board, nor her clothes, and if she has taken anything from one and the other, she must return it to them. If a child was born to her by either of them, the child is a bastard. Neither of them will be defiled because of her, and neither one nor the other has any claim on whatever she finds, nor on her handiwork, nor can either of them set aside her vows. If she be the daughter of an Israelite, she is barred from marriage to a priest; if she be a daughter of a Levite, from eating of the tithe; and if a daughter of a priest, from eating of the Heave-offering. The heirs of neither of them may inherit her marriage settlement. If either of the husbands die, their brothers must perform the Halizah, but may not contract levirate marriage.

Rabbi Yosi says: Her dowry is a charge on her first husband's estate.

Rabbi Eleazar says: Her first husband has a right to whatever she may find, or to her handiwork, and may void her vows.

Rabbi Simon says: If the brother of her first husband cohabited with her, or performed the Halizah, her co-wife is exempt from levirate marriage, and a child begotten by her first husband is not a bastard. But if she were married again without the consent of court, she may return to her first husband. If she married

[p. 153]

again with the consent of the court, she must be divorced and she must make the sin offering. It is the authority of the court that makes her exempt from the sin offering. If the court permitted her to remarry but she went out and disgraced herself, she must bring a sin offering; because the court's permission was only to marry.

(Mishna)

 

"AND must get a divorce from each one of them." It is quite obvious that she must get a divorce from the first husband. But why from the second, which is nothing else but a case of adultery?

Rabbi Huna answers: This is a precaution. It may be said that the first husband had divorced her, and the second had lawfully married her, and a married woman may leave her husband without a writ of divorce. If so, how is the latter clause to be explained, which says: If she was told: Thine spouse is dead, and she was betrothed, and her husband returned, she may return to him. One may say this time too that her first husband divorced her, and that the second married her, and that consequently a married woman may leave her husband without a writ of divorce. In reality she does not need a divorce. If so it may appear that the first husband had married his divorced wife after she was betrothed. This is in accordance with Rabbi Yosi ben Kipper who maintained that the remarrying of one's divorced wife after a marriage is forbidden, but after a betrothal is permissible.

"She has no claim on her marriage settlement." Why did the Rabbis provide a marriage settlement? The

[p. 154]

[paragraph continues] Rabbis provided a marriage settlement so that it wouldn't be easy for a man to divorce his wife. But in this case let it be easy for him to divorce his wife.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER X

 

THE ceremony of the Halizah must be performed before three judges, even if they be laymen. If the widow performed it with a shoe, it is valid; if with a sock, it is not valid; if with a heeled sandal, it is valid; but if it had no heel, it is not valid; if from below the knee, it is valid; if from above the knee, it is not valid. If she performed the Halizah with a shoe that did not belong to the man, or with a sabot, or with a left shoe that was worn on the right foot, it is valid. With a shoe that was too big, but he could walk in it, or with one that was too small but covered most of his foot, it is valid.

(Mishna)

 

SAID Raba, in the name of Rabbi Cabana, in the name of Rab: If the. prophet Elijah should appear and say that Halizah may be performed with a shoe, he would be followed, but if he would say Halizah must not be performed with a sandal, he would not be followed, because it has long since been established by the people that Halizah is being performed with a sandal.

"Above the knee." Rabbi Cahana objects (Deuteronomy xxviii, 57) And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet. Abaya answered: When a woman kneels to give birth she presses her heels against her thighs and thus gives birth. Come and hear: (2 Samuel xix, 24) And had neither dressed his feet nor trimmed his beard. This is a euphemistic phrase. Come

[p. 155]

and hear: (1 Samuel xxiv, 3) And Saul went in to cover his feet. This, too, is a euphemistic phrase. Come and hear: (Judges iii, 24) Surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber. This is a euphemistic phrase: (Judges v, 27) At her feet, etc. This, too, is a euphemistic phrase.

Rabbi Yohanan said: Seven indulgencies in sexual intercourse had that wicked man, Sisera, the day he fled from Barak and Deborah. For it was said: (Judges v, 27) At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead. But surely Jael had pleasure from that sin.

Rabbi Yohanan answered in the name of Rabbi Simon ben Yohai: Every good deed committed by an evil person is evil unto the righteous. As it is said: (Genesis xxxi, 24) Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad. Obviously, when it is spoken of evil; but why of good deeds? Because the good deeds of the wicked are evil to the righteous. By all means, because he may mention to him the name of his idol. But what evil could it cause here? He may inoculate her with sensual lust. As Rabbi Yohanan said: When the serpent copulated with Eve, he inoculated her with lust. For the Israelites who stood at Mount Sinai, lust terminated, but the lust of those who did not stand at Mount Sinai was not terminated.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER XII

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156] [p. 157]

  

The Marriage Contract

  

(TRACTATE KETHUBOTH)

A VIRGIN is to be married on the fourth day of the week, and a widow on the fifth day. Because the court is in session in the towns twice a week, on the second and on the fifth days of the week. So if a man questions the virginity of his newly wedded wife, he may bring suit in court the next morning.

The marriage settlement of a virgin is two hundred zuz and of a widow one hundred zuz. A virgin who becomes a widow after betrothal, or a divorcee or an Haluzah, her marriage settlement is two hundred zuz, and if her virginity is questioned, may be taken to court.

An adult who had intercourse with a minor, or a minor who had intercourse with an adult, or one whose hymen was broken by accident, her settlement is two hundred zuz, according to Rabbi Meir. The sages say: If it was due to an accident, her settlement is one hundred. A virgin who becomes a widow after betrothal, a divorcee or an Haluzah, her marriage settlement is one hundred zuz, and the question of her virginity cannot be taken to court.

(Mishna)

[p. 158]

SOMEONE came to Rabban Gamaliel and complained: I have found an "open door". Said the Rabbi: You might have moved it aside. I will give you an illustration: A man walked in the darkness of the night; he came upon a door. If he happened to move it, he found it open; if he did not happen to move it, it was locked.

Someone came to Rabban Gamaliel ben Rabbi and said: Master, I have had intercourse with my newly wedded wife and found no blood. The wife said: Master, I was a virgin. The Rabbi said: Bring me the sheet. When the sheet was brought he took it and soaked it in water and washed it, whereupon he found many drops of blood in the water. Then the Rabbi said to the husband: Go home and be happy with thine lot.

Someone came to Rabban Gamaliel ben Rabbi and said: Master, I have had intercourse with my newly wedded wife, and found no blood. The wife said: Master, I am still a virgin. Said the Rabbi: Bring before me two bondwomen, one a virgin and one that has been with man. They brought him two bondwomen; one a virgin, and one that had been with a man. He made them sit on a keg of wine. The one who had been with a man, the aroma of wine came through her, but the virgin,--the aroma of the wine did not go through her. He then made the wife sit on a keg of wine, and the smell did not go through her. The Rabbi then said to the husband: Go home and be happy with thine lot.

(Gemara)

 

IF THE woman lost her marriage contract, or hid it, or it was burnt, and if she produce witnesses that any one of the following took place: If they danced before

[p. 159]

her, played before her, if the cup of glad tidings was passed before her, or the sheet of virginity was exhibited: if she can produce proof of any one of these things, her marriage dowry shall be two hundred zuz.

(Baraitha)

 

THE Rabbis taught: How does one dance before a bride? The House of Shamai says: According to what the bride is like. The House of Hillel argues: You say beautiful, charming bride. The House of Shamai argued with the House of Hillel: Suppose she is deformed or blind, how can one say "beautiful and charming bride"? The Torah has taught us: (Exodus xxiii, 7) Keep thee far from a false matter. The House of Hillel answered to the House of Shamai: As you wish. If one has brought back a bad bargain from the market, should one praise his purchase to his face or deride it?--No doubt one should praise it. Therefore the sages said: A person should always be pleasant to other people. Rabbi Dimi said: In the West they sing thus before a bride; No eye-paint, no rouge and no waving of hair, and still "charming and most beautiful".

When Rabbi Zera was ordained they sang before him: No eye-paint, no rouge and no waving of hair and still "charming and most beautiful".

When Rabbi Ammi and Rabbi Assi were ordained they sang before them as follows: Ordain unto us such as these, such as these, but do not ordain unto us scoundrels and idiots.

When Rabbi Abbahu came from the academy to the palace of the king, maidens of the court came forth before him and sang; Prince of his people, leader of his nation, brilliant light, blessed be thy coming in peace.

[p. 160]

It is said of Rabbi Yehuda bar Elai that he used to take a twig and dance before the bride and say: Beautiful and charming bride. Rabbi Samuel ben Rabbi Isaac would also dance with twigs. Rabbi Zera said: That Graybeard is putting us to shame. When Rabbi Samuel passed away a pillar of fire came between him and the whole world. And it has been known that such a pillar of fire appears only once and at the most twice in a generation. Rabbi Zera said, it was on account of the twig. Others said it was because of his fine character, and some said because of his folly.

Rabbi Aha took the bride on his shoulder and danced. The Rabbis asked him: May we do the same? He answered: If the bride be on your shoulder like a beam, you may; otherwise not.

Rabbi Samuel ben Nahmani said in the name of Rabbi Jonathan: One may gaze upon the face of the bride all the seven days of the wedding festival, so as to make her husband more desirous of her. But the law is not in accord with this.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

THE seducer pays three kinds of compensations. The violator, four kinds. The seducer must pay for indignity and blemish, and the legal fine. The violator must add to it compensation for the pain that he caused. What is the difference between a violator and a seducer? The violator causes pain; the seducer does not cause pain. The violator pays the penalty at once; the seducer only if he declines the girl. The violator must drink out of his pot; but the seducer, if he wishes, may decline the girl.

[p. 161]

How does the violator drink out of his pot? He is compelled to marry her even if she be deformed, blind; even if she be afflicted with boils. But if she was found to be immoral, and therefore not fit to marry an Israelite, he does not have to live with her. For it is said: (Deuteronomy xxii, 29) and she shall be his wife. This means a wife that is suitable for him.

What is the compensation for indignity? It is all in accordance with the case of the offender and the offended. And in case of blemish? The girl is considered as if she were a bondwoman that is put up for sale. How much was she worth before, and how much is she worth now?

The fine is the same for all, and whenever there is a sum fixed by the law, it remains the same for all.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER III

 

THE father exercises authority over his daughter as regards her betrothal, through money, a contract, or intercourse. To him belong all that she may find and all her handiwork, and he may void her vows. He also receives her writ of divorce. But he may not use her property during her lifetime. If she gets married, her husband supersedes the father, because he has the right to her property during her lifetime; but the husband is responsible for her maintenance, her ransom, if she be captured, and for her burial. Rabbi Yehuda said: Even the poorest in Israel will provide not less than two flute players and one wailing woman.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

[p. 162]

THE following are the chores which a woman must perform for her husband: Grind flour, bake, launder, cook, nurse her son, make ready his bed, and work at the wool. If she brought him one bondwoman she need not grind the flour, nor bake, nor launder. If she brought two, she need not cook, nor nurse her son. If she brought three, she need not make his bed, nor work at the wool. If she brought four she may sit in a chair all day long. Rabbi Eleazar said: Even if she brought him a hundred bondswomen, he should compel her to work at the wool, for idleness leads but to unchastity. Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel said: If a man vowed not to permit his wife to work, he should be made to divorce her, and give her her marriage settlement, for idleness leads to ennui.

If a man vowed not to sleep with his wife, the House of Shamai says: She may agree to two weeks. The House of Hillel says: One week only. Students may go away to the colleges without their wives' permission for thirty days; laborers may stay away from their wives only one week. The Torah prescribed the marital duties as follows: Men who are unoccupied: every day; laborers, twice a week; ass-drivers, once a week; camel-drivers once in thirty days; sailors, once in three months. These are the words of Rabbi Eliezer.

If a woman does not consent to her husband, he may reduce her marriage allotment by seven denars each week. Rabbi Yehuda says: seven tropaiks. How long may he keep on reducing? Until her whole allotment is used up. Rabbi Yosi says: He may keep it up forever. If, perchance, an inheritance falls to her lot, he may put a claim upon it. If a man does not consent to

[p. 163]

his wife, her allotment is to be increased by seven denars each week. Rabbi Yehuda says: three tropaiks.

 

IF A man maintains his wife through a third person, he must allot to her not less than two measures of wheat or four measures of barley. He must also give her half a measure of beans and half a loog of oil, a measure of dried figs or a minah of pressed figs. If he cannot provide these he may substitute other fruits in their place. He must also provide her with a bed, and a mattress. If he has no mattress, a mat. He must also give her a cap for her head and a girdle for her loins and shoes at each of the festivals and clothing to the amount of fifty zuz, each year. If he cannot give her new clothes for the summer and old clothes for the rainy season, he must provide clothes to the value of fifty zuz in the rainy season, and she may clothe herself with worn garments in the summer. The used garments remain her property. He must also give her a silver coin for her needs. And she is to dine with him each Sabbath eve. If he does not give her the silver coin for her needs, her handiwork belongs to her. How much must she produce for her husband? In Judea she must weave for him the weight of five selahs; in Galillee ten selahs, but if she is nursing a child, they must reduce the amount of her work and increase her food allowance. This is spoken of the poor, but the rich must provide according to their standing.

(Mishna)

 

GRINDING of flour. How come you to say a thing like that? You can interpret it: supervise the grinding of flour, but if you will, you can say: grinding with a

[p. 164]

hand mill. The Mishna does not teach in accordance with the views of Rabbi Hiya, for Rabbi Hiya taught: A woman is only for beauty, or only for the sake of the children she will bear. Further Rabbi Hiya taught: A woman is only good for the finery she wears. And Rabbi Hiya also stated: Whosoever wishes his woman to look nice should dress her in linen garments. Whosoever wishes his daughters to have a clear complexion should feed her young chickens and give her milk to drink before she is about to attain her maturity.

 

OUR Rabbis taught: A child should be nursed twenty-four months. From then on, it is as if it sucked a detestable thing. These are the words of Rabbi Eliezer.

Rabbi Joshua said: The child may nurse even for four or five years, but if it stopped at twenty-four months and then started again, then it should be regarded as if it were sucking a detestable thing.

The Rabbis taught: If a woman agrees to nurse someone's child, she must not nurse her own child or a friend's child at the same time. If she agreed to a small fee, she still must eat plenty, and while she nurses, she must not eat anything that will be injurious to the milk.

 

A WOMAN that has her marital relations in a mill will have epileptic children; one that has intercourse on the ground will have children with long necks. A woman that steps on the blood of an ass will have scabby children. If she eats mustard, she will have hot tempered children. One who eats cress, will have bleary-eyed children. If she eats fish-soup, she will have children with

[p. 165]

blinking eyes. If she eats earth, she will have ugly children. One who partakes of intoxicating drinks will have dark children. The woman who eats meat and drinks wine will have strong children. If she eats eggs, her children will have big eyes. If she eats fish, her children will be very graceful. One who eats parsley will have beautiful children. One who eats coriander will have stout children. If she eats citrons, her children will have a pleasing scent. The mother of King Shapor's daughter ate citrons during her pregnancy, and the daughter used to be brought before her father as his finest perfume.

 

STUDENTS may go away to college, etc. For how long a period may they go with the permission of their wives?--For as long as they wish. What should be the usual time? Rab said: One month at college and one month at home. As it was said: (1 Chronicles xxvii, 1) In any matter of the courses which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year.

Rabbi Yohanan said: One month at college and two months at home. As it was said: (1 Kings v, 14) A month they were at Lebanon and two at home.

For laborers, twice a week. Were we not taught, laborers once a week; how is this? Rabbi Hanina answered: There is no contradiction here. One speaks of those who work in the town where they live, while the other speaks of those who work away from their home town.

How often should the scholars perform their duties

[p. 166]

to their wives? Says Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Samuel: Every Sabbath eve.

Yehuda the son of Rabbi Hiya and son-in-law of Rabbi Yanai spent all his time at the academy but every Sabbath eve he would go home. When he arrived one could see a pillar of light before him. Once he was so engrossed in his studies that he forgot to go home. When Rabbi Yanai missed the sign he said: Cover his bed, because if Yehuda were alive, he surely would not fail to do his duty towards his wife. This was (Ecclesiastes x, 5) as an error which proceedeth from the ruler, for Yehuda's soul went to its eternal rest.

Rabbi Hanania ben Hakinai went to the academy and remained there twelve years. When he returned, the streets in the town were changed and he could not find his home. He sat himself down beside the river. There he heard someone call: Daughter of Hakinai, daughter of Rabbi Hakinai, fill thy pitcher with water and we will go home. This maiden must belong to us, he thought, and he followed her. When they came to the house, his wife was sitting at the door and sifting flour. When she raised her eyes and saw him, her heart stopped beating and she passed away. Then the husband prayed to the Lord: This poor soul, is that her reward? Have mercy on her. And she came to life again.

Rabbi Akiba was a shepherd in the service of the wealthy Ben Kalba Sabua, and Sabua's daughter saw how noble and modest he was. She fell in love with him. One day she addressed him. If I should get betrothed to you, would you go away and devote your time to study and become a scholar? Most surely, replied Akiba. They were then secretly betrothed and she sent him forth to

[p. 167]

the academy. When her father found out about it, he drove her out of his house and vowed that she would not receive any inheritance from him.

Rabbi Akiba spent twelve years at the academy; when he returned twelve thousand disciples followed him. While he was home he heard an old man say to his wife: How much longer do you choose to remain in living widowhood? However, she retorted: If he would listen to me, he would spend another twelve years in the academy.

Whereupon Rabbi Akiba said: It is, then, with her consent that I may go, and immediately departed to the academy for another twelve years. When he returned this time there were twenty-four thousand disciples who followed him.

When his wife was advised that he was on the way, she went forth to greet him. Her neighbor begged her to borrow some clothes and finery and attire herself in them. But she answered: (Proverbs xii, 10) A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast. When she approached him, she fell upon her face and kissed his feet. His servants wanted to drive her away, but Rabbi Akiba said: Leave her alone. All that is mine and all that is yours belongs to her.

When her father heard that a great man had come to town, he said: I shall go to him, he may release me from my vow. When he came, Rabbi Akiba asked him: Would you have made your vow if you knew that your daughter's husband was a great scholar? Sabua replied: If he but knew one chapter of the Torah or one article of law, I should never have made my vow. Whereupon Rabbi Akiba said: I am the man. Sabua fell upon

[p. 168]

his face and kissed his feet and then bestowed upon him half of his wealth.

The daughter of Rabbi Akiba did the same thing with Ben Azai. This is just as the people say: One sheep follows another, like the mother so is the daughter.

 

WHEN Rabbi Yehuda, the Prince, was about to die, he asked for his sons. When they appeared before him, he said to them: Be careful to respect your mother. The candles should remain lighted in their place. The table should always be set in its place, and the bed shall always be made up in its place. Joseph of Haifa and Simon of Ephrath who attended to me while I was alive, shall attend to me when I am gone.

Then he asked for the Sages of Israel. When the Sages of Israel arrived, he said to them: Do not mourn over me in the small towns. Reassemble the classes in the academy after thirty days. Simon, my son, is wise. My son, Gamaliel, is Prince, and Hanina ben Hama shall preside over the academy.

Then he asked for his son, Simon. When Simon came in, he instructed him in the orders of wisdom. Then he asked for his elder son, Gamaliel. When Rabbi Gamaliel came, he instructed him in the traditions and conduct of his office. He said to him: My son, conduct your principality with honor and cast bile among the disciples.

On the day that Rabbi Yehuda died, a voice appeared and announced: All those who were present at the death of the Rabbi will be destined for the world to come. A launderer who used to come to the Rabbi every day did not appear that day. When he heard of the voice that

[p. 169]

appeared, he went up to the roof and jumped and was killed. The voice appeared again and announced: This launderer is also destined for the world to come.

The day before the Rabbi died, the Sages proclaimed a public fast and prayers for the life of the Rabbi. They further vowed that whoever would say the Rabbi died, would be killed.

The Rabbi's maid-servant went up to the roof and prayed: The angels want the Rabbi to join them and the mortals want the Rabbi to remain on the earth. May it please the Lord that the mortals be victorious over the angels. But when she saw how many times he had to go to the lavatory and how he suffered at the taking off and putting on of the phylacteries, each time, she prayed: May it please the Lord that the angels be victorious. But as the Rabbis did not stop their prayers for a moment, she took a crock and hurled it to the ground. The Rabbis stopped their prayers, and that moment the soul of Rabbi Yehuda departed.

The Rabbis told Bar Kapra to go in and investigate. When he went in, he found that the Rabbi was dead. He tore his garments and returned to the Rabbis and said: The angels and the mortals have gotten hold of the Holy Ark. The angels overpowered the mortals and the Holy Ark has been captured. Has his soul departed? they asked of him. You said it, he replied; I said nothing.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER V

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170] [p. 171]

  

Adultery

  

(TRACTATE SOTAH)

IF A man be jealous of his wife, he may warn her, according to Rabbi Eliezer, before two witnesses. He may make her drink the bitter water on the evidence of two witnesses, or on his own evidence.

How does he warn her? If he says to her, before two witnesses: Don't talk to so-and-so. But if she spoke to the man, she is still allowed into the home and she may eat of the Heave-offering. If she secretly entered a house with him, and stayed there long enough to be defiled, she is barred from her home, and is barred from eating of the Heave-offering. If her husband should die she performs the rite of Halizah, but does not contract levirate marriage.

The Sotah used to be brought before the high court in Jerusalem and the judges addressed her in the same way as they addressed witnesses in capital cases. They would say to her: Our daughter, wine contributes much to sin; frivolity, much; childishness, much; evil neighbors, much. Behave yourself for the sake of the great

[p. 172]

name that was written in holiness and which will not be obliterated by water. And they say to her things which neither she nor the family of her father's house are worthy of hearing.

If she says: I have been defiled, she forfeits her marriage allotment and is sent away. If she says: I am pure, she is brought to the Eastern gate which is near the gate of Nicanor. There the suspected women drink the bitter water. There the women are cleansed after child birth, and there the lepers are cleansed. A priest gets hold of her garments, if they get torn, they are torn. If they are ripped, let them be ripped, so that her bosom becomes uncovered. He undoes her hair. Rabbi Yehuda says: If she has a beautiful bosom, he does not uncover it. If she has beautiful hair, he does not undo it. If she was dressed in white, he dresses her in black. If she wore ornaments of gold chains and rings in her nose and on her fingers, they are taken away from her to make her look repulsive. Then the priest takes an Egyptian rope and ties it above her breasts. Whoever wants to gaze at her may come and gaze upon her, with the exception of her slaves and bondswomen, because her heart would be hardened by this. All the women are permitted to gaze at her, as was said: (Ezekiel xiii, 48) That all women may be taught not to do after lewdness.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

THE Husband takes the meal offering out of the Egyptian basket and puts it in the ministering vessel and into her hand: the priest then puts his hands under hers and waves it. After the waving he takes it to the

[p. 173]

altar and lets a part of it go up in smoke, and the rest is eaten by the priests. He then makes her drink the bitter water and bring her sacrifice.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

IF A man warned his wife and she secretly went out, even if he heard of it from a flying bird he may give her her marriage allotment and send her away. Thus says Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Joshua, however, says: Not until the women who spin yarn by the moonlight begin to talk about it may he send her away.

(Mishna)

 

SAMUEL said: A man should rather marry a woman of bad reputation than marry the daughter of a woman who has a bad reputation. For the one comes from pure stock, while the other comes from a tainted stock. Rabbi Yohanan, however, said: A man should rather marry the daughter of a woman of bad reputation, but not the woman of bad reputation, because the one is assumed to be chaste while the other one is not. An objection. Does one marry a woman of bad reputation? The Rabbi answered: It should be interpreted: If a man had married a woman of bad reputation. Rabbi Tahlifa bar Maaraba learned from Rabbi Abahu: The children of a loose woman are legitimate because the majority of the intercourses are ascribed to the husband.

Rab Amram asked. What is the case if she is a very loose woman? If one maintains that a woman conceives only shortly before her period, then no question may be raised, because the husband does not know when this occurs and cannot watch for her. However one that maintains that a woman conceives after her cleansing,

[p. 174]

can raise the question, because he knows when this takes place. Or cannot he tell anyway, since she is a very loose woman? The question remains without a solution.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER VI

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 175]

  

Divorces

  

(TRACTATE GITTIN)

ALL documents that have a Cuthean as a witness are invalid, except writs of divorce and bills of emancipation. There was a case of a writ of divorce that was brought before Rabban Gamaliel at Kfar Othnai. The witnesses were Cutheans. He declared it valid. All documents that are executed in the courts of the foreigners, though the witnesses be foreigners, are valid, except the writs of divorce and bills of slave emancipation. Rabbi Simon says: These, too, are valid. They are not to be honored only if they were executed by unauthorized persons.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

IF A man sent a writ of divorce to his wife and then overtook the messenger or sent another messenger to him and declared: The writ I gave to thee is void; it becomes void.

Witnesses sign a document as a precaution, for the general good.

[p. 176]

If a man had pledged his slave as security and then set him free, the law declared that the slave is not liable for anything, but as a precaution the new master is compelled to give him a bill of emancipation, and the slave executes a bill of indebtedness for his value. Rabban Gamaliel says: He executes no document whatsoever. The one that set him free is liable. If a man is half slave and half free, he works one day for his master and one day for himself. This is according to the House of Hillel, but the House of Shamai said to them: This is well for the master, but not so for the man. He may not marry a slave, since he is half free, and he can not marry a free woman because he is half slave. Shall he remain unmarried forever? Was not the world made for fruition and increase? As was said: (Isaiah xlv, 18) He created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited. For the general good, the master is compelled to set the half slave free, and the man gives him a pledge for a half of his value. The House of Hillel changed their view and taught according to the decision of the House of Shamai.

If a man sold his slave to a foreigner or beyond the borders of the Land of Israel, the slave must be set free.

Captives should not be ransomed for more than their worth, to prevent abuses. For the same reason captives are not aided in their escape. Rabban Simon ben Gamaliel said: This is a precaution for the good of the captives. One does not buy scrolls of the Torah, phylacteries or mezuzoth for more than their value, to prevent abuses.

If a man sent away his wife because of her bad reputation, he may not take her back.

[p. 177]

If a man sent away his wife because she is barren, Rabbi Yehuda says: He may not take her back. But the sages said: He may take her back.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

MANY procedures were laid down as a precaution for the general good. A priest is called to read the Torah first, then a Levite and then an Israelite, for the sake of peace. A pit nearest the water-channel is filled in first, for the sake of peace. The taking of animals from their traps and fish from their nets is considered somewhat like theft, for the sake of peace. Rabbi Yosi says: This is outright theft.

The things found by a deaf-mute or an imbecile, or a minor, are looked upon as belonging to them; and taking them away is somewhat like theft--for the sake of peace. Rabbi Yosi says: This is outright theft. If a poor man shakes the top of an olive tree, what is found beneath it is considered like theft, for the sake of peace. Rabbi Yosi says: Outright theft. One does not prevent the poor of the foreigner from gathering gleanings, the forgotten sheaf, and grain from the corner of fields, for the sake of peace. A woman may lend to her neighbor a sieve, a handmill, or an oven, though the neighbor is suspected of transgressing the Sabbatical year, for the sake of peace.

One may lend a hand in the field to a foreigner in the Sabbatical year, but not to an Israelite.

One extends greetings to a foreigner, all for the sake of peace.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER V

[p. 178]

THREE kinds of writ of divorce are not valid, but, if the woman remarried, the children are legitimate. If a man wrote the writ in his own hand, but there are no witnesses to it; there is no date on it, but there are witnesses; there is a date, but only one witness. Those are the three kinds of writ of divorce that are not valid, but, if the woman remarried, the children are legitimate. Rabbi Eliezer says: Though there are no signatures of witnesses on the writ, but it was given to the woman before two witnesses; it is valid, and she may collect her marriage allotment from mortgaged property, because the witnesses sign only as a precaution.

The House of Shamai says: A man must not divorce his wife unless he has found her unfaithful. As was said: (Deuteronomy xxiv, 1) Because he hath found some uncleanness in her. The House of Hillel says: He may divorce her if she only spoiled a dish for him because it was said: Uncleanness in anything. Rabbi Akiba says: He may divorce her if he found another that is more beautiful than his wife, because it was said: (Deut. xxiv, 1) If it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes.

(Mishna)

 

WHEN Rab Papa was confronted with a Persian document that was made in a foreign court, he would call in two foreigners, and without one knowing of the other, let them read the document. If they both agreed as to its contents, he would honor the document and, even, collect money on mortgaged property by such a document.

Rab Yehuda would take pains to read every document submitted to him. But Ula once said to him: You need not go to this trouble, for Rabbi Eliezer, who was

[p. 179]

the Head of the Land of Israel, had the documents read to him, and then he signed them. Rabbi Nachman would let the court scribes read the document to him, and then he would sign.

Rabbi Shaman ben Aba said in the name of Rabbi Yohanan: If a slave escapes from prison, he becomes free, and furthermore his master is compelled to give him a bill of emancipation. But Rab Simon ben Gamaliel taught that he returns to slavery. Rabbi bar Hanah said in the name of Rabbi Yohanan that whenever Rab Simon ben Gamaliel makes a statement in the Mishna, the law is followed according to his decision. There is the story of a woman slave of Mar Samuel that was captured. She was ransomed and was returned to the Rabbi with a message: We are of the opinion of Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel, but even if you follow the decision of the Rabbis you may take her back, because we ransomed her as a slave. But as he had given up all hope of ever recovering her, he would not take her back as a slave, and she was not even required to get a bill of emancipation.

Rabbi Zera said in the name of Rabbi Hanina, who quoted Rabbi Ashi: The Rabbi said: When a slave marries a free woman in the presence of his master, he becomes free. Rabbi Yohana asked him: Do you know that to be the ruling? I learned that according to Rabbi Meir, if a man write a contract of betrothal for his female slave, she becomes betrothed, and the Sages said that she is not betrothed. The explanation is like the one of Rabbi ben Shila who ruled in an analogous case: When the master puts the phylacteries on him. So is the

[p. 180]

ruling, here. The slave becomes free, as the master himself gives him the wife.

Rabbi Joshua ben Levi said: When a slave puts on phylacteries in the presence of his master, he is free. If the master borrows money from his slave, or appoints him overseer of his estate, or if the slave puts on phylacteries or reads three passages from the Torah, in the house of worship, in the presence of his master, does he become free thereby? No, answered Rabbi ben Shila: only when the master, himself, puts the phylacteries on the slave.

When Rabbi Dime came he quoted Rabbi Yohanan as saying: If a man said; just before he died, My female slave so and so should be set free, his heirs are bound to give her a bill of emancipation.

Rabbi Samuel ben Yehuda quoted Rabbi Yohanan: If a man said at his death bed, my woman slave so and so has been very kind to me, I want some kindness to be done for her, the heirs are bound to do a deed of kindness for her. It is a duty to execute the will of the dead.

There was once a slave owned by two masters. One set him free as to his half. The other bethought himself: If the Rabbis hear of it, they will compel me to set him free. So he transferred him to his minor son. Rab Joseph took this case to Rab Papa. He retorted: (Obadiah i, 15) As thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee: Thy reward shall return upon thine head. We all are aware that a child likes to play with coins. We shall appoint a guardian for the child. He will jingle some coins before him, and then the guardian will write a bill of emancipation in the child's name.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER IX

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

  

Betrothals

  

(TRACTATE KIDDUSHIN)

A WIFE is acquired in three ways, and she can get her freedom in two ways. She is acquired through money, through a deed, or through sexual intimacy. And she can get her freedom by divorce, or through her husband's death.

(Mishna)

 

THIS Mishna is in accord with Rabbi Simon, for Rabbi Simon taught: Why did the Torah say (Deuteronomy xxii, 13) If a man take a wife, and not if a woman is taken by a man? Because this is the way of the male to go out and look for the female, and it is not the custom for the female to look for the male. This is the same when someone loses an object. Who is looking for whom? The loser looks for the object, and not the object for the loser.

By money. How so? We have learned that the father exercises authority over his daughter in regard to her betrothal by money contract, or intercourse. How do we know that she can be acquired through money,

[p. 182]

and that the money belongs to her father? Rab Yehuda replied in the name of Rab: The scriptures say: (Exodus xxi, 11) Then shall she go out free without money. Her master does not receive any money, but money is given to another master, namely, the father. How about the money belonging to the girl? How is it that her father has authority over her betrothal? For it is written: (Deuteronomy xxii, 16) I gave my daughter unto this man, and she should get the money. Possibly this refers to a minor who has no right to accept her betrothal contract; but how about a grown girl, who has the right to accept her betrothal contract? She can betroth herself and take the money. It is written (Numbers xxx, 16) In her youth in her father's house. All gain of youth belongs to her father. The Rabbis taught: How is a wife acquired through money? If a man gave a woman money, or its equivalent, and said to her: Thou art betrothed to me; Thou art consecrated to me; Thou art a wife to me,--then she is betrothed to him. But if she gives the money to the man and says: I am betrothed to thee; I am consecrated to thee; I am a wife to thee,--she is not betrothed.

(Gemara)

 

A HEBREW slave is acquired by money or by a deed: and can free himself in the "seventh" year, or in the year of Jubilee or by paying for the outstanding time of his service. The Hebrew female slave has the advantage of being freed by signs of puberty. The slave who does not want to be freed in the "seventh" year is secured by having his ear bored, and is made free in the Jubilee or on his master's death.

(Mishna)

[p. 183]

THE Rabbis taught: If the man stole a thousand, but he is worth five hundred, he is sold once and then sold again. If he stole five hundred, and he is worth a thousand, he is not sold at all. Rabbi Eliezer says: If his theft corresponds to his worth, he is sold, otherwise he is not sold at all. The Rabbis said: In the following arguments Rabbi Eliezer prevails over the Rabbis: If he stole five hundred but he is still worth a thousand, he is not sold; because the All Merciful said: (Exodus xxii, 3) Then he shall be sold. All of him, and not half of him and the All Merciful also said: (Exodus xxii, 3) Sold for his theft; not for half of his theft.

A slave is freed against her own will. Raba wanted to interpret this: against the master's will, but Abaya said to him: How is that? Does it mean that one gives the master a bond for the value?--Would that be right? A man has a pearl in his hand, and we will give him a potsherd for it? But Abaya explained: It is meant against the will of her father, because of the disgrace to the family. Then should the family of a Hebrew male slave be compelled to redeem him because of the disgrace to the family?--Then he may go and sell himself again. In the case of the female slave too, cannot the father go and sell her again? Were not we taught, however, she cannot be sold, and sold over again, and this is according to Rabbi Simon who taught: A man may sell his daughter for marriage, and sell her a second time. He may sell her over again. He may sell her in marriage after servitude, but not for servitude after marriage says Rabbi Simon. Just as you cannot sell a daughter for servitude after the marriage, one cannot sell her for servitude after servitude.

(Gemara)

[p. 184]

A CANAANITE slave is acquired through money, through a bond or through the law of possession. He can redeem himself through money paid by others or through a bond of his own. This is according to Rabbi Meir. The sages, however, said: Through money of his own or by a bond of other people, providing the money belongs to other people.

Large cattle are acquired through delivery. Small cattle are acquired through lifting. This according to Rabbis Meir and Eliezer. The sages, however, said: Small cattle are acquired through pulling.

Secured property can be acquired by money, by a deed, or by the law of possession.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: Through possession in the following manner: If the slave loosened his shoe, if he carried his baggage for him to the bathing place, if he undressed him, bathed him, rubbed him, dressed him, put his shoes on, or if he lifted him, thus he acquired him. Rabbi Simon said: Possession is not greater than lifting; for by lifting, acquisition is valid everywhere. What does he mean? Rabbi Ashi explains: If the slave lifted the master he is thereby acquired by the master, but if the master lifted the slave, he did not acquire the slave. Rabbi Simon' said: Possession should not be greater than lifting, since lifting is recognized everywhere as acquisition.

We are taught: A slave goes free because of the loss of an eye, a tooth, or a limb that grows not again. It is quite obvious that the slave goes free because of the loss of an eye or a tooth. This is stated in the Torah. But how do we apply this to other parts of the body? It

[p. 185]

is self-evident. An eye or a tooth are blemishes which grow not again, so the loss of other limbs that grow not again make the slave free.

 

THE Rabbis taught: The father has the following obligations towards his son: He must circumcise him, redeem him, teach him the Torah, take a wife unto him, and teach him a trade. Some say he must teach him to swim also. Rabbi Yehuda said: He that does not teach his son a trade, teaches him to rob. Teaches him to rob? How is that?--we may say: as though he taught him to rob.

The Rabbis taught: If one must study and is about to marry, he studies first and marries later. But if he cannot do without a wife, he marries first, and then he studies. Rab Yehuda said in the name of Samuel: The law is that he marries first and studies later. Said Rabbi Yohanan: What? with a stone around his neck he can study the law?

Rab Hisda praised Rab Hamnuna before Rab Huna. He called him a great man. Said Rab Huna to him: If he comes to you, bring him to me. When Rab Hamnuna came before Rab Huna, he saw that he had no shawl on him. He asked him: Why have you no shawl on you? Rab Hamnuna replied: Because I am unmarried. The Rabbi turned his face away from him and said: Take notice that you do not see me again until you are married. He was consistent with his principles. For he said: He who is twenty and is not married lives in sin. Does he really mean, lives in sin? You may say, in sinful thoughts.

Rabbi said, and the school of Rabbi Ishmael agreed

[p. 186]

with him: Till the age of twenty, the Lord sits and waits. When will the man take a wife unto himself? But when he reaches twenty and had not taken a wife unto himself, the Lord says: Let his bones be swollen.

Rab Hisda said: The reason I am more alert than my colleagues is because I was married at sixteen. And had I married at fourteen, I would have said to Satan, an arrow in thine eye.

Rab said to Rabbi Nehemia ben Ammi: Marry him off while you have your hand around your son's neck; that is between sixteen and twenty. Others say: between eighteen and twenty-four. The Rabbis taught: The evil desire is very hard. Even his Creator called him evil. It was said: (Genesis viii, 21) For the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth.

Rabbi Isaac said: The desire of man renews itself every day and has designs on him. As it was written: (Genesis vi, 5) was only evil continually. And Rabbi Simon ben Levi said: The evil desire of man gets the upper hand of him every day and wishes to destroy him. As was said: (Psalms xxxvii, 32) The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him. And if the Lord, blessed be He, would not prevail against him, as was said: (ibid. 33) The Lord will not leave him in his hand.

The school of Rabbi Ishmael taught: If this reprehensible thing shall come upon thee, drag it into the house of learning. If it be stone, it will melt. If it be iron, it will fall to fragments. As it was said: (Jeremiah xxiii, 29) Is not my word like as fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock into pieces. And if it is stone it will melt, as was said: (Isaiah lv, 1) Ho, everyone that thirsteth, come ye to 

[p. 187]

the waters. And moreover it was said: (Job xiv, 19) The waters wear the stones.

To take a wife to him. How do we know this? For it was written: (Jeremiah xxix, 6) Take ye wives and beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands. All this is said of his sons, for they are in his hands. But what about the daughters, are they in his hand too?--This is the meaning. One gives her a dowry, clothing and adornments, so that man will desire her.

 

THE Rabbis taught: It was said: (Exodus xx, 12) Honor thy father and thy mother. It is also said: (Proverbs iii, 9) Honor the Lord with thy substance. The Scriptures had compared, here, the honor of father and mother with that of the Lord. It was said: (Leviticus xix, 3) Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father and it was said: (Deuteronomy vi, 13) Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God and serve him. The Scriptures thus compare the fear of the Lord to that of the father and mother. It was said: (Leviticus xxiv, 15) Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin. Thus the Scriptures compare the blessings of father and mother to the blessing of the Lord.

Said Rab Yehuda in the name of Samuel: Rabbi Eliezer was once asked: How far should the honor of father and mother extend? He answered: Go and see how a non-Jew, Dama ben Nethinah of Ashkelon, behaved towards his father:

Once the sages wanted to buy from him precious stones for the priest's breastplate. It would have brought him a profit of 60,000 denars, and Rabbi Kahana thinks

[p. 188]

it was 80,000. But the key to the jewel case was under the pillow of Dama's father and Dama would not wake him. The Lord rewarded him for it, for next year a red calf was born in his herd. When the sages of Israel came to him again, he said to them I know that if I demand it, you would give me all the money in the world for the red calf, which you need for your rites. But all I will ask of you is the amount I lost, because of the honor I paid to my father. Rabbi Hanina commented: If he who is not commanded, gets such a reward, how much more will be rewarded the man who was given a commandment and fulfills his commandment.

When Rabbi Dimi came he related: Once Dama sat, among Romans, wearing a gold-embroidered silken gown. His mother came in and tore the garment off, struck him on the head, and spat in his face. He, however, did not shame her.

Abimi, the son of Rabbi Abahu taught: One gives his father pheasants to tat, yet this drives him out of this world, because of the manner in which he gives it to him, while another makes his father work at the grindstone in the mill, and yet this will give him life in the world to come, for he does so with due honor to his parent.

Rabbi Abahu said: Here is an illustration, how my son Abimi fulfilled the commandment of honor to his father. Abimi had five ordained sons during the life of his father, but when Rabbi Abahu came knocking at the door, he himself would run to open it for him, shouting all the while: I am coming, I am coming, until he reached it.

One day his father said: Get me a drink of water.

[p. 189]

[paragraph continues] While he was getting the water the father fell asleep. Abimi bent over him and stood there till he awoke. He was rewarded for it, for he succeeded in interpreting the Song of Asaph, in the Psalms.

The Rabbis taught: What is fear and what is honor? Fear means that the son does not stand in his father's place, does not sit in his father's place, he does not contradict him and does not overrule him. Honor means that he feeds him, clothes him, covers him, and leads him in and out.

 

HE THAT is versed in the Scripture, the Mishna and the way of the world will not sin easily, for it was said: (Ecclesiastes iv, 12) And a three-fold cord is not quickly broken. But he who is not versed in the Scripture, nor in the Mishna, nor in the ways of life, has no place in the world.

(Mishna)

 

SAID Rabbi Eleazar in the name of Rabbi Zadok: The righteous in this world are compared to a tree that stands in a clean place, but whose branches spread over an unclean place. If the branches are pruned off, the tree is now entirely in a clean place. The Holy One blessed be His name, brings suffering upon the righteous in this world, so that they may inherit the world to come, as was said: (Job viii, 7) Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase. To what are the evil compared? To a tree that stands in an unclean place, but its branches spread to a clean place. If the branches are pruned off, the tree remains entirely in an unclean place. So does the Holy One, blessed be His name, bestow goodness upon the sinners in this world, but He shall destroy them and shall make them inherit

[p. 190]

the lowest depths of perdition, as was said: (Prov. xiv, 12) There is a way that seemeth right unto a man; but the ends thereof are the ways of death.

Once Rabbi Tarpon and the elders were in an upper story in the house of Nitzza in Lydia. The question was propounded: What is greater, study or action? Rabbi Tarpon said: Action. Rabbi Akiba said: Study is greater. Then all the rabbis agreed and said study is greater, for study leads to action.

The Rabbis taught: He who eats in the street is like a dog, and some say he is disqualified from being a witness.

Bar Kappara preached. The hot tempered gains nothing but the effects of his hot temper. But the good man partakes of the fruit of his good deeds. From a man that knows no Scripture, no Mishna, and no ways of life, one may have no benefit. For it was said: (Psalms i, 1) His seat is the seat of the scornful.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

A MAN may betroth himself personally or through an agent. A woman may betroth herself personally or through an agent. A man may betroth his grown daughter personally or through an agent.

If a man said to a woman: Be betrothed to me with this date, or be betrothed to me with this, and one of them is worth a perutha, the betrothal is valid; if not, it is not valid. If he said: Be betrothed to me with this, this and this, and they were together worth a perutha, the betrothal is valid; if they are not worth a perutha, it is not valid. If he said: Be betrothed to me with

[p. 191]

this cup of wine, and it was found to contain honey, or if he said: With this cup of honey and it was found to contain wine, or with this silver denar, and it was found to be of gold; or with this gold denar and it was found to be of silver; if he said: Be betrothed to me with the understanding that I am rich, and it was found that he was poor, or if he said poor and he was found to be rich; the betrothal is not valid.

Rabbi Simon says: If the advantage is on her side, she is betrothed.

If he said to the woman be betrothed to me, because I am a priest and he was found to be a levite. . . . If he said because I have a grown daughter or a bondwoman and he does not have them, or he said I have them not, and he has them, or if he said that he had children and he did not have them, or if he said he did not have children and had them. In all of these cases, though she may say: It was in my heart to be betrothed to him, the betrothal is not valid, and this also holds good if she deceived the man.

(Mishna)

 

IF HE can betroth himself through an agent is it not self-evident that he can do it personally? Rabbi Joseph said: Personally is preferable to doing it through an agent. It is even said that herewith is injected a prohibition. This is in accordance with Rab Yehuda, who quoted Rab: One is prohibited to be betrothed to a woman before he has seen her, for upon seeing her he may find something repugnant in her and she may be detestable to him, and the All Merciful taught: (Leviticus xix, 18) But thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. And this according to Rab Joseph applies to the woman,

[p. 192]

too. But Resh Lakish disagrees. He says: There is no prohibition as regards the woman, for it is better to suffer in marriage than to live in widowhood.

"A man may betroth his grown daughter." He may betroth her when she is grown, but not when she is a minor. This agrees with Rab. For Rab Yehuda said in the name of Rab, some may say it was Rabbi Eleazar: It is prohibited to betroth a daughter while she is a minor, only when she is grown and declares: "I want so-and-so."

 

RAB Nahman said in the name of Samuel: When orphans come to divide the estate of their father, the court appoints a guardian for them, and he selects a proper portion for each of them. But when they become of age they can protest it. Rab Nahman, however, decided that they cannot protest, because what would become of the authority of the court? If then Rab Nah-man decides thus against the court, what becomes of the authority of the court in this instance? But it is taught: If the valuation of the judges was one-sixth too high or one-sixth too low the sale is void. Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel said: It is not void, otherwise where does the authority of the court come in? Said Rab Huna in the name of Rabbi Hinena: Rab Nahman ruled that the law is in agreement with the sages. There is no contradiction here. It is one thing when the judges made a mistake, and another thing when there was no mistake.

 

TEN measures of wisdom descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the Land of Israel and one was taken by the rest of the world. Ten measures of beauty descended

[p. 193]

upon the world. Nine were taken by Jerusalem and one by the rest of the world. Ten measures of wealth descended upon the world, nine were taken by Rome and one by the rest of the world. Ten measures of poverty descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Babylon and one by the rest of the world. Ten measures of rudeness descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Elam and one by the rest of the world. Was not rudeness supposed to descend to Babylon? For it was written: (Zech. v, 9) Then lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there came out two women, and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork; and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and the heaven. Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the ephah? And he said unto me, to build it a house in the land of Shinar (Babylon) . Rabbi Yohanan says: This refers to hypocrisy and haughtiness, which descended upon Babylon. It came first to Babylon, but went then to Elam. But this is, indeed, not so, said the Master. What is the sign of rudeness but poverty, and poverty is to be found in Babylon. What is meant by poverty is poverty of learning, as it is written: (Song of Solomon viii, 8) We have a little sister and she hath no breasts. Rabbi Yohanan said: This refers to Elam, which had the advantages of learning, but not that of teaching. Ten measures of strength descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the Persians, and one by the rest of the world. Ten measures of vermin descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Medea, and one. . . . Ten measures of witchcraft descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Egypt, and one. . . . Ten measures of

[p. 194]

plagues descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the pigs, and one. . . . Ten measures of whoring descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Arabia, and one. . . . Ten measures of impudence descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Meshan, and one. . . . Ten measures of gossip descended upon the world. Nine were taken by woman, and one. . . . Ten measures of blackness descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the Ethiopians, and one. . . . Ten measures of sleep descended upon the world. Nine were taken by slaves and one by the rest of the world.

(Gemara)

 

IF A man betrothed a woman with the stipulation that she has no vows and it was found that she had vows, she is not betrothed. If she was betrothed without any stipulations, and it was found that she had vows, she may be sent away without her marriage allotment. If she was betrothed with the stipulation that there are no defects in her, and it was found that she possesses defects, she is not betrothed. If she was betrothed without any stipulations, and if she was found to possess defects, she may be sent away without her marriage allotment. All defects which disqualify priests disqualify women.

If a man betrothed two women with what was worth a perutha or one woman with what was worth less than a perutha, even if he sends gifts to her later, the betrothal is not valid, for the reason he sends his gifts is that they have already been betrothed. This applies, also, to a minor.

If a man betroths a woman and her daughter, or a woman and her sister both at the same time, they are not betrothed.

[p. 195]

There was once the case of five women, among whom were two sisters. A man lifted a basket of figs that belonged to them--it contained the produce of the 7th year--and said: With this basket you all are betrothed to me, and one of the women accepted the basket on behalf of them all. The sages ruled that the sisters were not betrothed.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER II

 

IF A man betrothed a woman, and later says: I believed that she was the daughter of a priest, and she proves to be the daughter of a levite. Or the daughter of a levite, and she is the daughter of a priest. Or rich, and she is poor, or poor, and she is rich. She is betrothed to him, for she did not deceive him. If a man says to a woman: Be thou betrothed to me after I become a proselyte, or after thou becomest a proselyte, or after I become free, or thou becomest free, or after thine husband shall die, or after thine sister shall die, or after thou shalt have performed the Halizah to thine brother-in-law: she is not betrothed. This applies also to one who said: If thine wife shall bear thee a female child, it is betrothed to me. The child is not betrothed.

If a man said: Be betrothed to me on the condition that I intercede for thee with the government or on condition that I work for thee as a laborer; if he interceded on her behalf with the government or worked for her as a laborer, she is betrothed. But if he did not, she is not betrothed. If he said: Be thou betrothed to me on condition that my father consents. If the father consent, she is betrothed, if not, she is not betrothed. If the father die in the meantime, she is betrothed. But if the

[p. 196]

son died, the father is instructed to say that he does not consent.

If a man says: I betrothed my daughter to someone, but I do not know whom, and someone appears and says: I betrothed her, he is believed. If two appear and each says that he betrothed her, both are compelled to give her a writ of divorce, but if they are willing, one gives her a writ of divorce and the other marries her.

(Mishna)

 

RAB says: He is believed when it's a question of a divorce as no one will sin without any gain; but not believed as to marriage.

His passion may have persuaded him to say it. Rab Ashi says: He is believed to marry her. But Rab Ashi stipulates, however, if the woman says: I have been betrothed, and know not to whom I have been betrothed, and one appears and says: I betrothed her, he is not believed to marry her.

We were taught according to Rabbi Ashi: I betrothed my daughter and know not to whom. If one comes and says: I betrothed her, he is believed to marry her. If he married her and another came and says: I betrothed her, he is not believed and she is not forbidden to the husband. But if a woman says: I was betrothed and know not to whom, and one appears and says: I betrothed her, he is not believed, because the woman will shield the man.

 

RAB Yehuda said: If one had betrothed this woman before one witness, the betrothal is disregarded. Rab Yehuda was asked: Suppose both admit it? He was uncertain, yes or no.

[p. 197]

A question was asked: If one witness charges that one's wife committed adultery? Abaya says: The witness is believed. Rabbi says: This is a case of incest, and in a case of incest two witnesses are needed. Abaya said the following case proves it to me: Mar-Samuel had a blind man who used to recite the law for him every day. One day the man did not appear, so the Rabbi sent a messenger for him. While the messenger took one road, the blind man entered, coming through a different road. When the messenger returned, he announced that the blind man's wife committed adultery. Mar-Samuel said to the blind man, if you believe him send your wife away; but if you don't believe him, don't send her away. If you believe him means that the witness is not a robber. And Rab said: If you believe him as if it were two witnesses, send her away, otherwise don't send her away.

Abaya said: I also learn this from the following story:

Once King Yanai went to Kohalith in the wilderness and conquered sixty cities. When he returned he was very happy. He invited all the sages of Israel and said to them. Our forefathers ate mallow when they were building the Temple. Let us, too, eat mallow, in remembrance of our forefathers. So mallow was served on golden tables and they ate. Among them there was one Eleazar ben Poyra, a scoffer and an evil-minded man, and he said to King Yanai: "O King Yanai! The heart of the Pharisees is against thee." What shall I do? asked the King. Test them by the gold plate between thine eyes. So he tested them with the gold plate between his eyes. There was an old man there by the

[p. 198]

name of Yehuda ben Gedidiah. And Yehuda ben Gedidiah said to the King, "Oh King Yanai, the crown of royalty is enough for thee. Leave the crown of priesthood to the descendants of Aaron." Now there was talk that Yanai's mother was once a captive in Modin (This would make Yanai ineligible for priesthood), but this charge was investigated, and was never substantiated. The Sages of Israel departed in anger. Whereupon Eleazar ben Poyra said to King Yanai: "This is the law, even for the meanest in Israel, and thou art a King and High Priest. Art thou bound by the same law? Then what shall I do?" "If thou wilt listen to my advice, trample them down." "Then what shall become of the Torah?" "The Torah is rolled up, lying in the corner, whoever wants let him come and study." Said Rabbi Nahmai ben Israel: Immediately heresy entered into his soul, for he should have answered this applies to the written law, but how about the oral law? And this evil was spread through Eleazar ben Poyra. All the Sages of Israel were slain. And the world became desolate till Simon ben Shetah appeared and restored the Torah to its former position.

Now how does the case stand? Shall we say that there were two witnesses who said that she was a captive, and two that said she was not? Shall we believe one or the other? Therefore it must have been one witness who testified that she was a captive, and two who testified that she was not. Otherwise we would say that one would be believed.

(Gemara)

 

RABBI Tarfon says: Bastards can be made pure. In what manner? A bastard marries a slave, the offspring

[p. 199]

is born a slave, but if he is later emancipated he becomes a free man. Rabbi Eliezer says: That is but a bastard slave.

(Mishna)

 

A QUESTION. Does Rabbi Tarfon mean that this is at the very outset, or that it is already done? Come and hear. Rabbi Tarfon was asked: You have purified the male, but you have not purified the female. Now if you mean at the very outset, then let a female bastard go and marry a slave? A slave has no paternity. Come and hear: Once Rabbi Simlai said to his host, who was a bastard: Had I known you before, I could have made your sons to be pure. Surely! if you say that it is at the very outset; but if you say only if it has already been done, then what could he advise him? He would have told him to steal something and be sold as a Hebrew slave. From this you conclude that Rabbi. Tarfon means at the very outset. Rabbi Yehuda said in the name of Samuel: The law is in accordance with Rabbi Tarfon.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER III

 

IF A man says: This son of mine is a bastard, he is not believed. Even when both parents say that the child in the mother's womb is a bastard, they are not believed. Rabbi Yehuda says: They are believed.

(Mishna)

 

WHY say both parents? It is quite obvious that the father, who cannot be certain of the parentage, is not believed, but the mother who is sure of the parentage, why, too, is she not believed? It is self-evident that they

[p. 200]

should not be believed when the child enjoys the presumption of being spotless, but in the case of a child who is still in the womb and does not enjoy the presumption of spotlessness, they are still not believed.

Rabbi Yehuda says: They are believed. We are taught: (Deuteronomy xxi, 17) He shall acknowledge him before the others. It follows: A man is believed when he says: This son of mine is my first born. He is also believed when he says: This one is the son of a divorcee, this one is the son of a Haluzah. But the Sages ruled that he is not believed.

(Gemara)

 

A MAN must not stay alone with two women. But one woman may stay alone with two men. Rabbi Simon says: One man may stay with two women if his wife is with him, and he may sleep with them in an inn, because his wife keeps watch over him. A man may stay alone with his mother and with his daughter, and he may sleep with them in the same bed. But if they become of age she must sleep in her clothes, and he in his clothes.

(Mishna)

 

"BUT one woman." Rabbi Yehuda said in the name of Rab: This is spoken only of respectable men and women. Even ten men must not stay alone with a loose woman. There was a case once when ten men carried a woman out on a bier. Rabbi Joseph said: We have proven that ten men will get together to steal a beam, and will not be ashamed of each other.

Here is another proof: Two scholars are sent with the man so that he won't have intercourse with the woman on the way. Scholars, but not ordinary people. Only scholars, because they know and can warn him.

[p. 201]

Rab and Rab Yehuda were once walking on the road. There was a woman walking in front of them. Said Rab to Rab Yehuda: "Run faster away with perdition." "But you yourself said that it was all right with respectable people." "Who says that respectable people means men like you and me?" "Who then?" "Such as Rabbi Hanina and Rabbi Papi and their colleagues."

Rabbi Meir would scoff at transgression. One day Satan appeared to him on the other side of the river, disguised as a woman. As there was no bridge across, he grabbed a rope and began to tow himself across. When he reached the middle of the river, Satan let go, and said: Had they not proclaimed in Heaven: Take heed of Rabbi Meir and his learning, I would have valued your blood at two mahs.

Rabbi Akiba used to scoff at transgression. One day Satan appeared to him, disguised as a woman, on the top of a palm. Akiba grasped the palm and began to ascend. When he reached the middle, Satan let him go and said: Had they not proclaimed in Heaven: Take heed of Rabbi Akiba and his learning, I would have valued your blood at two mahs.

Pelimo used to say each day: A bolt in thine eye, Satan. One Eve of Atonement Satan appeared before him disguised as a beggar and knocked on his door. Bread was brought out to him. Whereupon Satan said: On a day like this everyone is within, shall I be outside? So he was asked to come in and they gave him bread. Whereupon he said: On a day like this everyone sits at the table, shall I sit alone? So he was asked to sit at the table. His body was all covered with sores and he conducted himself repulsively. Pelimo said to him: Sit

[p. 202]

properly. Then Satan asked for a goblet. He was given the goblet and he began to cough in it and spat his phlegm into it. He was scolded. Whereupon he fell and died. Whereupon a voice cried: "Pelimo killed a man, Pelimo killed a man." So he ran and hid in a privy. Satan followed him. When he saw how Pelimo was suffering he let himself be recognized and said: "Why do you talk that way every day?" "What should I say?" inquired Pelimo. "You should say: The All-Merciful upbraid Satan."

Rab Hiya ben Ashi used to fall upon his face and pray: All-Merciful, protect us from evil desire. When one day his wife heard him, she reflected: It is so many years that he kept away from me, why does he pray in this manner? One day when he was studying in his garden, she dressed herself up and paced before him, back and forth several times. Whereupon he asked her: "Who are you?" "I am Hirtha, the courtesan", she answered, "and have returned only today." And when he desired her, she said to him: "Get me that pomegranate from the top of the tree." He went up and got it for her. When he returned home, his wife was just making the fire in the oven. So he went up and sat in it. She said to him: "What does this mean?" He answered her: "So and so happened to me." Whereupon she replied: "It was I", but he would not believe her until she gave him proof thereof. "Nonetheless", he said, "my intentions were sinful."

(Gemara)

 

A BACHELOR must not teach children, and a woman must not teach children. Rabbi Eleazar says: Also one who has no wife must not teach children. Rabbi

[p. 203]

[paragraph continues] Yehuda says: A bachelor must not tend cattle, nor may two bachelors sleep under one cover. But the Sages permit it. One whose business is with women must not stay alone with women. And a man should not teach his son a woman's craft. Rabbi Meir says a man should teach his son a clean and easy trade, and let him look up to those that possess riches and wealth, for there is no trade that there are riches and poverty in it, and riches do not come from trade, nor does poverty, for all depends on merit.

Rabbi Simon ben Eleazer says: Have you ever seen a wild beast or bird that has a trade? And yet they sustain themselves without much trouble, and they were created to serve me, while I was created to serve my Maker. Is it not right that I shall sustain myself without trouble? But I have turned to evil and so despoiled my livelihood.

Abba Gurian of Zaidan says in the name of Abba Guria: A man should not teach his sort to be: an ass-driver, or a camel-driver, or a barber, or a sailor, or a shepherd, or a shopkeeper, for all these trades are trades of thieves. Rabbi Yehuda said on his own account: The ass-drivers are mostly evil, but the camel-drivers are mostly honest. The sailors, most of them, are pious. The best of the medicine men may go to Hell, and the most honest of the butchers is a partner of Amalek. Rabbi Nehorai says: I keep away from all the trades in the world, and teach to my son the Torah only. Because a man gets his rewards in this world and the principal is secured for him for the world to come. But all other professions are not like that. For when a man gets sick or becomes old or is suffering and cannot engage

[p. 204]

in his work, he dies from starvation. But the Torah is not like that. For it guards him from all evil, and gives him a future and hope in his old age.

The Rabbis taught: He whose business is with women has a sullen disposition, as for instance: The goldsmiths, carders, a mill cleaner, a hawker, a peddler, weavers, barbers, launderers, blood-letters, bath attendants and tanners. They may not be crowned King or High Priest. Why? Not because they are unfitted, but because of their mean occupation.

Bar Kappra discoursed: Always teach your son an easy and clean trade. What is it? Rabbi Yehuda replied: "Needlepoint embroidery!"

It was taught: There is no trade that will disappear from the world. Happy is he who sees his parents in a superior trade, and woe to him who sees his parents in a mean trade. The world cannot do without a perfume maker and without a tanner. Happy is he whose trade is perfume making, and woe to him who is a tanner. The world cannot exist without male and female. Happy is he whose children are male and woe to him whose children are female.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 205]

  

LAW

  

NEZIKIN

[p. 206] [p. 207]

  

Civil Law

  

(TRACTATE BABA KAMMA)

THERE are four primary causes of damage: The ox, the pit, the despoiler and fire. The ox is not like the despoiler, and the despoiler is not like the ox. Nor is either of these two, in which there is life, as the fire in which there is no life; nor are these whose way is to go forth and create damage, as the pit, whose way is not to go forth and create damage. The only thing that they have in common is that they cause damage, and that it is the owner's duty to watch out for them and prevent their causing any damage. And if any of them has caused any damage, the man responsible for them must pay for it with the best of his estate.

(Mishna)

 

WHEN we speak of primary causes, then there must also be secondary causes. Are these other classes of damage equal to the first or not? . . .

Rab Papa said: Some of the subdivisions are equal to the primary causes while others are not.

The Rabbis taught: There are three primary classes

[p. 208]

of damage with regard to the ox. The Horn, the Tooth, and the Hoof. Whence do we know of the Horn? The Rabbis taught: (Exodus xxi, 28) If it will gore. There is no goring, but with a horn, as it was said: (1 Kings xxii, 11) And Zedekaiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he said, thus saith the Lord, With these shalt thou gore the Syrians, and it is further said: (Deut. xxxiii, 17) His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: With them he shall gore the people, etc.

For what purposes is the "further" quotation?--Because one may argue that the teaching of the Pentateuch cannot be deduced from the Prophets. Therefore it is stated: His glory is like, etc. But is this then a deduction? Is it not rather only an indication that by "goring" we are to understand that it means goring with a horn?--Indeed one could believe that the Almighty made the distinction between the harmless and the dangerous only as regards the severed horn, while if the horn is still attached to the animal it is always regarded as dangerous. Therefore it is said: His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, etc.

What are the subdivisions of Horn?--Collision, Biting, Falling and Kicking. Goring is surely considered a primary cause of damage, for it is written: (Exodus xxi, 35) If it will gore. Why should this not also apply to Collision, for it is written: (Ibid.) If it will collide--Here by collision we understand also goring. Indeed we were taught the passage begins with "collision" and ends with "goring"; this is to enlighten us that goring and colliding mean the same thing. Why is the word goring used with regard to humans, while with regard

[p. 209]

to animals we use the term colliding?--Man who has the faculty, of judgment is, as a rule, injured through goring, but an animal, which possesses no such faculty, is, as a rule, injured through collision. . . .

What are the divisions of Pit? . . . It may refer to a stone, or a knife, or baggage that one left on a public thoroughfare, which has caused injury to someone. According to Samuel and Rab, if they were abandoned they would be in the same class as Pit, but if they were not abandoned, then, according to Samuel, who maintains that all such damages are included in the class of Pit, they would be classed as Pit, while according to Rab, who maintains that all such damages should be judged according to the rules which apply to the Ox, these would be put in the same class as the Ox.

(Gemara)

 

FIVE are considered harmless, while five are considered dangerous. Cattle are not considered dangerous whether to gore, to push, to bite, to fall down, or to kick. The tooth of an animal is considered as a danger, for an animal will consume everything that is fit for it to eat; a leg is considered as a danger, for it will break or trample as it goes along; and so is an ox that has become unmanageable, an ox that causes damage to private property; and likewise a human being. The wolf, the lion, the bear, the leopard, and the serpent are all considered as a danger. Rabbi Eliezer says: if they have been tamed, they are not considered a danger, but the serpent is always considered a danger. What is the difference between the harmless and the dangerous? The harmless pays half damages of its own body while the

[p. 210]

dangerous pays full damages out of the best of the estate.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

THE tooth of an animal is considered a danger in that it consumes everything that is fit to eat. A beast is considered a danger in so far as it will consume fruit and vegetables; but if it has consumed clothing or utensils, the owner pays only half damages. This applies only if the damage was done on the private property of the injured, but if it was caused in a public place, the owner is exempt from payment. If the beast derived a benefit from what it consumed, the owner pays to the extent of the benefit that the animal derived from it. In what instance does the owner pay for the benefit that the animal derived from it? If the animal consumed some food from the stalls in the midst of the market, the owner pays to the extent of the benefit that the animal derived from it; but if it consumed something from the back alleys of the market; he pays to the extent of the damage that it caused. If it consumed food from the entrance of a shop, he pays only to the extent of the benefit, but if from the inside of the shop, he must pay for the full damage that it caused.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: The tooth is considered a danger in that it consumes everything that is fit to eat. How? If a beast enters the property of the injured, and eats food that was fit for it, and drinks liquids that were fit for it; the owner pays full damages. And this applies, also, to an animal that has entered the property of the injured and torn an animal to pieces and eaten its flesh;

[p. 211]

the owner pays full damages. This applies, also, to a cow that has consumed barley, or an ass that has consumed beans, or a dog that has licked up some oil, or a pig that has devoured a piece of meat; for these, the owner pays full damages. Rab Papa said: Now also we say that foods which ordinarily are not considered food fit for the particular animal, but which under pressing circumstances they consume, must be considered fit food for the animal. In case a cat has eaten dates, or an ass has eaten fish, the owner must pay full damages.

It happened once that an ass consumed some bread and ruined the basket. Rab Yehuda ordered payment of full damages for the bread, but only half damages for the basket.--Why so? If it is usual for the ass to eat bread, is it not also usual for it to ruin the basket? First it consumed the bread, and then it ruined the basket. But can we say that bread is the usual food of an ass? I shall point out a contradiction. If an animal has consumed bread, meat, or a cooked dish, the payment is only for half damages. Does this apply to a domestic animal?--No, this applies to a wild animal. To a wild animal? Does not a wild animal usually eat meat?--No, the meat was roasted. But if you wish, I can say that this refers to a deer. If you wish, I can also say that it refers to a domestic animal when it has consumed the bread that was lying on a table.

A goat saw some turnips on top of a barrel. It climbed up and ate the turnips, and in doing so broke the barrel. Rab ordered full damages to be paid for the turnips and for the barrel. He explained that as it was usual for a goat to eat turnips, it was also usual for it to climb up for them.

[p. 212]

RAB Hisda said to Rami ben Hama: Why weren't you at the academy last night? Some very interesting matters were discussed there.--"What were they?"--"Does a man who occupies another's premises, unknown to the owner, have to pay rent or not?"--Under what circumstances? If the premises were not for rent, and the man who occupied them was not in the habit of renting places, we cannot say then that the owner sustained a loss, or that the other derived a benefit. But if the premises were for rent, and the other is in the practice of renting places, then the owner sustained a loss and the other derived a benefit. Then there is the case, where the premises are not for rent, but the man who occupied them is in the habit of renting places; the owner may say you have derived a benefit; while the other may answer; you have sustained no loss. Rami ben Hama said to Rabbi Hisda: There is a Mishna that enlightens us on this problem.--Which Mishna?--If you will render me a service I shall tell you. Rabbi Hisda took his shawl and folded it carefully. Then Rami ben Hama told him: "If the animal derived a benefit the owner must pay damages to the extent of the benefit." Raba remarked: How little an opponent recognizes one's errors, if one is lucky! This case is not at all similar to the one in the Mishna, but Rab Hisda accepted it. In that case one derives a benefit and the other sustains a loss, but here one derives a benefit while the other sustains no loss. Rami ben Hama: How did he arrive at this conclusion? He was of the opinion that if one leaves produce in a public place, he probably gave up the title to it.

(Gemara)

[p. 213]

A HUMAN being is considered a danger at all times, whether he causes damage unwittingly or deliberately, whether awake or asleep. If a man has blinded his neighbor's eye, or ruined any utensils, he must pay full damages.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER II

 

IF A man pours out water into a public place and someone is injured by it, he is liable for damages. If a man hides thorns or glass, or has made his fence of thorns, or if the fence has fallen into a public street, and someone is injured by it, he is liable for damages.

If a man put his straw and his stubble into a public place in order to make manure of it, and someone is injured by it, he is liable for the damage; and whoever comes first may appropriate the straw. Rabbi Gamaliel said: Whoever clutters up a public place, and thereby causes damage to anyone, he is liable for it, and whoever comes first may appropriate what was left there. If a man has turned up manure in a public place, and someone was injured by it, he is liable for the damage.

(Mishna)

 

MAY we infer that the Mishna is not in accord with the view of Rabbi Yehuda? For we learned that Rabbi Yehuda said that during the season when manure is prepared, a man may put out his dung into the public street, so that men and beasts will tread upon it, for with this understanding Joshua made the land available to the people.--But you may say that Rabbi Yehuda concurs in this, for he too maintains that if damage is caused, restitution must be made for the damage.

(Gemara)

[p. 214]

IF A man walked carrying a barrel and another came carrying a beam, and the barrel was broken by the beam, the man with the beam is not liable, for both have the right of way. If the man with the beam came first, and the man with the barrel came behind him, and the barrel was broken by the beam, he is not liable. But if the man with the beam stopped suddenly; he is liable, but if he warned the man with the barrel to stop, he is not liable. If the man with the barrel came first, and the man with the beam was behind him, and the barrel was broken by the beam; the man with the beam is liable, but if the man with the barrel stopped, he is not liable; but if the first man said to the beam carrier, Stop, the man with the beam is liable. This applies to one who comes carrying a candle, while another comes carrying flax.

If a man splits wood in private premises and injures someone in a public thoroughfare, or if he is doing it in a public thoroughfare and injures someone on private property, or if he is on private property and injures someone on another private property, he is liable.

There are instances when a man may be liable for the acts of his ox, but not liable for his own acts, and then there are instances when a man may be liable for his own acts, but not for those of his ox. If his ox caused indignity, he is not liable, but if the man himself caused indignity, he is liable. If a man's ox blinded the eye of his slave, or knocked out his tooth, he is not liable, but if he himself blinded the eye of his slave or knocked out his tooth, he is liable. If an ox injured his father or his mother, he is liable, but if he himself injured his father or his mother, he is not liable. If an ox set fire to a stack of corn on the Sabbath, he is liable; but if the

[p. 215]

man himself set fire to a stack of corn on the Sabbath, he is not liable for damages, for in those cases he is subject to capital punishment.

If one ox was running after another ox, and either was found to be injured, and one owner says: Your ox injured my ox, and the other says: No, it was injured by a stone, the burden of proof rests with the one who wants to exact the payment.

(Mishna)

 

SAID Rabbi Hiya ben Abba. Here the colleagues of Symachus disagreed with him, for he maintained that money the ownership of which could not be ascertained should be equally divided between the two contestants. Said Rabbi Abba ben Memel to Rabbi Hiya ben Abba: Did Symachus express the same opinion in a case where both contestants claimed that they were positive of the ownership of the money involved? Yes, he answered. Symachus adhered to this opinion even where both contestants claimed to be certain to whom the money ought to go. But how do you know that the Mishna is treating here of a case where both contestants are positive of the claim?--Because it states: One says your ox caused the injury, while the other says, no. 

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

 

IF A potter brings his pots into the courtyard of a householder without the permission of the owner, and the householder's beast breaks them, the householder is not liable. If the beast is injured by the pots, the potter is liable; but if he brings in the pots by permission, then the householder is liable. If he brings his produce into the courtyard of the householder without permission, and

[p. 216]

the householder's cattle eat it, the householder is exempt from payment, and if the cattle are harmed by it, the owner of the produce is liable. But if he brings it in by permission, then the owner of the courtyard is liable.

If a man brings his ox into the courtyard of a householder without permission, and an ox belonging to the householder gores it, or his dog bites it, the householder is exempt from paying for the damage. But if it gores an ox belonging to the householder, then the man who brought in the ox is liable. If the ox falls into the householder's well and pollutes its water, the owner of the ox is liable. If the father or the son of the householder is in the well, and is killed by the ox, the owner must pay the ransom price. But if he brings in the ox with the permission of the householder, then the owner of the courtyard is liable. Rabbi says: The householder is never liable unless he agrees to watch over the property that is brought in.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: If the householder says: Bring in your ox and watch it, and if the ox causes damage, the owner of the ox would be liable. But should the ox be injured, the owner of the yard would not be liable. If, however, the householder said: Bring in your ox and I will watch it, then if the ox should be injured the householder is liable, but should the ox cause any damage, its owner would be exempt from paying for the damage.

There is here a contradiction: At first you argue: If the owner said: Bring in your ox and watch it, and if the ox should cause damage, the owner would be liable, but should the ox be injured the householder would not be liable. The reason for this is that he plainly says to

[p. 217]

the owner of the ox: watch it. Thus the owner of the ox is liable, and the householder is exempt. From this we may infer that if no mention was made of watching the ox, the owner of the yard would be liable, and the owner of the ox exempt. In other words by keeping silent the householder indicates that he will watch the ox. Now the following text reads: If he said: Bring in your ox and I will watch it, then should the ox be injured, the householder would be liable, but should it cause damage the owner of it would be exempt. The reason is that the householder plainly said: "I will watch it." From this we infer, if the householder kept silent, the owner of the ox would be liable and the householder would be exempt. For in this case there is no indication that the householder will watch the ox. This is in accord with Rabbi who said, that there is no liability on the part of the householder unless he agreed to watch over the ox. Is then the first clause according to the Rabbis and the concluding one according to Rabbi? Rabbi Eleazar said: The contradiction is quite obvious: whoever taught the first, did not teach the second. Raba however explained: The entire text can be taken as in accord with the Rabbis: since in the first part we learn: "watch it" in the second part we learn: "I will watch it." Rab Papa explained: The whole text is in accord with Rabbi, for he concurred here with the opinion of Rabbi Tarfon who said: For the damages caused by "Horn" on private ground, the owner of the ox is liable for full damages. It therefore indicates, that where he plainly says: "watch it" he did not transfer to him any rights to any part of the property, so that it comes under the rule of a Horn causing damage on private property, and thus the

[p. 218]

liability is for full damage. Where, however, he did not plainly say: "watch it" he, it is assumed, granted him the right to some place on his property, so that this would come under the ruling of the "Horn" causing damage on property of joint ownership, and the liability, here, is of payment for half damages.

(Gemara)

 

IF A man digs a pit on public property and an ox or an ass fall into it, he is liable for the damage caused. . . .

If a pit belonged to two partners and one passed over it and did not cover it, and the second partner did not cover it either, the second is held liable. If the first one covered it, but the second found it open and did not cover it, the second is liable. If he covered it properly, and an ox or an ass fell into it, he is exempt, but if he did not cover it properly, and an ox or an ass fell into it and was killed, he is liable.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER V

 

IF A man left his cattle in the sun, or he entrusted them to the care of a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor, and they came out and caused damage, he is liable. If he entrusted his flock to a shepherd, the shepherd takes the place of the owner. If the flock got into a garden and derived a benefit from it, the owner of the flock pays for the amount of benefit that it derived. If they went by it in the usual way and caused damage, he pays for the damage. How does he pay for the damage? They estimate how much a seah's space of ground in the field was worth before, and how much it is worth now. Rabbi Simon says: If the cattle ate ripe fruit, he must pay for

[p. 219]

ripe fruit. If they damaged one seah the owner of the flock shall pay one seah, if two, he shall pay two.

(Mishna)

 

RABBI Joshua said: There are four things for which a man who commits them is exempt from the judgment of men, but is guilty before the judgment of Heaven: And these are the following: He that knocks down a fence in front of his neighbor's cattle; he that bends his neighbor's stacks of corn towards a fire; he that hires false witnesses, and he that knows of testimony favorable to his neighbor, and does not testify.

(Gemara)

 

IF A man caused a fire through a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor, he is not liable under the laws of man, but he is guilty under the laws of Heaven, but if he caused a fire through a person of sound judgment, that person is liable. If one brought the fire, and then another brought the wood, the one who brought the wood is liable. If one brought the wood, then another brought the fire, the one who brought the fire is liable. If a third person came and fanned the flames, he is liable, but if the wind fanned the flame, all are exempt.

(Mishna)

 

SAID Rabbi Simon ben Lakish in the name of Hezekiah: This interpretation refers only to the man who handed to one of these a coal, and that one fanned it; but if he handed one a blazing flame, he is liable. What is the reason? It was his action that caused the fire. But Rabbi Yohanan said: Even if he handed one a blazing

[p. 220]

flame, he is not liable. What is the reason? The reason is that the actions of the deaf-mute caused the fire. He is not liable unless he supplied him with wood, shavings, and a light, for in that case it is a certainty that it was his deed that caused the fire.

 

RABBI Ammi and Rabbi Assi were sitting before Rabbi Isaac the smith. One asked him to give them a talk on some legal point while the other asked for a homiletic exposition. When he wanted to discourse on something homiletic, the first would not let him; and when he tried to talk about some legal point, the other would not let him. He said to them: I will tell you a parable. To what can this be likened? To a man who had two wives, one young and one old; the young would pull out his white hair, while the old would pull out his black hair, so that he finally became entirely bald. Whereupon he said to them: I shall tell you something that will be of interest to both of you: (Exodus xxii, 6) If a fire breaks out, and catch thorns, (breaks out means "of itself") he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution. The Holy One, blessed be He, said: I ought to make restitution for the fire that I had kindled in Zion, for it was said: (Lament. iv, 11) And hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof, and some day I shall rebuild it with fire, for it was said: (Zechariah ii, 5) For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her. The legal viewpoint: The verse begins with damages caused by a chattel and concludes with damage caused by a person. This is to enlighten us that fire means also a human agency.

[p. 221]

A man once kicked another man's money-box Into the river. The owner came and said: I had such-and-such valuables in it. Rabbi Ashi sat and pondered the problem. How should lie decide in a case of this kind? Whereupon Rabina said to Rabbi Aha ben Raba, or as some say, it was Rabbi Aha ben Raba who said it to Rabbi Ashi: Is not this the same as what we learned in the Mishna? There we learned: "The Sages agree with Rabbi Yehuda, that when a man sets fire to a house, he must make restitution for everything that was in it, for it is customary for people to keep their property in their homes." He replied: If he had asked for money that he kept there, it would have come under the same ruling. However, in this case, the man contends that he had jewels in the box. How shall I decide? Do people keep jewels in their money boxes or not?--This remained without decision.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER VI

 

THERE are more cases of two-fold payments than payments of four-fold and five-fold. For two-fold payments apply to things that are alive and to those that have no life in them, while four-fold and five-fold payments apply only to an ox or a sheep, for it was said: (Exodus xxii, 1) If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox and four sheep for a sheep. If one steals from a thief he does not have to make two-fold restitution, and if one slaughters or sells what he steals from a thief, he does not have to make four-fold or five-fold payments.

Small cattle must not be raised in the Land of Israel, but one may raise them in Syria and in the deserts that

[p. 222]

are in the Land of Israel. One must not breed fowls in Jerusalem because of the Holy Places, but priests must not do so anywhere in the land, because of uncleanliness. Pigs must not be bred anywhere. A man must not raise a dog unless he keeps him on a chain. One must not place traps for pigeons within thirty ris from an inhabited place.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: If a shepherd repents, he must not be compelled to sell all at once, but he shall sell a few at a time. The same applies to a proselyte who inherited dogs and pigs, he must not be compelled to sell them all at once, but sell them a few at a time. The same is with a man who has vowed to buy a house, or marry a wife in the Land of Israel, he does not have to act upon his vow at once, but he may wait till he finds what suits him. There was a case of a woman whose son was annoying her. In  she vowed: Whoever will offer to marry me, I shall not refuse him. Men who were not suitable presented themselves to her with an offer of marriage. The matter was laid before the Sages. They declared: This woman, surely, did not intend to marry anyone that was not suitable for her.

 

RAB, and Samuel, and Rabbi Assi once went to a circumcision and some say it was a birthday celebration. Rab would not enter before Samuel, and Samuel would not enter before Rabbi Assi, and Rabbi Assi would not enter before Rab, and so they stood there arguing who should enter last. It was finally decided that Samuel should wait, while Rab and Rabbi Assi should go in. Rab yielded his precedence out of deference to Samuel to whom he wanted to show honor, because of that sad

[p. 223]

occasion, when he had once uttered a curse against him. In the meantime a cat came by and bit the hand of a child. Whereupon Rab in his lecture declared: "It is permitted to kill a cat, and one must not keep it. And furthermore the laws of theft, or the return of a lost object to its owner do not apply to it. . . ."

Rabbi Simon ben Eleazar said: One may keep village dogs, cats, monkeys, and porcupines, because they help to keep the house clean. There is no contradiction here. One refers to a black cat, while the other refers to a white cat. But was not the biting in Rab's case caused by a black cat?--Yes, it was a black cat, but it was the offspring of a white one. Is not this the case of which Rabina raised a question? For Rabina asked: What should be the ruling in case of a black cat that was an offspring of a white one?--The question asked by Rabina was in reference to a black cat that was the offspring of a white one which in turn was an offspring of a black one. The case of which Rab spoke was that of a black cat which was the offspring of a white one which in turn was an offspring of another white cat.

 

THE Rabbis taught: Joshua the son of Nun made ten stipulations: The cattle may graze in the woods; wood may be gathered in anybody's field, grasses may also be gathered in any place, except in the field of planted clover; shoots may be cut in all places, except the stump of the olive; a spring that has opened for the first time may be used by all the inhabitants of a town; anyone may fish in the sea of Tiberias, provided he does not spread a sail, for this would hamper the boats; one may relieve himself against any fence, even a fence that encloses

[p. 224]

a field of saffron; anyone may use the paths in a private field, till the time of the second rains; anyone is permitted to use the sides of the road because of obstructions on the main road; if one is lost in a vineyard, he may cut his way through when going up or down; and a corpse that is found acquires the right to be buried on the spot.

Ezra has enacted ten acts: That the Torah be read on the Sabbath at the afternoon services, that on Mondays and Thursdays the Torah should also be read, that court be held on Mondays and Thursdays, that washing should be done on Thursdays, that garlic should be eaten on Sabbath eve, that housewives rise early and bake, that a woman should wear a sinar, that a woman should comb her hair before she enters the public bath, that peddlers of spices may travel through the towns; and he also enacted that those who were polluted be required to cleanse themselves.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER VII

 

IF A man injures his fellow he is liable to him for five things: for damage, for pain, for medical treatment, for loss of time, and for indignity. How, for damage?--If he blinded him or cut off his hand, or broke his leg, the injured is looked upon as if he were a slave, that is being sold in the market. How much was he worth before, and how much is he worth now? How, for pain?--If he burned him with a spit or a nail, even though it were only on his fingernails, where it does not cause a wound; it is estimated how much money a man of equal standing would be willing to take to suffer that much. How, for medical treatment? If he struck him

[p. 225]

he must pay for the medical treatment, if ulcers developed, if it is a result of the inflicted wound, he is liable, but if not, he is exempt. If it opened and was healed and then reopened again, he must pay for the treatments, but if it was once healed completely, he does not become liable again. Loss of time?--He is looked upon as if he were a watchman of a field of cucumbers, for he has already been paid the value of his hand or his leg. Indignity?--All depends on the standing of the man who inflicted the indignity, and the person who suffered the indignity. If a man inflicted indignity on a naked person, on a blind person, or on a sleeping one, he is liable. But if the man was asleep while doing it, he is exempt. If a man fell from a roof and thereby injured and inflicted indignity upon someone, he is liable for the injury, but not for the indignity. A man is not liable for indignity unless he inflicted it with intention.

(Mishna)

 

HOW then? It is written: (Exodus xxi, 24) Eye for an eye. Does not the All-Merciful actually mean the eye? Let this enter your mind. For we learned: One would believe, that if one blinded a fellow's eye, the offender's eye would be blinded, or if he cut off his arm, the offender's arm would be cut off, or if he broke his leg, the offender's leg would be broken. Therefore it was stated: (Leviticus xxiv, 17, 18) And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast. Just as for the smiting of a beast a money payment is made, so also in case he smiteth a man, money should be paid for the damage. But if you would wish to contend otherwise:--why it was said: (Numbers xxxv, 31) Moreover ye shall 

[p. 226]

take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death. This means that for the life of a murderer payment may not be accepted, but for a limb that cannot grow , we may accept payment.

(Gemara)

 

THE law, here, is more severe for man than for the ox. A man must pay for injury, pain, medical treatment, loss of time, indignity and the value of the unborn child, but in the case of an ox there is no payment but only for damage caused, and there is also exemption for the value of the unborn child.

If a man strikes his fellow, he must pay him a selah. Rabbi Yehuda says, in the name of Rabbi Yosi the Galilean, that he pays him a maneh. If he slaps his face, he pays two hundred zuz; if he slaps his face with the back of his hand, he pays him four hundred zuz.

If he tore his ear, or pulled his hair, or he spit at him and the saliva reached him, if he removed his clothing from him, if he uncovered a woman's head in the market place: he pays four hundred zuz. This is the general rule; it all depends upon the standing of the person injured. Rabbi Akiba said: Even the poorest in Israel are looked upon as free men who have lost their fortunes, for they are the children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

It once happened that a man uncovered the head of a woman in the market place. She came before Rabbi Akiba, who ordered the offender to pay her four hundred zuz. The man asked for time in which to make the payment, and Rabbi Akiba granted him time. The man then watched the woman until he saw her standing at the entrance of her yard. Before her eyes he broke a

[p. 227]

jar containing an isar of oil. She uncovered her head, scooped up the oil in her hand and put it to her head. He then brought witnesses to this affair, and came before Rabbi Akiba and asked: To such a woman must I pay four hundred zuz? Rabbi Akiba answered: You have made no point. If a man should wound himself, though he has no right to do so, he is exempt, but if another person wounds him, that other is liable.

Though a person pays for the injury, he is not forgiven, till he begs forgiveness from the injured person.

If a man says: Blind my eye, or cut off my arm, or break my leg, the man that does it is guilty. Even if the man said: I agree that you won't be liable, the other is still guilty. If he says: Tear my garments, or break my jar, the other man is liable; and if he said to him: I agree that you won't be liable, he is still liable, whether he injured the person or his property.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER VIII

 

IF ONE steals wood and makes articles of it, or he steals wool and makes garments of it, he pays for them according to their value at time of the theft. If one stole a cow that was pregnant, and it gave birth, or a sheep with wool, and he sheared it, he pays the value of a cow about to give birth, or the value of a sheep ready to be sheared. If he stole a cow which became pregnant in his possession and then gave birth, or a sheep which grew its wool while in his possession, and then sheared it, he pays according to the value at the time of the theft. This is the rule: All robbers pay in accordance with the value of the property at the time of the robbery.

(Mishna)

[p. 228]

THE Rabbis taught: If robbers or usurers are willing to return property, one does not accept it from them, and if he does, he does it against the wishes of the Sages. Rabbi Yohanan said: This doctrine was inaugurated at the time of Rabbi. Once a certain man wanted to repent and return stolen property, whereupon his wife said to him: You fool! If you begin to make restitution, even the girdle that you are wearing belongs to another, so he stopped and did not repent. It was then inaugurated that if robbers and usurers are ready to repent and return property, it is not proper to accept it from them; and whoever accepts it, does so against the wishes of the Sages.

Come and hear: Robbers and usurers, even if they have already collected the , must make restitution.--What has a robber to collect? They either robbed, or they did not rob--Rather read: Robbers, that is to say usurers, even if they have already collected the money, must make restitution. I will tell you, they must make restitution, but one does not accept it from them. Then why must they make restitution?--So as to fulfill their duty before Heaven.

Come and hear: For shepherds, tax collectors, and revenue contractors it is very hard to repent but still they must make restitution to those they know that they have robbed.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER IX

 

IF A man stole things and fed them to his children, or left it to them upon his death, they are exempt from making restitution. But if it is mortgagable property, they must make restitution.

(Mishna)

[p. 229]

RAB said: The law is that a document of indebtedness can be attested even though the defendant is not present, or even if he is present and proclaims aloud that it is a forgery. But if he pleads for time to bring witnesses and disprove the document, he must be given the necessary time. If he appears, well and good, but if he does not appear, then we wait till Monday, and Thursday and another Monday. If he still does not appear, we issue a warrant against him returnable in ninety days. For the first thirty days we don't take possession of his property for we take it that he is trying to borrow the money; for the next thirty days we do not take his property--we think he might not have been able to raise a loan and is now trying to sell the property, for the last thirty days we still do not seize his property for we take it that the buyer is now busy raising the purchase money. It is after he has not appeared all this time that we issue an order of execution for the seizure of the property. This procedure takes place only if he pleaded for time, but if he said: "I will not appear", an order for the seizure of the property is issued at once. An order of seizure can be issued only on real estate, but not on movable property, because the creditor can take away the movable property and dispose of it, and should the defendant later appear with witnesses to prove the document faulty, he would find naught which he could recover.

(Gemara)

 

ONE does not take change from the box of a tax-gatherer or the purse of a tax collector, nor may one accept charity from them; but one may accept it in their own homes or in the market place.

[p. 230]

If tax-gatherers took a man's ass and gave him another ass, or if robbers took his cloak and gave him another cloak, he may keep them, because the original owner has given up all hope of recovery.

One must not buy from shepherds wool or milk or kids, nor fruits or wood from gardeners, but in Judea one may buy woolen articles from women, and in Galilee one may buy flax, and in Sharon one may buy calves. But if a person sell any of these on condition that it be kept hidden, it is forbidden to buy. Eggs and chickens may be bought anywhere.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: From shepherds one must not buy goats or kids or fleece, nor shreds of wool; but one may buy from them sewn garments, as these are surely their own. In the desert one may buy from them milk and cheese, but not in inhabited places. It is further permissible to buy from them four or five sheep, or four or five fleeces, but one must not buy two sheep or two fleeces. Rabbi Yehuda says: Domestic animals one may buy from them, but undomesticated one must not buy. This is the rule: All things that a shepherd sells that would be noticed by his master are permissible; but those that might not be noticed by his master are forbidden.

One may buy fruit from the gardeners if they are offering it for sale while seated before their baskets with their scales in front of them, but under no circumstances should one buy if one is told to hide it. One may also buy fruit from them in front of the garden, but not in back of it.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER X

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

  

Law of Procedure

  

(TRACTATE SANHEDRIN)

CASES concerning money matters are decided by three judges. Cases of larceny and injury by three judges. Damages, half damages, double, four-fold or five-fold payments by three judges. The violator, the seducer, and the slanderer are judged by three. Thus, according to Rabbi Meir; but the Sages say: Cases of libel should be judged by twenty-three judges, because they may involve capital punishment. Cases punishable by flogging are judged by three, but according to Rabbi Ishmael they should be judged by twenty-three. . . . Redemption of sacred property by three; Rabbi Yehuda says: One of the judges should be a priest. Real estate by nine and a priest.

Cases involving capital punishment are judged by twenty-three, as are cases of beasts and men who commit unnatural intercourse.

The ox that is to be stoned, by twenty-three, for it was said: (Leviticus xxi, 29) The ox shall be stoned and its owner shall be put to death. Those that have jurisdiction over the owner of the ox shall judge the ox. The

[p. 232]

wolf, the lion, the bear, the leopard, the panther, or the serpent, their death is decided by twenty-three judges. A tribe, a false prophet, or a High Priest is judged by a court of seventy-one.

An offensive war is not to be declared, except by the authority of a court of seventy-one.

The Great Sanhedrin shall consist of seventy-one, while the Small Sanhedrin shall consist of twenty-three.

(Mishna)

 

RABBI Aha ben Rabbi Ika says: According to the Torah, every one is competent to pass on cases of indebtedness, for it was said: (Leviticus xix, 15) In righteousness thou shalt judge thy neighbor. But three are required, since they are laymen. For it is not likely that no one of the three should have no knowledge whatsoever of law.

The Rabbis taught: Cases of money are decided by three. Rabbi says by a vote of five, so that a majority decision may be rendered by three. But when three sit can't there be a verdict rendered by a majority of two? What Rabbi evidently meant was that there must be a concurring decision of at least three. Rabbi Abahu poked fun at this: in that case the Great Sanhedrin would have to be composed of one hundred and forty-one, so that a majority decision of seventy-one could be rendered, and the Small Sanhedrin would have to be composed of forty-five, so that a majority decision of twenty-three could be rendered. But this is not so. The Merciful said: (Numbers xi, 16) Gather unto me seventy men, of the elders of Israel. Seventy at the time of gathering.

[p. 233]

The Rabbis taught: Monetary cases are judged by three, but if one is an experienced judge, he may render a decision alone. Rabbi Nahman said: One, like me, may render a decision alone in a case involving money. And so said Rabbi Hiya.

Come and hear: Mar Zutra the son of Rabbi Nahman judged a case and rendered an erroneous decision. He came before Rabbi Joseph who told him: If both litigants accepted you as their judge, you are not liable, but if not, go and make restitution to the loser. From this it can be inferred that the decision of an unauthorized judge is also valid.

Rab said: If one wishes to judge monetary cases alone, and does not wish to incur liability, he must receive authorization from the Exilarch. And thus said Rabbi Samuel also.

Rabbi Samuel ben Mansya said: If two litigants come before you, before you have heard their case, or if you have heard it, and have not decided to which side the verdict inclines, you may tell them: Go and compromise; but if you have heard their case and have made up your mind as to the verdict, you must not tell them to settle it by a compromise.

 

THE Rabbis taught: The calendar cannot be set save by a court especially appointed for that purpose.

There was the case of Rabbi Gamaliel who ordered: Send up seven scholars to my upper chamber for this purpose. When he came he found that there were eight. He asked who came here without authorization? Whereupon Samuel the Little arose and said: I am the one who came up here without authorization, but I have come

[p. 234]

not to intercalate the year but to learn how the law is applied in practice. Said Rabbi Gamaliel: You may sit down, my son. You are worthy that every year shall be intercalated by you. The Sages, however, decided that the year may be lengthened only by a court appointed specifically for that purpose.--But it was really not Samuel the Little that had come unauthorized, but another. But because he did not want to shame the other fellow, he arose.

 

IT HAPPENED once that while Rabbi was lecturing he smelled garlic. He said: Whoever ate garlic, let him leave the room. Whereupon Rabbi Hiya arose and left the room. Then all the other disciples arose one after the other and left the room. Next morning Rabbi Hiya met Rabbi Simon, the son of Rabbi, and was asked: Are you the one that annoyed my father yesterday? He answered: A thing like this should never occur in Israel.

From whom did Rabbi Hiya learn to act like this?--From Rabbi Meir. It was related that a woman came once to the academy of Rabbi Meir and said to him: Rabbi, one of you betrothed me through intercourse. Whereupon the Rabbi arose, wrote out a writ of divorce, and handed it to her. Thereupon all the disciples arose and each in his turn gave her a writ of divorce.

The Rabbis taught: A year may not be intercalated unless it is necessary for the improvement of roads or the strengthening of bridges, or the repair of the ovens for the Paschal Offering. Or because of the Pilgrims who have left their homes, but have not yet arrived; but not because of the snows or the cold, or the Pilgrims who have not as yet set out from their homes.

[p. 235]

RABBI Yohanan said: Only such are selected for the Sanhedrin as possess stature, appearance, wisdom; and are ripe in years; as have a knowledge of sorcery, and understand seventy languages, so that the Sanhedrin will not have to employ interpreters.

Rabbi Yehuda said, in the name of Rab: In the city where one cannot find two men who speak seventy languages and one who understands them, no Sanhedrin should be appointed there. In the city of Bethar there were three such men, and in Yabnah four: Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Akiba, and Simon the Yemenite, who would discourse while sitting before his masters on the floor.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

THE High Priest may judge and may be judged. He may testify and others may testify against him. Halizah may be performed upon him, and one may submit to Halizah by his widow. He cannot contract levirate marriage, for as a Priest he is forbidden to marry a widow. If someone dies in his family, he must not follow the bier. If the bier appears within his sight he must disappear. But he may follow the procession to the gates of the city. Thus according to Rabbi Meir; but Rabbi Yehuda says: He does not venture out of the Temple.

The King does not judge, and no one judges him. He does not testify and one cannot testify against him. He does not submit to Halizah, nor does his wife perform the rite to anyone. He does not contract levirate marriage, nor does anyone contract levirate marriage

[p. 236]

with his widow. Rabbi Yehuda says: If the King is willing to submit to Halizah, or is willing to contract levirate marriage, he merits praise.

(Mishna)

 

"THE High Priest may judge." Is not this quite obvious? This is stated so that we may adduce that he may be judged. But this too is obvious. For how could he judge if he cannot be judged? For it was written: (Zephania ii, 1) Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together. And Resh-Lakish explained: Adorn thyself and then adorn others. Further we are taught: A King does not judge, and no one judges a King, so he also teaches: "The High Priest may judge and may be judged." But if you wish, we may say that what we are taught is really the following lesson: If a High Priest killed anyone intentionally, he is sentenced to death, but if he killed anyone unintentionally, he is exiled. If he transgresses a positive or a negative command, in either case, he receives the same treatment as any ordinary person.

The Rabbis said: Originally the mourner used to stand, while the people passed by, but two families in Jerusalem fought with each other over the privilege of passing first. So the Rabbis instituted the custom of the people standing while the mourners pass by.

"The King does not judge", etc. Rabbi Joseph said: This refers only to the Kings of Israel, but the Kings of the House of David may judge and may be judged. For it was written: (Jeremiah xxi, 12) Oh House of David, thus said the Lord; Execute judgment in the morning. And if the King could not be judged, how could he judge others? Was it not written "Gather and

[p. 237]

be gathered" which, as Resh-Lakish explained, meant "Adorn thyself and then adorn others?" But why not the Kings of Israel? Because of the case of a slave of King Yanai who once killed a man. Simon ben Shetah said to the Sages: Mark the man, and we shall take him to court. They sent word to the King saying: "Your slave has killed a man." He sent the slave to them. They sent word to him: "Thou too must come", for the law says: (Exodus xxi, 29) If it hath been testified to his owners. The owner of the ox must come and stand by his ox. The King came to court and sat down. Then Simon ben Shetah said to him: Stand on thy feet, King Yanai, and let the witnesses testify against thee. Thou art not standing before us, but before Him who spoke and the world was created, art thou standing. As it was written: (Deuteronomy xix, 17) Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord. Said the King, "I shall not do as thou sayest, but as thy colleagues say". Simon then turned to his right and saw that they all were looking to the ground. He turned to the left and saw that there, too, all were looking to the ground. Said Simon ben Shetah to them, "Are all of you engrossed in thought? Then let the Master of thought come and call you to account". Instantly Gabriel appeared and smote them to the ground, and they died. Right there and then it was decreed that a King does not judge, and no one judges a King. He does not testify, and no one may testify against him.

(Gemara)

 

THE King may set forth to a voluntary war only upon the decision of a court of seventy-one. He has

[p. 238]

right of domain to establish a road through private property and no one may protest against him. The King's road has no limit. Whatever the people plunder, they must set before him and he takes the first portion.

No one may ride on the King's horse, nor sit on his throne, and no one may make use of his sceptre. No one may gaze upon him while he is having his hair cut, or when he is naked, or when he is in the bath house. For it was said: (Deuteronomy xvii, 15) Thou shalt in everywise set him King over thee. His awe shall be over thee. 

(Mishna)

 

RAB Yehuda said in the name of Samuel: All that is said in the chapter of the King, the King may do. Rab said: This whole chapter was brought forth only for the purpose of inspiring awe for him among the people.

 

MAR Zutra, and some say it was Mar Ukba, said: Originally the Torah was given to the Israelites in Hebrew script and in the Holy Hebrew tongue. Later it was given to them, in the day of Ezra, in the Assyrian script and in the Aramaic tongue. The Israelites then selected the Assyrian script and the Holy tongue, and left the Hebrew script and the Aramaic language for the laymen.

 

RABBI Jacob said in the name of Rabbi Yohanan: Abishag was allowed to be married to King Solomon, but she was not allowed to Adoniyah. She was allowed to Solomon because he was King, and the King may make use of the King's sceptre. But she was not allowed to Adoniyah because he was an ordinary citizen.

[p. 239]

Said Rabbi Shaman ben Aba: See how hard divorcing was made! King David was allowed to marry Abishag, but he was not allowed to divorce any of his wives.

Rabbi Eliezer said: When a man divorces his wife, even the altar sheds tears for him.

Rabbi Alexandri said: A man whose wife dies while he is alive, is as if the world darkened about him.

Rabbi Samuel ben Nahman said: Everything can be replaced but the wife of one's youth. For it was said: (Isaiah liv, 6) And a wife of youth, when thou wast refused.

Rab Yehuda lectured his son Isaac: A man finds joy only with his first wife. For it was said: (Prov. v, 18) Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER II

 

MONETARY cases are judged by three; each litigant selects one judge and then both together select one. Thus says Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say: The two judges select a third. Each litigant may reject the judge selected by the other. Thus says Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say: The judges may be rejected only if they are related to a litigant or are otherwise disqualified. But if the judges are eligible or are experts they cannot be rejected. Each may reject the witnesses of the other. Thus says Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say: A witness may be rejected if he is a relative or otherwise ineligible, but if they are eligible they may not be disqualified. The following are ineligible: dice-players, usurers, pigeon-fliers, and dealers in produce of the seventh year.

(Mishna)

[p. 240]

WHAT sin does a dice player commit? Said Rammi ben Hamma: Because the game is a speculation, and a speculation cannot be binding by law, and thus he receives ill-gotten money. Rabbi Shesheth said: It is not a question of speculation. The reason is, that gamblers are not concerned with the welfare of the people.

Pigeon-fliers. Who is called a pigeon-flier? Here it was explained: A man who says: If your pigeon overtakes mine, you win.

Rabbi Nahman said: One who is suspected of incest is eligible as a witness. Said Rabbi Shesheth: Rabbi, he deserves forty lashes but is still eligible as a witness? Said Raba: Rabbi Nahman admits that he is not eligible as a witness in matrimonial cases. Rabina or Rab Papa said: He is not eligible as a witness in a divorce case, but he may be a witness where marriage is concerned.

(Gemara)

 

HOW are witnesses examined? They used to bring them into a room and they admonished them. Then all were sent out, but one, the eldest, was left, and he was asked: How do you know that so-and-so is indebted to so-and-so? If he answered: He told me "I am indebted to him" or "So-and-so told me that he is indebted to him",--it means nothing. He must say: In our presence he admitted to him that he owes him two hundred zuz. Then they bring in the second witness and he is examined. If they find that their statements agree, the judges discuss the matter. If two say he is not guilty, and one says he is guilty; then he is not guilty. If two say he is guilty and one says he is not guilty, then he is guilty.

[p. 241]

[paragraph continues] If one says, "Guilty" and one says, "Not Guilty", or if two say, "Guilty" or two say, "Not Guilty", and one says, "I have no opinion", they must add to the judges.

When the judges were finished with their work, the litigants were admitted and the senior judge would announce: "So-and-so, you are guilty", or "So-and-so, you are not guilty". And whence do we know that when one of the judges goes out he must not say: "I said 'Not guilty' but my colleagues said 'Guilty', what could I do? They were in the majority". Of such a one it was said: (Lev. xix, 16) Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people. And it was also said: (Prov. xi, 13) A talebearer revealeth secrets.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER III

 

THE same procedure applies to capital cases as to monetary cases. For it was said: (Lev. xxiv, 22) Ye shall have one manner of law. What is the difference between monetary cases and capital cases? Monetary cases are judged by three, while capital cases are judged by twenty-three. Monetary cases can be opened for acquittal or for conviction, but capital cases must be opened with motions for acquittal and must not be opened with motions for conviction. Monetary cases may be decided by a majority of one for conviction or for acquittal, but capital cases may be decided for acquittal by a majority of one, but for conviction they must be decided by at least a majority of two. In monetary cases the decision may be reversed for either conviction or acquittal. But in capital cases, it may be reversed if a man was convicted but if he was acquitted, it cannot be reversed. In monetary cases everyone may argue for conviction or for acquittal,

[p. 242]

but in capital cases everyone may argue for acquittal, but not everyone may argue for conviction.

Everyone is eligible to try monetary cases, but not everyone is eligible to try capital cases, only priests, levites and Israelites who are worthy of contracting marriages with priests.

(Mishna)

 

RABBI Hanina said: According to the Torah, there is but one law, which applies alike to monetary and capital cases; and the methods of procedure as regards inquiry and investigation are the same. For it was written: (Leviticus xxiv, 22) Ye shall have one manner of law. But what is the reason that it was decided to have the procedure different in capital cases from that in monetary cases? It was done so that the door would not be locked for borrowers. Then if the judges should err they should not be held responsible.--Then surely the doors would be locked for the borrowers.

 

Raba said: The Mishna refers to cases of fines, while Rabbi Hanina refers to cases of loans and admissions.

(Gemara)

 

THE Sanhedrin was arranged like a half a circular threshing floor so that the judges could see one another, and the scribes of the court stand before them; one to the right and one to the left of them. They write down the testimony for conviction and for acquittal. Rabbi Yehuda said: Three scribes; one writes down the testimony for acquittal, one writes down the testimony for conviction, while the third writes down the testimony both for conviction and for acquittal.

Three rows of disciples of the Sages sat before

[p. 243]

them; each one had his designated place. If an additional judge was needed they appointed one from the first row, and one of the second row took a place in the first, and one from the third row went to the second, while one from the public was selected and seated in the third row. He was not seated in the place of the former, but in a place that was proper for him.

How were witnesses admonished? In capital cases they brought them in and said to them: Perhaps what you want to say is only supposition or hearsay, or testimony from the mouth of an eye-witness or from a truthful person? Do you know that we shall search and inquire and examine you, and do you know that capital cases are not like monetary cases? In monetary cases a man can repay the money and the error be forgiven, but in capital cases the blood of the convicted and of his potential seed to the end of time are upon you.

Perhaps they will say: What do we want with all this trouble?--Was it not once said: (Leviticus v, 1) And is a witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it. And if you should say: Why should we be guilty of the man's blood? Was it however not said: (Prov. xi, 10) When the wicked perish, there is shouting.

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: What is supposition? The judge said to them: Perhaps it was like this: You saw a man pursuing another fellow into a ruin and you ran after him. You found a sword in his hand and blood trickling from it, and a murdered man was in the throes of death. If that is what you saw--you saw nothing.

Though the Sanhedrin was abolished after the destruction

[p. 244]

of the temple, the four methods of execution were not abolished. How so? They surely were abolished.--The law of the four deaths was not abolished. Those who merited death by stoning, died by falling from a roof or by being trampled to death by wild beasts. Those who merited death by fire, died by perishing in a fire or by a bite from a serpent. Those who merited death by the sword were either handed to the government or robbers beset and killed them. Those who merited death by strangulation, died by drowning in a river. or by suffocating.

 

THE Rabbis taught: Man was created one. And why? So that the heretics would not say: There are many Lords in heaven. Another reason is that he was created thus for the sake of the righteous and the evil. So that the righteous might not say, we are the children of the righteous, and the evil might not say, we are the children of the evil. Another explanation is that it was done for the sake of the families, so that the families might not quarrel one with another. Now that man was created one, the families quarrel one with another; how much more would they quarrel if there had been two created.

The Rabbis taught: Man was created one to proclaim the greatness of our Lord, the King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He. For a man stamps many coins with one mould, and each one resembles the other, but the Holy One, blessed be He, stamps each man from the mould of the first man, and not one resembles the other.

Rabbi Meir used to say: In three things a man differs from his fellow man: In voice, in looks, and in mind. In

[p. 245]

voice and in looks for the sake of avoiding incest, and in mind because of robbers and extortioners.

Man was created on Sabbath eve so that heretics might not say that the Holy One, blessed be He, had partners in the creation of the world. Another explanation is that if man gets over-haughty, he may be reminded that the smallest insect preceded him in creation.

 

ONCE the Emperor said to Rabbi Gamaliel: Your God is a thief. For it is written: (Genesis ii, 21) And the Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam and he slept, etc. The Emperor's daughter interrupted: "Leave him to me and I will answer him." Whereupon she said to the Emperor: "Let me have a duke." "What need have you of a duke?"--She answered: "Robbers came last night and took from us a silver chalice and left in its stead a gold one." Said the King: "I wish that they would come to us like that every day." "Was not Adam satisfied that they took a rib from him, and in its stead gave him a maid to wait upon him?" "Well", replied the King, "what I mean to say is that they could have taken the rib openly." She answered: "Give me a piece of raw meat." When the piece of meat was given to her she put it under her armpit. After a while she took it out and put it before the Emperor and said: "Eat of it." He answered: "It is disgusting." Whereupon she said: "Had they taken the rib openly from Adam, Eve would have been disgusting to Adam."

The Emperor said to Rabbi Gamaliel: I know what your God is doing in heaven and where he sits. Whereupon Rabbi Gamaliel sighed and seemed worried. What is the matter? asked the Emperor. Rabbi Gamaliel answered:

[p. 246]

[paragraph continues] I have a son in the lands overseas, and I am yearning for him. I wish you would tell me about him. Do I know where he is? said the Emperor. Whereupon Rabbi Gamaliel replied: What is going on upon this earth you know not, yet you seem to know what goes on in heaven.

The Emperor said once to Rabbi Gamaliel: "It is written: (Psalm cxlvii, 4) He telleth the number of the stars, etc. What is so remarkable about this? I too can count the stars." Whereupon Rabbi Gamaliel put some quinces into a sieve and spun it around and said to the Emperor: "Count them."--"Hold them still", said the Emperor.--"The stars in heaven are revolving, too", said Rabbi Gamaliel.

Once the Emperor said to Rabbi Tanhum: "Let us all become one people." "That is fine", said Rabbi Tan-hum, "but we who are circumcised cannot become like you. Therefore you must become circumcised, and become like us." The Emperor answered: "You spoke well, but whoever wins in an argument with the Emperor is thrown into the arena." Whereupon he was thrown into the arena but he was not devoured. Then one of the heretics said: "They did not eat him because they are not hungry." So they threw the heretic in, and he was devoured instantly.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

 

IF THE judges find that the witnesses agreed in their evidence they begin with the arguments in favor of the accused. If one of the witnesses arises and says: I have something in favor of the accused, and then one of the disciples arises and says: "I have something to argue

[p. 247]

for his conviction," the disciple is silenced. But if one of the disciples says: "I have something in favor of the accused", he is told to come up and sit with the judges, and he remains there all day. If he has something pertinent to say, they listen to him. If the defendant arises and says, I have something to argue in my own defense, they listen to him, but make sure his words are pertinent to the case.

If they acquitted him, he is set free; but if they found him guilty, they hold the sentence over till the next day. During the day they gather in pairs, they eat little, and drink no wine the whole day, and they discuss the case all night long. The next morning they rise and go to court early. The one who voted for acquittal says: I voted for his acquittal and I stand now for his acquittal. The one who was for conviction says: I voted for his conviction and I still stand for his conviction. One who was for conviction may now favor acquittal, but one who voted for acquittal must not change his stand. If they erred in something, the two scribes remind them of it. If they acquitted him, he is set free; but if not, they take a vote. If twelve are for acquittal, while eleven are for conviction, he is acquitted. If twelve are for conviction and eleven are for acquittal, or even if eleven are for acquittal and eleven are for conviction, while one says I know not, they must add to the judges. How many do they add? By pairs till seventy-one. If thirty-six are for acquittal and thirty-five are for conviction, he is acquitted. If thirty-six are for conviction, while thirty-five are for acquittal, the two sides argue the case till one of those who voted for conviction sees his way to vote for the acquittal.

(Mishna)

[p. 248]

RABBI Hisda said: If one says he killed him with a sword while another says he killed him with a dagger, the evidence is contradictory. If one says: His garments were white, while another says his garments were black, their evidence is not held contradictory.

This was objected to. "Certain" means "certain". If one says: He killed him with a sword, while another says he killed him with a dagger, or one said his garments were white; the evidence surely is not certain. Rabbi Hisda explained: This refers to garments with which a man was strangled, in which case they are in the same category as the sword and the dagger.

"The two sides discuss, etc." But if they cannot agree, Rabbi Aha says: He is set free. And thus said Rabbi Yohanan: He is set free. Said Rab Papa to Abaya: Then why did they not set him free in the first place? Said Abaya: Rabbi Yohanan explained that this is done, so that the court will not be adjourned in confusion. Some say that Rab Papa said to Abaya: Why add to the judges? Let the original court discharge him. To which Abaya answered: Rabbi Yosi is of your opinion. For we were taught: Rabbi Yosi says: Just as a court of seventy-one is not increased, thus we need not add to a court of twenty-three.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER V

 

WHEN the trial is over, the guilty is brought out to be stoned. The place of stoning is situated outside the court house. For it was said: (Lev. xxiv, 14) Bring forth him that hath cursed. One man stands at the door with a scarf in his hand, while another man sits on a horse in the distance but so that the man at the door can

[p. 249]

see him. If someone comes and says: I have something in favor of the condemned, the man at the door waves the scarf and the horseman runs and stops the condemned. Even if the condemned says: I have something to say in my favor, he is brought back to court. Even if it is four or five times, he is brought back, provided he has something pertinent to the case.

(Mishna)

 

"ONE man stands, etc." It is very clear that the stone with which a man is to be stoned, the gallows on which a man is to be hanged, and the sword with which he is to be put to death or the cloth with which he is to be strangled are all furnished by the community. Indeed, one cannot say to the condemned that he should furnish the necessary things and put himself to death. But then Rab Huna asked: Who furnishes the scarf and the horse? These are for the purpose of saving the man. Or should they be furnished at the expense of the court, since the court is duty bound to endeavor to save him? Furthermore, said Rabbi Hiya ben Ashi in the name of Rab Hisda: When a man is led out to be executed he is to be given a cup of drugged wine so as to becloud his spirit. For it was said: (Prov. xxxi, 6) Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts. And it was said that compassionate souls in Jerusalem used to donate and bring these things. But if the women did not furnish them, at whose cost then were they furnished? It is quite evident from this that they must be furnished at public cost.

(Gemara)

[p. 250]

IF THEY found something for his acquittal, he is set free, but if not he is led out to be stoned. A herald goes before him and calls: So-and-so is being led to be stoned for such-and-such an offense; such-and-such were his witnesses. Anyone that may know anything in his favor shall come and plead for him.

(Mishna)

 

ABAYA said: They must also say: The crime was committed on such-and-such a day, at such-and-such an hour, at such-and-such a place. So that if one can prove that the witnesses testified falsely, he may come and do so.

"And a herald goes before him." This means right before the execution, but not previously.

(Gemara)

 

WHEN he was about ten ells from the place of stoning, they would say to him: Make your confession. That was the way with all who were to be executed. They would make their confession. For he who makes his confession has a share in the world to come.

When he was four ells from the place of stoning they took off his clothes. The men were covered in front while the women were covered front and back. So said Rabbi Yehuda, but the Sages said: A man is stoned naked, but a woman is not stoned naked.

When the flesh was decomposed, the bones were gathered and were buried in their own place. The relatives came and greeted the judges and the witnesses, as if to say: We bear no grudge against you. You have brought in a just verdict. They did not go into mourning for the executed, but they grieved over him, for grief is a matter of the heart.

(Mishna)

[p. 251]

IF A man breaks into a house, he is judged according to the consequences that might have occurred. If he broke a barrel while breaking in and this caused bloodshed, he is guilty, but if there was no bloodshed he is not guilty.

(Mishna)

 

WHAT is the reason for the law of breaking in? Because a man will surely defend his property. So the thief reasons: If I break in, the owner will surely oppose me and will prevent me from stealing. But if he opposes me, I shall kill him. Therefore the law states: If one wants to kill you, you can forestall this by killing him.

(Gemara)

 

THE following should be saved from committing sin, even at the cost of their lives: he who pursues after his neighbor to kill him; he who is after a male or after a girl who is betrothed. But he who pursues after a beast, he who desecrates the Sabbath or he who commits idolatry, these are not saved from committing sin at the cost of their lives.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER VIII

 

HOW do Abaya and Rab interpret the verse: (Lev. xix, 29) Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore? Rabbi Mani says: They mean a man who marries off his daughter to an old man. As we have learned: "Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore."

Rabbi Eliezer says: This means one who marries off

[p. 252]

his daughter to an old man. Rabbi Akiba says: This means a man who lets his marriageable daughter sit and wait.

Said Rabbi Kahana in the name of Rabbi Akiba: There is no poor man in Israel except the subtly wicked, and the one who lets his marriageable daughter sit. But is not one who lets his marriageable daughter sit, a subtly wicked man? This is the meaning: Which poor man is subtly wicked? He who lets his marriageable daughter sit and wait.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER IX

 

THE following are strangled: He who strikes his father or his mother; he who steals a soul in Israel; an Elder who rebels against the decision of the court; a false prophet; he who prophesies in the name of a pagan god; he who violates another man's wife, and he who bears false testimony against a priest's daughter and her paramour.

An Elder who rebels against the decision of the court. It was said: (Deut. xvii, 8) If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment. There were three courts. One sat at the entrance of the Temple Mount. One sat at the gate of Temple Court and one sat in the chamber of the Hewn Stones. They would come to the court at the entrance of the Temple Mount and say: So I expounded, and thus expounded my colleagues; so I taught and thus taught my colleagues. If the judges knew anything about the problem, they enlightened them, but if not they went to the court at the gate of the Temple Court, and there propounded their problem. If these judges knew anything about it, they enlightened them. If not,

[p. 253]

they all went to the great court at the chamber of the Hewn Stones whence the laws were issued for the whole people of Israel.

(Mishna)

 

THE Elder who rebels is guilty of a deliberate sin, which is punishable by extirpation; but if he sinned through error, he brings a sin offering. These are the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: He is guilty for transgression against a law that is rooted in the Torah, but its interpretation is made by the scribes. Rabbi Simon says: He is guilty even for transgressing only one detail of the interpretation of the scribes.

"Three courts, etc." Said Rabbi Kahana: If the elder gives a ruling based upon tradition and the court says: We base our ruling on tradition, he is not executed. If he says: That is how it appears to me and they say: That is how it appears to us, he is not executed. So much the more if he says: "My ruling is based on tradition", while they say: "So it appears to us." He is not executed unless he says: "This is how it appears to me", while they say: "We base our ruling on tradition." This can be deduced from the fact that Akiba ben Mahalael was not executed. Rabbi Eliezer said: Though the elder says: My ruling is based on tradition, while they say: This is how it appears to us; he is executed. Because controversy must not spread in Israel.

But why was not Akiba ben Mahalael executed? Because he did not give his ruling for the purpose of practical application. We were taught: So I taught and so taught my colleagues. Does this not mean that he said: I base my ruling on tradition and they say: That is how

[p. 254]

it appears to us?--No, he said, that is how it appeared to me, while they say, Our ruling is based on tradition.

Come and hear. Rabbi Josiah said: Three things were told to me by Zeira in the name of the man from Jerusalem. When a husband withdraws his warning, it is void. A rebellious son whom the parents are willing to forgive is forgiven. A rebellious elder, whom the court wishes to forgive, is forgiven. But when I came to the South, they agreed to the first two, but they did not agree as to the rebellious elder, because controversy must not be spread in Israel.

At first there were not many quarrels in Israel. The court of seventy-one sat in the Hall of Hewn Stones, and the two courts of twenty-three sat, one at the entrance of the Temple Mount, and the other at the gate of Temple Court. While other courts of twenty-three sat in all cities of Israel. If a problem arose, it was asked of the local court. If they knew of a traditional ruling, they gave it. If not, they asked a ruling from a court in the nearest city. If they knew of a traditional ruling, they gave it; if not, they went to the court at the Temple Mount. If they knew the ruling, they gave it; if not, they went to the court at the gate of the Temple Court. The judges would say: So I expounded and so expounded my colleagues; so I taught and so taught my colleagues. If they knew of a traditional ruling, they gave it; if not, they all went to the court at the Hall of Hewn Stones, where they convened from early in the morning till evening. And on the Sabbath and Festival days they sat on the hel. The problem was then stated to them. If they knew the ruling, they gave it to them, if not, they took a vote. If the majority said it was "clean", it was declared

[p. 255]

[paragraph continues] "clean"; if the majority voted "unclean", it was declared "unclean". But when the disciples of the Houses of Hillel and Shamai, who were not very experienced, multiplied, the quarrels began to spread, and the Law became like two Laws. From there communications were written and sent to all places. Whoever was wise and modest and enjoyed the esteem of his fellow townsmen was appointed as local judge. From there he was elevated to the court at the Temple Mount and from there to the court at the Gate, and from there to the court at the Hall of Hewn Stones.

(Gemara)

 

MORE emphasis is placed on the words of the scribes than on the words of the Torah. If a man says: There is no need of phylacteries, he is transgressing a precept of the Torah, and he is not guilty; but if he says the phylacteries must have five compartments, thus he adds to the words of the scribes, and he is guilty.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER X

 

ALL of Israel have a share in the world to come, for it was said: (Isaiah lx, 21) Thy people also shall be all righteous: They shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. And the following have no share in the world to come. He that says that no resurrection is stated in the Bible; he that says that the Bible does not come from Heaven. The heretic. Rabbi Akiba said: also he that reads proscribed books, and he that whispers charms over a wound and says: (Exodus xv, 26) I will put none of these diseases upon thee which I have brought 

[p. 256]

upon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord that healeth thee. Abba Saul says: He also who pronounces the Name of the Lord with all of its letters.

(Mishna)

 

SAID Rabbi Yohanan: Where is a resurrection indicated in the Bible?--It was said: (Numbers xviii, 28) And ye shall give thereof the Lord's heave offering to Aaron the priest. Does Aaron live forever? Why, he did not even enter the land of Israel. Can the offering then be given to him? This means that he is to be resurrected, and Israel will give him the offering. From this we infer that resurrection is indicated in the Torah. The school of Rabbi Ishmael taught: To Aaron, means as Aaron. As Aaron was a scholar, so his sons are to be considered scholars. Rabbi Samuel ben Nahman said in the name of Rabbi Jonathan: How do we know that the offering must not be given to a priest who is ignorant? (II Chronicles, xxxi, 4) Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord. He who holds to the Law of the Lord has a share: whoever does not hold to the Law has no share. Said Rab Aha ben Adda in the name of Rab Yehuda: Whoever gives the Offering to an ignorant priest is as if he had given it to a lion. Just as of a lion we are not sure whether he will tear and eat it, or will not tear and eat it, so of an ignorant priest we are not sure whether he will eat it in cleanliness or in uncleanliness. Rabbi Yohanan says: One may even cause him death. For it was said: (Lev. xxii, 9) And die therefore, if they profane it. The school of Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob taught: He also leads him into transgression, for

[p. 257]

it was said: (Lev. xxii, 16) Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass when they eat their holy things.

Rabbi Simai said: How do we infer resurrection from the Bible?--For it was said: (Exodus vi, 4) And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan. It is not said to you, but to them. From this, too, we infer resurrection is indicated in the Torah.

Rabbi Gamaliel was asked by the Saducees: Whence do we know that the Lord will resurrect the dead? He answered them: From the Torah, the Prophets and the Hagiographa; but they would not accept it. From the Torah, for it is written: (Deut. xxxi, 16) And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers and rise up. But, said they to him: Do we not read: And this people will rise up? From the Prophets (Isaiah xxvi, 19): Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.--Perhaps those are the dead that Ezekiel resurrected? From the Hagiographa, as is written: (Cant. vii, 9) And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak. Perhaps this means only that the lips were moving. This is according to Rabbi Yohanan, for Rabbi Yohanan taught, in the name of Rabbi Yehozadak: If a ruling is quoted in the name of one departed, his lips whisper in his grave. For it was said: Causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak. Not until he quoted to them the following verse: (Deut. xi, 21) Which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them. It is not said to "you",

[p. 258]

but to "them". Thus resurrection is stated in the Torah. Others say, he quoted the following verse: (Deut. iv, 4) But ye that did cleave unto the Lord, your God, are alive every one of you this day. As you are alive today, even though those that live today shall be dead, you will be alive. As you are alive today, so will you be alive in the world to come.

Queen Cleopatra asked of Rabbi Meir: I know that the dead shall be resurrected, for it is written: (Psalms lxxii, 16) And they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth. Will they arise naked or garbed? He answered: This is deduced by a fortiori argument from a grain of wheat: While a grain of wheat is put into the ground naked, it emerges in many garbs. The righteous who are buried in their garments will so much the more arise dressed.

Caesar said to Rabbi Gamaliel: You say that the dead will come to life again, but the dead turn to dust. How can dust come to life again? Said the emperor's daughter: Let me answer him: We have two pottery makers in our town. One moulds from water; the other from clay. Which one is the more praiseworthy? Said Caesar: The one who moulds from water. If he can mould from water, he surely can mould from clay, answered his daughter.

A heretic said once to Rabbi Ammi: You say that the dead will arise again, but the dead turn to dust. How can they arise again? He answered: I will tell you a fable: This is like unto a King of flesh and blood who said to his servants: Go and build for me a great Palace in a place where there is no earth nor water. They went and they built him a palace, but in a few days the palace

[p. 259]

collapsed. Thereupon the King commanded them to build him a palace in a place where there was earth and water. This we cannot do they said. The King scolded them: In a place where there was no earth and no water, you built a palace; but in a place where there is earth and water you surely can build. But if you don't believe, go into the dale and observe the mouse. Today half of it is dust and half flesh. On the morrow it is all developed, and is entirely of flesh. But if you should say that this takes a long time, go into the mountains and you will find a single snail. On the morrow a rain will fall, and the place will be filled with snails.

A heretic said once to Gebiha ben Pesisa: "Woe unto you, you wicked people! You say that the dead will live again. If even those who are alive shall die, how shall the dead live?" He replied: "Woe unto you, you wicked people! You say that the dead will not live again. If those who do not exist as yet, will live, how much more shall those live who exist now?" "You call me wicked," said the heretic--"If I give you a kick I'll knock the hump off your back." "If you would do that," replied ben Pesisa, "you would be known as a great physician and you would receive a large fee."

 

THE Rabbis said: There was a story of two men who were taken captive on Mount Carmel, and the captor walked behind them. Said one of them to the other: The camel that is walking in front of us is blind in one eye. It is loaded with two kegs; one is filled with wine, the other with oil. Of the two men that are leading it one is a Jew and one is a heathen. "You stiff-necked people"--said the captor to them--"How do you know all

[p. 260]

this?" They answered: The camel eats the grass on the side that it can see; on the side it cannot see, it does not eat. It is loaded with two kegs one of wine and one of oil. Wine drips and sinks into the ground, while oil drips and remains on the surface. And the two men that are leading it, one is a Jew, the other a heathen. The heathen attends to his call of nature in the middle of the road, while the Jew steps aside. He ran after them and found that it was really so. He came back and kissed his captives, and made them guests in his home.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER XI

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 261]

  

Flogging

  

(TRACTATE MACOTH)

WHAT is to be done with witnesses who testify falsely? If they say of a priest: "We testify that such-and-such a one is the son of a divorcee, or the son of a woman who performed Halizah, one cannot say that the false witness should become the son of a divorcee, or the son of a woman who performed Halizah instead of the priest, but he receives forty lashes. If they testify that a man should be exiled, one can't say that they should be exiled in his stead, but they receive forty lashes.

If witnesses said: "We testify that so-and-so owes his neighbor two hundred zuz" and they were found to have testified falsely, they are flogged and they must, also, pay the sum involved, because the ruling that inflicts upon them the punishment of lashes is other than that which governs their liability for payment. This is the opinion of Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say: If a man is ordered to pay, he is not ordered to be flogged too.

If they said: "We testify that so-and-so is liable to forty lashes," and they are found to have testified falsely,

[p. 262]

they receive forty lashes in accord with the verse: (Exodus xx, 16) Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor, and as many again because: (Deuteronomy xix, 19) Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to do. This is according to Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say: They receive only forty lashes.

Penalties of money are divided among the false witnesses, but the penalty of lashes is not divided. How? If, for instance, they testified that so-and-so owes two hundred zuz and it was found that they testified falsely, they divide the fine among them; but if they testified that so-and-so is liable to forty lashes, and it was found that they testified falsely, each one receives forty lashes.

The decisions of the Sanhedrin are valid in the country and outside of it. A Sanhedrin that condemns a man to death once in seven years is considered a destructive body. Rabbi Eliezer ben Azariah said: Once in seventy years. Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiba said: Had we been members of the Sanhedrin, there never would be anyone condemned to death. Rabbi Gamaliel said: They too would have increased bloodshed.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

THE following are banished into exile: Whoever kills someone through an error; for instance: if one was rolling a roof with a roller, and it fell and killed a man, or he was lowering a barrel and it fell and killed a man, or a man was on a ladder and fell on someone and killed him--all these are banished into exile. But if he was pulling up the roller and it fell on someone and killed him, or if one was drawing up a barrel and the rope snapped

[p. 263]

and caused the barrel to fall on someone and kill him, or if one was going up a ladder and fell down on a man and killed him--All these are not exiled. This is the rule: Whoever kills someone coming down is banished into exile; but otherwise, he is not exiled.

If a man threw a stone into a public place and killed someone, he is banished into exile. Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says: If after the stone has left the man's hand someone put out his head and it struck him, the man is not guilty. If a man threw a stone into his own yard and it killed someone, if that person had the right of entry into the yard, the man should be banished into exile, but if the person had no right there the man is not exiled, for it is written: (Deut. xix, 5) As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbor. . . . The wood is a place where the injured and the injurer have a right to enter. From this follows that the yard, into which the other has no right of entry, exempts the householder. Rabbi Abba Saul says: This applies to every accidental killing in an optional act such as the hewing of wood, but it excludes the father who hits his son, or the teacher who strikes his pupil, or the clerk of the court who administers the lashes.

(Mishna)

 

IF HE throws a stone into a public place, is he a deliberate offender? Rabbi Samuel ben Isaac said: If it happens while he is demolishing a wall? Then he should take precautions. Suppose he was demolishing it at night,--he should be doubly careful. If he were loading the debris on a rubbish pile? What sort of a place was it? If it is a public thoroughfare, then he is guilty of negligence; but if it is not a thoroughfare, then it is mischance.

[p. 264]

[paragraph continues] Rab Papa said: This is a case of a rubbish pile which people are apt to pass at night, but are not using it as a rule during the day time. It so happened that someone came there during the day time. In this instance it is not a case of negligence, because no one is expected there during the day time. It is, however, a case of mischance, because it does occur that people pass it sometimes.

(Gemara)

 

A FATHER may escape into exile for the death of his son, and a son may escape into exile for the death of his father. All are banished into exile for the death of an Israelite, and an Israelite goes into exile for the death of all others with the exception of that of a resident stranger. And a resident stranger is exiled only for the death of another stranger. A blind person does not go into exile, so says Rabbi Yahuda, but Rabbi Meir says: He does go. An enemy of the slain man does not go into exile. Rabbi Yosi ben Yehuda says: An enemy should be put to death, because he is a "potential deliberate murderer". Rabbi Simon says: There is an enemy that may escape into exile, and there is an enemy that may not escape. This is the rule: All those of whom it may be said that they killed deliberately, may not escape into exile; but those of whom it may be said that they killed through accident, they may escape into exile.

Whither shall they be banished into exile? To the cities of refuge: To three cities on the other side of the Jordan, and to three cities in Canaan, as it was said: (Numbers xxxv, 14) Ye shall give three cities on this side of the Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan.

[p. 265]

Rabbi Yosi ben Yehuda said: At first they used to send to the cities of refuge, those that killed deliberately and those that killed through an accident. The court would then send and bring them from there. Whoever was condemned to death was executed, if he were not condemned, he went free; and whoever was sentenced to be banished was returned to the city of refuge, for it was said: (Numbers xxxv, 25) And the congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, etc. . . .

If a man-slayer has escaped to a city of refuge, and the citizens of the town wish to do him honor, he must say to them: "I am a man-slayer." If they answer: "Even so we wish to do honor unto you," he may accept it from them, for it was said: (Deuteronomy xix, 4) And this is the case of the slayer. They used to pay the salary of the Levites.

Rabbi Meir says: They need not pay them their salaries. He may resume the office that he held before, this is according to Rabbi Meir, but Rabbi Yehuda says: He does not resume his former office.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER II

 

THE following receive lashes: He who has intercourse with his sister, his father's sister, his mother's sister, his wife's sister, his brother's wife, his father's brother's wife, or a menstruant. A High Priest who takes a widow unto him, a priest who takes a divorcee or a Haluzah, a layman who takes a bastard or a Nathina, or the daughter of a layman who married a bastard or a Nathina. If a High Priest married a woman that was a widow and a divorcee, he is liable on two counts, but

[p. 266]

if he married a woman who is a divorcee and a Haluzah, he is guilty only on one count.

He is flogged who eats Holy Food while he is unclean, or he who enters the Sanctuary while he is unclean. He who eats Fat or the Blood, the Remains or the Refuse of Offerings, or that which became unclean, or who slaughtered an Offering outside the Temple, or eats leavened food during Passover, or he who eats or performs work on the Day of Atonement. . . .

(Mishna)

 

WE ARE taught here only of those transgressions that incur death at the hand of the Lord, but not those that incur the death penalty by sentence of the court. The Mishna here teaches according to the opinion of Rabbi Akiba. For we have been taught that both those who are liable to death at the hand of the Lord and those who are liable to the death penalty by sentence of the court, incur also the penalty of forty lashes.--These are the words of Rabbi Ishmael. Rabbi Akiba says that only those who are liable to death at the hand of the Lord incur the penalty of forty lashes, for if they should repent, the court of Heaven may grant them forgiveness; while those who incur the death penalty by sentence of the court are not subject to the penalty of "forty lashes", for if they should repent, the earthly court cannot grant them forgiveness. Rabbi Isaac says: Those guilty of incest have already been included in the penalty of death at the hand of the Lord; what reason is there for including here the case of the brother and his sister?--To show that this offense is punishable by extirpation only, and not by forty lashes.

(Gemara)

[p. 267]

IF A man shears his head bald, and rounds out the hair on the corners of his head, or shaves the corners of his beard, or makes an incision into his flesh because of the Dead, he is liable to forty lashes. . . .

(Mishna)

 

THE Rabbis taught: (Leviticus xix, 28) Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh. One could believe that a man is liable to lashes if he cut his flesh because his house has collapsed, or because his ship was lost at sea. It is stated (Ibid.) For a soul,--This means that one incurs punishment only if he cut his flesh because of the dead.

(Gemara)

 

IF A man writes on his skin "incision writing" he is liable to forty lashes. If he wrote but did not tattoo it, or tattooed but did not imprint it, he is not guilty. He is liable only if he writes and incises it with ink or with eye-paint or anything that leaves a permanent mark. Rabbi Simon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Simon: He is not guilty unless he has written the name of a god. For it was said: (Leviticus xix, 28) Nor print any marks upon you: I am the Lord.

How many lashes are inflicted on a transgressor?--Forty less one, for it was said: (Deuteronomy xxv, 2, 3) By number forty. This means a number close to forty. Rabbi Yehuda says: He gets the full forty; and where does he receive the fortieth? Between his shoulders.

When they estimate how many lashes he can stand, it must be a number that is  by three. If they estimated that he can stand forty, and after he has received part of the flogging, they say that he cannot stand any

[p. 268]

more; he is exempt. If they estimated that he can stand eighteen, and after he had received the eighteen  they say that he can stand forty, he is exempt from the rest.

(Mishna)

 

WHENCE is this?--Had it been written: "Forty in Number" I would say it actually means forty lashes in number, but now that it is written: "by number forty", it means a number close to forty. Raba said: How foolish are the people who stand up in reverence for the scroll of the Torah, but not for the great men that interpreted the Torah. In the Torah it is written forty lashes, but the Rabbis came, and by their interpretation reduced it by one.

(Gemara)

 

HOW is a person to be flogged? His two hands are bound to a post on either side of him, and the beadle of the synagogue takes hold of his garments.--If they get torn let them be torn, if they get ripped, let them be ripped, till his chest is bared. A stone is placed behind him on which the beadle stands with a strap of calf's hide, it is folded twice and then folded into four, and two straps are attached to it. The handle of the strap is one handbreadth long and one handbreadth wide; and its tip must reach his navel. He gives one-third of the lashes in front, and two-thirds behind. He strikes him neither in a standing nor in a sitting position, but only when he is stooped over, for it was said: (Deuteronomy xxv, 2) The judge shall cause him to lie down. And the one that strikes, strikes with this one hand with all his might. And the reader recites: (Deut. xxviii, 58) If thou wilt not observe to do . . . Then the Lord will make 

[p. 269]

thy plagues wonderful and the plagues of thy seed, etc., and resumes again from the beginning of the text: (Deut. xxix, 9) Keep therefore the words of the covenant . . . and he concludes with (Psalms lxxviii, 38) But he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and resumes again from the beginning of the text. If he die under his hand, the man that strikes him is not guilty. But if he gave him one strike more than was ordered; he must escape into exile. If the person being flogged befouls himself with feces or with urine, he is exempt from the rest. Rabbi Yehuda says: A man if he befouls himself with feces, a woman with urine.

(Mishna)

 

SAMUEL said: If he was tied down, and he managed to escape from the court room, he is exempt. A question: If he befouled himself at the first or the second stroke, he is exempt. If the strap broke at the second stroke, he is exempt, but if at the first, he is not exempt. Why is that? Why should this not be the same as in the case of his escape--because there he actually escaped, but in the second instance he really has not escaped.

(Gemara)

 

ALL those who are liable to death at the hand of the Lord. If they have been flogged, they are exempt from the punishment of death at the hand of the Lord: for it was said: (Deuteronomy xxv, 3) Then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.--when he has been flogged, he is considered thy brother. Thus. are the words of Rabbi Hanina ben Gamaliel. Further Rabbi

[p. 270]

[paragraph continues] Hanina ben Gamaliel said: If one commits one sin, he forfeits his soul, how much more, if he performs one precept, shall his soul be restored to him.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER III

     
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

  

Oaths

  

(TRACTATE SHEBUOTH)

THERE are two kinds of oaths; these are subdivided into four. Knowledge of being unclean is of two kinds, which are subdivided into four. Carrying burdens on the Sabbath is of two kinds, which are really four. The symptoms of leprosy are two, which are subdivided into four.

(Mishna)

 

NOW, the author has just finished the tractate "Macoth", why does he begin with the tractate of "Oaths"?--Because there he taught: For the cutting of the hair around the corners of the head one is punished with two lashes, one for each side. For the shaving of the beard one is punished: twice for each side of the face and once for under the chin. Because he is discussing here one transgression that merits two punishments, therefore he continues with two kinds of Oaths, that are subdivided into four.--Why does the author treat only here, of all the laws of "two that are subdivided into

[p. 272]

four"? Why didn't he treat of the carrying of burdens on the Sabbath and of the symptoms of leprosy in the tractates where they belong?--I will tell you: The laws of oaths and knowledge of being unclean are mentioned in the Bible in the same place, and are similar to each other in that they merit a "Rising and Falling Offering". The author then began here with the laws of oaths, and also with the laws of uncleanliness, and having treated of them here, and since there are but a few of these laws, he disposes of all of them here at one time. Then he proceeds to the laws of oaths, which are many.

There are two kinds of oaths, these are subdivided into four. Two: I shall eat; I shall not eat. These are subdivided into four: I have eaten; I have not eaten. There are two kinds of knowledge of being unclean, which are subdivided into four. Two: The knowledge of being unclean while eating holy food, and the knowledge of being unclean while having entered the sanctuary. These are subdivided into four: Knowledge of being unclean, and knowledge of eating holy food, knowledge of being unclean, and knowledge of entering the sanctuary.

The symptoms of leprosy are two, which are subdivided into four. A boil and a bright spot. The boil and its species and the bright spot and its species.

Who is the author of this Mishna?--It is not Rabbi Ishmael, nor is it Rabbi Akiba. It is not Rabbi Ishmael for he says that only one who makes an oath in the future tense is liable. And it is not Rabbi Akiba who says: He is liable only if he forgets that he is unclean, but is not liable if he forgot that he entered the sanctuary.

If you wish I may say that the author of this Mishna is Rabbi Ishmael, and if you wish I may say that it is

[p. 273]

[paragraph continues] Rabbi Akiba. It may be Rabbi Ishmael, for one is liable for some of the oaths, and is held not liable for other oaths. And it may be Rabbi Akiba, for again for some of the oaths one is liable, while for others one is not liable.--How not liable? Does not the author teach of all of them, together with the laws applying to the symptoms of leprosy: just as in these, one is liable in all the four subdivisions, so in the case of oaths, is not one liable in all instances?--Indeed, the author is probably Rabbi Ishmael; and though in the case of the oaths, he does not hold liable one who made the oath in the past tense, he frees him only from bringing a sacrifice, but he holds him liable to lashes. This is in accord with Raba, who said: The Torah plainly states that a false oath is the same as a vain oath; just as a vain oath is of necessity in the past, so also is a false oath in the past tense. The author of this Mishna is its compiler, Rabbi. In one instance he accepted the opinion of one of the Rabbis, while later on he adopted the decision of a different Rabbi.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER I

 

IF ONE said: "I swear that I shall not eat", and he ate and drank, he is liable only once. If he swore: "I shall not eat and I shall not drink", and he ate and drank; he is liable twice. If he swore that he would not eat, and he ate a piece of wheaten bread, and a piece of barley bread, and a piece of bread made of spelt, he is liable only once. If he swore that he would not eat wheat bread, barley bread, and spelt bread, and he ate them, he is liable for each one of them separately.

If he swore that he would not eat, and ate things

[p. 274]

which are not fit to be eaten, and he drank liquids which are not fit for drinking, he is not held liable. If he swore that he would not eat, and ate carrion, or unkosher food, or forbidden animals, or reptiles, he is liable. But Rabbi Simon says: He is not liable. If he says: "Konam (sacred); I shall not enjoy my wife if I have eaten today", and he ate carrion, unkosher food, forbidden animals, or reptiles, his wife is forbidden to him.

(Mishna)

 

RABBI Hiya ben Abin said in the name of Samuel: If a man said: "I swear I shall not eat," but he drank, he is guilty. If you wish, I can prove it to you by logic and if you wish I can prove it to you from the Scriptures. If you wish, I can prove it to you by logic, for if one says to his friend: "Let's partake of something" they go in and eat and drink. And if you wish, I can prove to you from the Scriptures that drinking is included in eating. For it was said: (Deuteronomy xiv, 23) And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine. Tirosh is wine, and yet it is written: "Thou shalt eat." Possibly the Scripture means when one dips his bread in it. For Samuel said: Wine sauce is prepared with almonds and juices of other vegetables. Furthermore Rabbi Aha bar Jacob explained: Can this be deduced from the following verse: (Deuteronomy xiv, 26) And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink. Wine is a drink, yet here "eating" is used.--Perhaps it means in wine sauce? It is said "strong drink" which means something that intoxicates.

[p. 275]

[paragraph continues] And perhaps a pressed fig is meant, for it was taught: If he ate a pressed fig and ate honey and milk and had then entered the Temple and performed the service, he is liable.--Furthermore we deduce that drinking includes eating, from the words "strong drink" which is used in the case of the Nazirite, just as it means wine there, so it also means wine here.

(Gemara)

 

WHAT is a vain oath?--If he swore of something that is contrary to what is well known to all men. For instance: he said of a pillar of stone that it was of gold; he said of a man that it was a woman or of a woman that it was a man. Or if he swore of a thing that was impossible: "If I have not seen a camel flying in the air," or "If I have not seen a serpent as thick as a beam of the olive-press." If a man said to witnesses: "Come and testify for me" and they replied: "We swear that we will not testify for you." If he swore that he would nullify a precept, if he said I shall not erect a hut on the Feast of Tabernacles, or I shall not take a Lulab on the Feast of Tabernacles, or I shall not put on phylacteries. These constitute a "vain oath", for which he is liable to lashes, if he uttered them deliberately, but if he uttered them unwittingly he is not guilty.

If a man swore: "I shall eat this loaf of bread," then he swore: "I shall not eat this loaf of bread." The first is "a rash oath", the second is "a vain oath". If he ate it, he transgressed a "vain oath", if he did not eat it he transgressed a "rash oath".

(Mishna)

 

ULLA said: This applies to something that is known to at least three persons. If one swore of a thing which

[p. 276]

is impossible: "If I have not seen a camel flying in the air." What is meant by: "If I have not seen"? Abaya says: Read: "I swear that I have seen." Raba said: It means a man said, "All the fruits in the world should be forbidden to me if I have not seen a camel flying in the air." Said Rabbina to Rab Ashi: It may be that the man saw a large bird, and he called it a camel, and when he swore, he swore according to what was in his mind. But if we say, we go according to what he utters with his mouth and not according to what is in his mind. It is not so. For we were taught: When a man was adjured, they said to him: "Know that we adjure you not according to what is in your mind, but what is in our mind and in the mind of the Court." Why is this? Because it may be said, that a man gave to his debtor chips and counted them as zuzim, and when he swore, he swore according to what was in his mind.--Not so, for this is the case of Raba and the cane. (A man was sued for a sum of money which was loaned to him. He was brought before Raba. Just as he was to go on the witness stand he handed his cane to the plaintiff and asked him to hold it for him. Whereupon he swore that he returned the money. The plaintiff got so angry that he broke the cane in his excitement; behold! money fell out of the cane. It was then established that one swears not to what is in his mind, but what is in the mind of the court.)

(Gemara)

 

THE laws regarding a "rash oath" apply to men and to women, to relatives and to those who are not relatives, to those who are qualified to be witnesses, and to those who are not. It matters not whether the oath was made

[p. 277]

before a court or not, as long as it was uttered from the person's own mouth. And if it was uttered deliberately, he is liable to lashes, but if unwittingly he brings a "Rising and Falling Offering".

The laws of "a vain oath" apply to men and to women, to relatives and to non-relatives. To those who are qualified to be witnesses and to those who are not. It matters not whether the oath was uttered before a court or not, as long as it was uttered by one's own mouth. If it was uttered deliberately he is liable to lashes, but if unwittingly, he is exempt. For either of these oaths, if he was adjured by others, he is liable. Thus if he said, I have not eaten today, and I have not put on phylacteries today, and one said to him: "I adjure you", and he said, "Amen", he is guilty.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER III

 

AN OATH concerning testimony applies to men, but not to women. It applies to strangers but not to relatives, to those that are fit to bear witness, but not to those who are unfit, to those who are qualified and to those who are not qualified. It matters not whether the oath was uttered before a court or not, but it must be uttered from a man's own mouth; if he was adjured by the mouth of others, he is not guilty, unless he denies it before the court. This is according to Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say: Whether he uttered it from his own mouth, or he was adjured by the mouth of others, he is not liable unless he denies it before the court.

One is guilty if he swore deliberately, or if he swore unwittingly, but deliberately denied the knowledge of testimony. But he is not guilty if he denied it in error.

[p. 278]

[paragraph continues] And what is one liable for a deliberate oath? He is liable to a Rising and Falling Offering.

What is an oath of testimony? If a man called two persons and said to them: "Come and bear witness for me" and they swore that they knew of no testimony for him, or if they said that they knew of no testimony for him, and he said: "I adjure you", and they said "Amen", then they are guilty. If he adjured them outside the courtroom five times, but when they came before the court they admitted the knowledge of testimony, they are exempt. But if they denied it, they are guilty for each oath. If he adjured them before the court five times, and they denied, they are guilty only once.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER IV

 

WHAT is an oath of deposit? If a man said: "Give me my deposit that I have with you" and the man swore: "You have nothing with me", or if he said: "I have nothing that belongs to you", and the other said: "I adjure you", and he answered: "Amen", he is guilty. If he adjured him five times, before a court or not before a court, and he denied it, he is guilty on each count. Rabbi Simon said: What is the reason? Because he can retract and admit each time.

If one said: You have violated, or you have seduced my daughter, and the other said: "I have not violated", or "I have not seduced your daughter", and he said "I adjure you"--and he answered "Amen" he is guilty. Rabbi Simon exempts him. For a man does not pay a fine through his own admission. But though he pays no fine on his own admission, he still pays for the blemish,

[p. 279]

or for the indignity that he caused through his own admission.

If a man said: "You have stolen my ox" and the other answered: "I have not" and he said: "I adjure you" and he replied "Amen", he is guilty. If he said: "I stole it, but I have not killed it, nor have I sold it", and the other said: "I adjure you", and he replied "Amen" he is exempt.

There was a rule established. Whoever must pay a fine through his own admission is liable; but if he does not have to pay a fine, he is exempt.

 

"YOU have violated, etc." . . . What is Rabbi Simon's reason? Because the claimant is mainly seeking the fine. Raba said: According to Rabbi Simon this could be compared to the case of a man who says to his neighbor: "Give me the wheat, the barley, and the spelt that I have with you", and the other says: "I swear that you have no wheat with me", and it is proven that he had no wheat with the man, but barley and spelt he did have; he is exempt, for he swore that he had no wheat and that was true. Said Abaya: Can this be compared? Here he denies the possession of wheat, but does not deny the possession of barley and spelt, while there he denied the whole thing. But this then is to be compared to one who says to his neighbor: "Give me the wheat, the barley, and the spelt that I have with you." And the other answers: "I swear that you have nothing with me", and it is proven that he has barley and spelt, but he had no wheat; he is liable. When Rabbin came he said in the name of Rabbi Yohanan: According to Rabbi Simon, he is asking only for the fine, but not for

[p. 280]

the shame and blemish that he caused. But according to the Sages, he is claiming both the fine and also quittance for the shame and the blemish.--Where is the disagreement?--Rab Papa said: Rabbi Simon is of the opinion, that a man does not leave that which is fixed for something which is not fixed, while the Rabbis are of the opinion that a man does not leave that for which if one were to admit it, he would not be exempt, for that for which if he were to admit it, he would be exempt.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER V

 

ALL those who are made to take an oath as prescribed in the Torah, swear and need not pay. The following take an oath and collect that which they claim: The hired man, one who has been robbed, one who has been wounded, and the one whose defendant cannot be trusted to take an oath, and the storekeeper on his account book. For instance if a hired man said: "Give me my wages that are due me", and the man answered him: "I have given you your wages", and the hired man says: "I have not received any." He takes an oath and obtains his wages. Rabbi Yehuda says: Not unless the claim was admitted in part. How?--If for instance he said to him: "Give me my wages of fifty denars that are due me", and he answered: "You have already received one golden denar." How about a man that was robbed? If it was testified that a man entered the house without permission, to take a pledge, and the owner says: "You have taken my vessel", and the other answers: "I have not taken", the owner takes an oath and receives his vessel. Rabbi Yehuda says: Not unless there was partial

[p. 281]

admittance. If he said: "You have taken two vessels," and the other replied: "I have taken one." . . .

How about the storekeeper on his books? Not if he says: "There is an entry on my books that you owe me two hundred zuz." But if he said, for instance: "Give to my son two selahs' worth of wheat", or "give to my labourers a selah's worth of change", and he says I have given it to them, while they say that they have not received it. The storekeeper takes an oath and obtains his due, and they take an oath and receive their due. Ben Nanas said: How is that? They both are made to take a "vain oath". No, he gets his without an oath, and they get theirs without an oath.

If a man said to the storekeeper: "Give me a denar's worth of fruit", and he gave it to him and then said: "Give me the denar", and he replied: "I have given it to you and you put it into your till." The householder takes an oath that he gave the denar to the storekeeper. If the householder says "Give me the fruit," and the storekeeper says: "I have given them to you and you took them home", then the storekeeper takes the oath. Rabbi Yehuda says: He that is in possession of the fruit, has the upper hand.

If a man said to a money changer: "Give me a denar's worth of change" and he gave it to him and then the money-changer says: "Give me the denar", and he replies: "I have given it to you and you put it into your till", then the householder takes an oath. If the householder gave him a denar, then asks him for the change and the money-changer says: "I have given it to you, and you put them into your purse." Then the money-changer

[p. 282]

takes an oath that he gave him the change. Rabbi Yehuda says: It is not the way of a moneychanger to give even an issar without first receiving the denar.

(Mishna)

 

"ALL THOSE who are made to take an oath, etc." Where do we deduce this?--For the Scripture said: (Exodus xxii, 11) And the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good. He that has to make the payment, he is the one to take the oath.

"The following take an oath and collect." Why is a hired-man different, that the Rabbis have decreed that he should take the oath and obtain his payment? Said Rab Yehuda in the name of Samuel: Here they taught a great law. Are these then laws? Say then, that these are great rulings--Great, because there are also minor rulings? But Rab Nahman said in the name of Samuel: They enacted here iron-clad laws. The Rabbis here took the oath away from the householder and imposed it upon the hired man for the sake of his livelihood.--Shall we then injure the householder for the sake of the livelihood of the hired man?--the householder himself would prefer that the hired man take the oath and get his wages, so that the men will hire themselves out to him.--Just the opposite. Would not the hired man prefer that the householder take the oath and be freed from paying him, so that the householder be compelled to hire him?--The householder has to employ hired men. The hired man needs employment.--Furthermore the householder is occupied with his many hired men.--Then why should he not pay him without an oath?--Just to appease the house-holder--

[p. 283]

[paragraph continues] Then why should he not pay him before witnesses?--That would be inconvenient for him--Then why should he not pay him at the beginning?--Well, both need credit. This should also apply in the case of arranging the amount of the wages stipulated. Therefore we have learned: If the labourer says: You stipulated two zuz; while the householder says: "I stipulated only one", the burden of proof falls upon the one who demands the payment. The labourer surely remembers the amount stipulated.--If so, this should also apply in case the time of payment has expired. Why was it taught: If the time had expired, and he did not pay him, he does not take an oath to receive his wages?--It is assumed that the householder will not transgress the precept: (Lev. xix, 13) . . . shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.--But didn't you say that the householder is preoccupied with his hired men?--This only before the time of payment has arrived. But when the time of payment has arrived? The obligation lies heavy upon him and he is aware of his duty.--Will the labourer then transgress the precept: (Lev. xix, 13) Thou shalt not rob?--As for the householder there are two assumptions: First the householder will not transgress the precept regarding the wages of a hired servant, and second, the hired man will not allow the payment of his wages to be delayed.

(Gemara)
 FROM CHAPTER VII

 

THERE are four kinds of guardian: an unpaid guardian, a borrower, a paid guardian, and a hirer. The unpaid guardian takes an oath in every instance, and is exempt; a borrower must pay in every instance; a paid

[p. 284]

guardian or a hirer takes an oath in case the beast was injured, was captured, or died, and he is exempt; but he must pay if it were lost or stolen.

(Mishna)
 FROM CHAPTER VIII

    
The Babylonian Talmud in Selection, by Leo Auerbach, [1944], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 285]

  

GLOSSARY

Amora (pl. amoraim), interpreter, teacher, sage of the Talmud after the Mishnaic Age.

Baraitha, external.

Denar (pl. denarim), a silver, or gold coin.

Gemara, lit. completion, also study. The commentary on the Mishna.

Haggada (pl. haggadoth), homiletical portions of the Talmud, legend.

Halacha (pl. halachoth), traditional law, ruling.

Halizah, rite performed by a childless widow (Deut. xxv-9).

Haluzah, childless widow who performed the rite of Halizah.

Hanukah, the festival of the Maccabean.

Haroseth, a mixture of nut fruit and wine.

Issar, a copper coin 1/24 of a denar.

Kab, measure of capacity 1/6 of a seah, 4 loogs.

Kilbith, a very small fish.

Konam, sacred, a term introducing a vow.

Kor, a measure of capacity = thirty seahs.

Loog, a liquid measure  1/4 of a Kab.

Lulab, palm branch.

Maneh, a weight in gold = 100 zuz.

Midrash, interpretation of Scriptures, exposition.

Minah, 100 Denars.

Mishna, lit. "teaching," the collection of traditional laws.

Mezuza (pl. mezuzoth), a rolled up piece of parchment containing Deut. vi, 4-9, xi, 13-17, put on the door post.

Nathin, f. nathina, descendants of the Gibeonites whom Joshua made into Temple slaves. (Josh. ix-27).

[p. 286]

Omer, first sheaf of barley offered as a meal offering to the Temple. (Lev. xxiii-10).

Pandion, coin 2 issar.

Peah, corner of the field.

Perutha, the smallest copper coin ###8539### of an issar.

Ris, a measure of distance 266- 2/3 cubits.

Sanhedrin, supreme court.

Seah, measure of capacity 1/30 of a Kor.

Selah, a coin 4 denars.

Shekina, the spirit of the Lord as manifested on earth.

Sinar, a girdle, apron.

Sotha, wife suspected of adultery.

Sukah, a hut, a booth used during the Feast of Tabernacles.

Talmud, lit. study, learning, Mishna and Gemara.

Tanna (pl. Tannaim), a teacher, sages of the mishnaic times.

Torah, the Law, the Pentateuch.

Tropaik,  1/2 denar,  1/2 zuz.

Urim athumin, Oracle.

Zuz, another name for denar.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: bfd.txt =====


    
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2] [p. 3] [p. 4]

The Wisdom of the East Series

EDITED BY

L. CRANMER-BYNG

Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE BOOK OF FILIAL DUTY

TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE OF THE HSIAO CHING

  

BY IVAN CHEN

FIRST SECRETARY TO THE CHINESE LEGATION

WITH THE TWENTY-FOUR EXAMPLES FROM THE CHINESE

  

LONDON

  

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET

  

[1908]

PRINTED BY

HAZELL, WATSON AND VINEY, LD.,

LONDON AND AYLESBURY.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

CONTENTS

          INTRODUCTION

       <page 7>

     
      THE DOCTRINE OF FILIAL DUTY

       <page 16>

     
      THE TWENTY-FOUR EXAMPLES

       <page 33>

     
   
     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

EDITORIAL NOTE

THE object of the Editors of this series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour. Finally, in thanking press and public for the very cordial reception given to the "Wisdom of the East" Series, they wish to state that no pains have been spared to secure the best specialists for the treatment of the various subjects at hand.

L. CRANMER-BYNG.

S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
        185 PICCADILLY, W.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

INTRODUCTION

  

I. THE ORIGIN OF THE BOOK

THE Hsiao Ching, or Book of Filial Duty, is generally held to be the work of an unknown pupil of Tseng Ts'an, the disciple of Confucius, to whom is attributed the famous Confucian classic known as The Greater Learning. Certainly it can be traced back as far as 400 B.C., within a century from the death of Confucius. The preservation of the text in its present form is due to the Emperor Ming Huang (A.D. 685-762), one of the most fascinating characters in Chinese history, who had it engraved, together with eleven other of the Confucian writings, on tablets of stone and set up in his capital of Chang-an. He afterwards added a commentary of his own, which is still extant, and has proved invaluable to all commentators of a later period. The Book of Filial Duty is often found in China bound up with another treatise called the Hsiao Hsueh, or Teaching for the Young, of which the

[p. 8]

following is a specimen: "The way to become a student is with meekness and humility, receiving with confidence every word spoken by the master. The pupil, when he sees men of virtue, should try to follow in their steps; when he hears wise sayings, he should try to conform to them. He must not harbour evil designs, but always act honourably. Whether at home or abroad, he must have a fixed abode, and resort with those who are well disposed, regulating his demeanour with care, and curbing the passions."

Few books have enjoyed greater popularity amongst all classes in China than The Book of Filial Duty. It may be called The Book of Emperors, from the fact that so many Emperors, both before and after Ming Huang, have commentated upon it. Equally it is The Book of Youth, being the first treatise of importance placed in the hands of children, after the horn books of elementary instruction. The reason for its survival after so many centuries is not hard to seek. Family life has always been, from time immemorial, the foundation-stone of the Chinese Empire, and filial piety is the foundation-stone of family life. Nor does this duty of son to father merely extend to the living. The living head of the family pays due reverence to the countless ancestors who have preceded him. A witty Chinese writer once remarked that in the West family life only began after death--

[p. 9]

in the family vault. Here, at any rate, after years of separation and divided interests, the members met to enjoy a common oblivion. I cannot but think that there is some exaggeration in this; yet not even the greatest apologist of Western methods will venture to deny that the Chinese and indeed most Oriental ideals of family life are superior to his own. Whilst living, only the calls of Empire, or the demands of their profession, may keep relations apart; but the interests of the family are always greater than the interests of the individual, and no exile is without hope of return to the home of his fathers. The dead will not be forgotten, for it will be the duty of their sons to offer sacrifice to their shades. The death-days of two generations of parents are kept sacred with solemn festival, and the nameless and unnumbered dead have their special days of ceremony and remembrance in the spring and autumn. Every house has its family shrine, every village its hall of ancestors. Thus the filial piety of the survivors honours those who have gone.

As regards the living, respect is the great essential of daily intercourse. The subject respects his emperor, the son his father, the wife her husband, and the younger brother his elder brother. But respect is not only for those older than ourselves, or of superior station. The wisdom of Confucius is nowhere more clearly

[p. 10]

shown than in his utterance concerning the respect to be paid to youth: "A youth is to be regarded with respect. How do we know that his future will not be equal to our present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty, and has not made himself heard of, then he will indeed not be worthy of respect."

Maxima debetur pueris reverentia!

The Chinese national spirit is a spirit of continuity; the spirit of the Confucian philosophy is a spirit of harmony with the environment of daily life. "Confucius," says Tzu-ssu, "possessed, as if by hereditary transmission, the virtues of Yao and Shun (Emperors of the Golden Age), and modelled himself on Wen and Wu (first King of the Chou dynasty, 1133 B.C.) as his exemplars. Above all, he kept in unison with the seasons of the sky; below, he conformed to the water and the land.

"We may liken him unto the sky and earth in respect of the universality with which they uphold and sustain things, the universality with which they overspread and enfold things. We may liken him unto the four seasons in respect of their varied march; unto the sun and moon in respect of their alternate shining.

"All things are kept in train together without their injuring one another; their ways go on together without interfering one with another: the smaller forces in river streams, the greater

[p. 11]

forces in ample transformations. It is this that makes the sky and earth so great." [*1]

The first environment of the human soul is that of the family. Before we can become good subjects, before we can aspire to study nature and mould ourselves upon the laws of heaven and earth, we must first of all learn to become good sons, to complete the unity of family life. All things will be added in their due course. To the Chinese mind the successful policy in life is a policy of adjustment. This policy runs from highest to lowest, and back again from lowest to highest. The Emperor adjusts himself to the requirements of his great Ministers, they in their turn to the provincial governors, they in their turn to the local magistrates, and so on down the scale of social order. So this policy of adjustment works equally upwards from the youngest son of the meanest family to the Emperor himself, who adjusts his methods to those employed by his August Father. As The Book of Odes says:

That great and noble Prince displayed
 The sense of right in all he wrought;
 Adjusting justly, grade by grade,
 The spirit of his wisdom swayed
 Peasant and peer; the crowd, the court.

It is for this reason that The Book of Filial

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Duty commences with a chapter on "Filial Piety in the Son of Heaven." The Emperor is, the Emperor always has been, the father of the greatest family on earth--the Chinese nation.

  

II. THE TWENTY-FOUR EXAMPLES OF FILIAL DUTY

Instead of the Hsiao Hsueh, or Teaching for the Young, which is usually grouped with The Book of Filial Duty, I have chosen The Twenty-four Examples of Filial Duty by way of illustration to the Hsiao Ching. They are naive and terse, and yet not without their simple charm. Even where they lend: themselves to exaggeration, as in the story of the old gentleman who dressed himself in gay garments and frisked in front of his very venerable parents, they are not meaningless nor devoid of humanity. The lesson to be drawn is that our duty towards our parents is the first obligation in life, and that we should go, if necessary, to all lengths to fulfil it. Nothing is known of the authorship of these stories, or the time in which they are written. Each story is accompanied by its commentary, and probably the stories themselves originated during the Ming dynasty (A.D. 1368-1644), the commentaries belonging mostly to the latter years of that dynasty. The period dealt with in these tales is a very wide one, and ranges from the time of the great Emperor Shun (circa 2300 B.C.) down to the Sung

[p. 13]

dynasty (A.D. 900-1200). There have been many editions of The Twenty-four Examples in Chinese, mostly embellished with quaint and original woodcuts, of which the figure on the cover of the present volume, kindly supplied by Mrs. Lionel Giles, is an example.

  

III. FILIAL DUTY AND PARENTAL LOVE

In conclusion, I hope none of my readers will imagine, from these examples and the treatise that precedes them, that Chinese family life is cold and repellent, and devoid of mutual love. The moment a tiny life enters the circle it is guarded by the triple walls of kinship. In the children our parents return to us; in the children we survive. All through Chinese history the exile longs for return to wife and children. All through Chinese literature you will find allusion to the love of little ones which has been the heritage of the Chinese from time unknown. The Book of Odes, quoted in Mr. Ku Hung-ming's eloquent translation of the Chung Yung, or Conduct of Life, for this Series, says:

When wives and children and their sires are one,
 'Tis like the harp and lute in unison.
 When brothers live in concord and in peace,
 The strains of harmony shall never cease.
 The lamp of happy union lights the home,
 And bright days follow when the children come.

[p. 14]

With the Chinese the natural joys of life have always been the most sought after. Home, family, friendship, landscape, and flowers--these are the pleasures which they delight in. The religion of Confucius is the religion of daily life. On the side of the parent there is responsibility; on the side of the child, obedience, but not a blind one. Of the responsibility of parents there is no question. Confucius himself laid down the law when he sentenced a father, who had brought an accusation against his son, to be imprisoned with him. On being remonstrated with, he made this memorable reply: "Am I to punish for a breach of filial piety one who has never been taught to be filially minded? Is not he who neglects to teach his son his duties equally guilty with the son who fails in them? Crime is not inherent in human nature, and therefore the father in the family and the government in the State are responsible for the crimes committed against filial piety and the public laws."

On the other hand, the obedient son must be able to discriminate and not follow blindly, when the father is at fault. In the Li Chi, or Book of Rites, it is written: "When his parents are in error, the son must remonstrate with them with respect and gently. If they do not receive his reproof, he must strive more and more to be dutiful and respectful towards them till they are pleased, and then he must again point out their fault."

[p. 15]

The Chinese give respect to the living, and also reverence the dead. It is from the past that they have tried to learn, and the past is a pathway which the feet of spirits have trodden and made luminous. And, moreover, no man can escape from his ancestors, even if he go to the uttermost parts of the earth and dwell among strangers. Over the heads of the family the politician, ancient and modern, looks to the State. But China, from the shelter and security of her myriad bulwarks, has watched the sun of many empires rise and set.

  

NOTE

IN preparing this little book for the press, I am indebted to Mr. Lionel Giles and Mr. L. Cranmer-Byng for their kind assistance. Mr. Giles has revised the English spelling of Chinese names according to the system almost universally adopted by sinologues to-day; while Mr. Cranmer-Byng has made himself responsible for the Introduction. As regards The Twenty-four Examples of Filial Duty, due acknowledgment must be made to Vol. VI. of The Chinese Repository, which contains the only complete translation of these stories, and has been extensively drawn upon for the present work.

Footnotes

^11:1 Translated by John Carey Hall in Chinese Civilisation, by Pierre Laffitte.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16]

  

THE DOCTRINE OF FILIAL DUTY

  

CHAPTER I

THE MEANING OF FILIAL DUTY

ONCE upon a time Confucius was sitting in his study, having his disciple Tseng Ts'an to attend upon him. He asked Tseng Ts'an: "Do you know by what virtue and power the good Emperors of old made the world peaceful, the people to live in harmony with one another, the inferior contented under the control of their superiors?" To this Tseng Ts'an, rising from his seat, replied: "I do not know this, for I am not clever." Then said Confucius: "The duty of children to their parents is the fountain whence all other virtues spring, and also the starting-point from which we ought to begin our education. Now take your seat, and I will explain this. Our body and hair and skin are all derived from our parents, and therefore we have no right to injure any of them in the least. This is the first duty of a child.

[p. 17]

"To live an upright life and to spread the great doctrines of humanity must win good reputation after death, and reflect great honour upon our parents. This is the last duty of a son.

"Hence the first duty of a son is to pay a careful attention to every want of his parents. The next is to serve his government loyally; and the last to establish a good name for himself.

"So it is written in the Ta Ya : "You must think of your ancestors and continue to cultivate the virtue which you inherit from them."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II

THE FILIAL DUTY OF AN EMPEROR

IN order to prevent the people from treating their parents with cruelty, the Emperor first sets an example to them by showing a dear love to his mother; and in order to teach them not to treat their parents with rudeness, he first treats his parents with respect. Having loved and respected his own parents, his good conduct will influence the minds of his people, and his good example will be followed by them.

So it is written in the Fu Hsing [*2]: "When the Emperor has done a good act, millions will be benefited."

Footnotes

^17:1 A section of the Canon of Poetry.

^17:2 The 27th of the books of Chou in the Canon of History.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

CHAPTER III

THE FILIAL DUTY OF FEUDAL PRINCES

ANY man will be secure in his position, however high it may be, if he does not behave himself in a haughty manner; and will be ever able to keep his wealth if he is frugal and careful in his expenses.

When he is able to secure himself in his high position, he can, of course, remain unimpaired in his dignity; and where he can keep his wealth, he will always remain rich. Having placed himself in a position of honour, and secured the possession of his wealth, he will be able to protect his country and further the welfare of his people. This is the filial duty of a feudal Prince.

In the Shih Ching it is thus written: "Be careful as though you were standing upon the brink of a high precipice or treading on thin ice."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV

THE FILIAL DUTY OF HIGH OFFICERS

IF we do not put on such dress as our good Emperors of old would forbid, if we do not speak such words as they would forbid, and if we do not behave ourselves in such a way as they would forbid, then we shall be always right in what we say and what we do. If so, then nobody

[p. 19]

will be able to find fault with our words or with our deeds, and therefore we shall be able to keep our family from being visited with any serious misfortune, and to offer sacrifices to our ancestors for ever. This is the filial duty of a high officer.

In the Shih Ching it is thus written: "Be diligent every minute to attend upon the one person " (meaning the Emperor).

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V

THE FILIAL DUTY OF THE LITERARY CLASS

FROM the manner in which we should treat our father we learn how to treat our mother. The love toward them is the same. From the manner in which we should treat our father we also learn how to serve our August Master. The respect shown to them is the same. To our mother we show love, to our August Master respect, while to our father, both love and respect. If we can serve our August Master with such feelings as we have toward our father, then loyalty is shown; and if we treat venerable persons with respect, then harmony will reign in the circle of our life. Not failing to treat the August Master with loyalty and the venerable with respect, we shall be able to make ourselves secure in our high position and to offer sacrifices to our ancestors for ever.

[p. 20]

This is the filial duty of the Literati. So in the Shih Ching it is written: "Do not do anything in the course of a day which will reflect dishonour upon your ancestors."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI

THE FILIAL DUTY OF COMMON PEOPLE

TO do the necessary in every season (such as growing crops in spring and reaping harvest in autumn), to do the utmost to make lands as fertile as possible, and to be frugal in their expense, in order to keep their parents in comfort, is the filial duty of the common people.

From the Emperor downwards to the common people, every one has the same duty imposed upon him, and there is no instance in which we can find that a man cannot fulfil this duty.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII

THE "THREE POWERS" [*1]

ON hearing what Confucius said about filial duty, Tseng Tzu remarked: "How great is the use of filial duty!" Here Confucius continued: "Filial duty is the constant doctrine of Heaven, the natural righteousness of Earth, and the practical duty of man. Every member of the community ought to observe it with the greatest

[p. 21]

care. We do what is dictated by Heaven and what is good for the general public in order to organise the community. On this account our education is wide-spread, though it is not compulsory, and our government is sound, though it is not rigorous. The effect of education upon the minds of the people was well known to the good Emperors of old. They made every person love his parents by loving their own parents first. They induced every person to cultivate his virtue by expounding the advantages of virtue to him. They behaved themselves respectfully and humbly, so that the people might not quarrel with one another. They trained the people with ceremonial observances, and educated them with music so that they might live in harmony. They told the people what things they liked or disliked to see done, so that they might understand what they were forbidden to do.

In the Shih Ching it is thus written: "The dignified statesman is always the subject of the attention of the people."

Footnotes

^20:1 I.e. Heaven, Earth, and Man.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII

FILIAL DUTY IN GOVERNMENT

THE good Emperors of old ruled the Empire by means of filial duty, and dared not neglect the ministers of their vassal states. How much less

[p. 22]

the dukes, marquises, earls, viscounts, and barons! They thereby gained the goodwill of all their vassal states, which sent their deputies to represent them in any sacrifice offered to the ancestors of their Supreme Master. This is what we mean by saying that the good Emperors of old governed the world by filial duty.

As to the vassal states, their rulers dared not treat widowers and widows with insolence; how then could they dare act so towards the literary class and the people? Hence they gained the good-will of their subjects, and the latter would join them in offering sacrifices to their ancestors.

Now we may say a word about a family. If the head of a family do not act haughtily towards his servant, he cannot act so to his wife and children. Hence he will gain the goodwill of all his people, and they will help him in the fulfilment of his filial duty. In such a family the parents must feel happy when they are living, and their spirits must come to enjoy the sacrifice when they are dead. By the principle of filial duty the whole world can be made happy and all calamities and dangers can be averted. Such was the government of the Empire by the enlightened rulers of old, in accordance with the principle of filial duty.

In the Shih Ching it is thus written: "If you adorn yourself with the highest virtue, the whole world will follow you."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

CHAPTER IX

GOVERNMENT BY THE SAGE

TSeNG TZu asked: "Is filial piety the highest of all the virtues possessed by a great sage?" To this Confucius replied: "There is nothing so great in the world as man, and there is nothing so great in a man as filial piety. The first duty of a son is to venerate his parent, and in order to show reverence for his dead father he has to offer him sacrifice when he offers sacrifices to Heaven. A man who had done this was the Duke of Chou. When he offered sacrifices to Heaven in a suburban district, he also offered a sacrifice to his deceased ancestor Hou Chi, and when he offered sacrifice to Heaven at the temple named Ming Tang, he also made one to his deceased father Wen Wang. His good action produced such an effect that all the feudal barons at that time came to assist him in performing the ceremony of offering sacrifice to Heaven. It is therefore evident that there is nothing so great in human nature as filial piety. The feeling of affection is fostered during the time of infancy, and from that affection springs reverence. Since every man has a natural reverence, the great sages of the time teach him how and when to show it; and since he has a natural feeling of affection, they teach him when and how to cultivate it. As the teachings of these sages are based on the principle of filial

[p. 24]

piety, their doctrine is propagated without effort, and their government is effectual without resorting to force. The affection between a father and a son is natural, and also a source from which springs the reverence which a minister ought to show to his sovereign. When parents have a son born to them, the regular line of descent in the family is thereby secured. This is the greatest duty in family life. We must treat our parents with the same reverence as is shown to our sovereign, because we receive boundless kindness from them and are under a natural obligation to do so. If any one does not love his parents, but others, he is a rebel against virtue; and if any one does not respect his parents, but others, he is also a rebel against the standard of rites. Any action which is against the law of nature will certainly not be an example for the public; and any one who gets a high position, such as that of a ruler, by undue influence instead of by good actions, will be despised by good men. As to the latter, they say what they ought to say, and do what they think is good for the public. Their virtue and justice are estimable, their actions are worthy of being followed, their behaviour is creditable, and their manner is correct in every way. If such persons are rulers of a state, they will afford to the people a good example to follow and will also inspire them with reverence and affection. This is principally the cause of their being successful

[p. 25]

in propagating their doctrines, and in effectually carrying on their government. Do you not remember what is said in the Shih Ching?--Look at that good man. How correct his behaviour is!"

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X

THE FILIAL DUTY OF A SON

CONFUCIUS said: "A filial son has five duties to perform to his parents: (1) He must venerate them in daily life. (2) He must try to make them happy in every possible way, especially when the meal is served. (3) He must take extra care of them when they are sick. (4) He ought to show great sorrow for them when they are dead. (5) He must offer sacrifices to his deceased parents with the utmost solemnity. If he fulfils these duties, then he can be considered as having done what ought to be done by a son."

A son ought not to feel proud of the high position he occupies, ought not to show dissatisfaction with his inferior position to that of others, and ought not to act against the natural feeling of the public. If he is proud and haughty when he is a high official, he will soon bring ruin upon himself and his family; if he feels dissatisfied with his lower position, he may be led to do illegal acts; and if he does anything contrary to the public feeling, he will probably be the

[p. 26]

object of attacks. Having thus wronged himself, he cannot be considered as a filial son, although he treats his parents every day to luxurious meals.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI

THE FIVE PUNISHMENTS

THE criminal law consists principally of five punishments, which are directed against three thousand offences. Of them, disobedience to one's parents is considered the most heinous crime.

To threaten the sovereign with force is an act which shows that the wrongdoer does not know the duty of an inferior to a superior; to say anything against the government founded by the wise men of many generations gone by is an act which shows that the speaker does not know what law is; and to say that a son need not be filial to his parents is also an act which shows that the speaker does not know what is the natural relation and duty between a son and parents. Such acts will no doubt lead the man to a wrong course of life.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII

AMPLIFICATION OF THE "IMPORTANT DOCTRINE"

CONFUCIUS said: "The best way to teach the people to love their sovereign is for the sovereign

[p. 27]

first to love his own parents; to teach them to be polite to each other is for the sovereign himself first to be polite to all his elders; and to improve bad manners and customs is for him first to pay attention to the composition of the music played in the country.

"What is etiquette? It is simply due respect to one's elders. If I respect the parents, the son will be pleased; if I respect the elder brothers, the younger ones will be pleased; and if I respect the sovereign, all the ministers will be pleased. I respect only one person, but I please thousands upon thousands. Those to whom the respect is paid are few, and those whom I please are many. This is what is called "an important doctrine."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII

AMPLIFICATION OF "THE HIGHEST VIRTUE"

CONFUCIUS said: "When a ruler wishes to teach his people to love their parents, he does not go to their family every day to teach them. He teaches them by his showing reverence to all old people. In the same manner he teaches his people to show respect to their elders by doing so first; and to be loyal to their ruler by his doing duty to his superiors first.

"The Shih Ching says, "The behaviour of the ruler is so good that he is loved by the people as

[p. 28]

their parent." A ruler could not have been so loved by his people had he not possessed the highest virtue."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIV

AMPLIFICATION OF "RAISING THE REPUTATION"

CONFUCIUS said: "A true gentleman is always filial to his parents, and in order to fulfil his duty to them to the fullest extent, he also serves his August Master with patriotism. He always shows reverence to his elder brothers, and in order to fulfil his duty to them to the fullest extent, he does the same towards every one who is older than he.

"As he can maintain order in his family affairs, so he can do the same in the government. He bases the principle of the government of a State upon that of a ruling family, and the consequent success will make his name to be remembered throughout generations to come."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV

THE QUESTION OF REMONSTRANCE IN CONNECTION WITH FILIAL DUTY

TSeNG TZu said: "I have heard all that you said about parental love, filial love, reverence to elders, how to treat parents every day, and how

[p. 29]

to please them by making oneself known for good conduct; and now I will venture to ask you whether it is filial that a son should obey every command of his father, whether right or wrong?"

"What do you say?--what do you say?" replied Confucius. "Once upon a time there was a certain Emperor who would have lost his empire through his wickedness, but that he had seven good ministers who often checked his illegal actions by strong protests; there was also a feudal baron who would have lost his feudal estate through wantonness, but for the fact that he had five good men who often made strong remonstrances to him; and there was also a statesman who would have brought frightful calamity upon his family, but for the fact that he had three good servants who often strongly advised him not to do what he ought not.

"If a man has a good friend to resist him in doing bad actions, he will have his reputation preserved; so if a father has a son to resist his wrong commands, he will be saved from committing serious faults.

"When the command is wrong, a son should resist his father, and a minister should resist his August Master.

"The maxim is, "Resist when wrongly commanded." Hence how can he be called filial who obeys his father when he is commanded to do wrong?"

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

CHAPTER XVI

THE INFLUENCE AND FRUIT OF FILIAL PIETY

THE good Emperors of old were not only filial to their parents, but also to the Supreme Father and Mother--that is, Heaven and the Earth. When an Emperor can live in harmony with his elders, there will be harmony throughout his dominion between superiors and inferiors; and when he is filial to the Supreme Father and Mother, he will be blessed by them.

Although the Emperor is the highest of all ranks, yet he still has some one to respect. He has his father and elder brothers.

Why do we offer sacrifices to our ancestors in our family shrine? Because we ought not to forget them. Why must we cultivate our minds and be circumspect in our actions? Because we do not wish to bring disgrace upon the name of our ancestors. If we can show respect to them when we offer them sacrifices in our family shrine, we shall be blessed by the Supreme Father and Mother. Filiality to parents and reverence to elders will be known to the Supreme Being, and will be followed by the people in every part of the world; no place can remain unaffected by their influence. In the Shih Ching it is said that "from east to west and from north to south there is no one who does not submit to rule."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

CHAPTER XVII

SERVING THE SOVEREIGN

CONFUCIUS said: "A good man always endeavours, while he is in the service of his sovereign, to express the utmost loyalty during audience with his August Master, and thinks at his leisure how to repair any wrong his August Master may have done. He will carry out any praiseworthy schemes projected by his master, and will correct any fault which he may commit. In this way a great affection will be fostered between them.

"Thus in the Shih Ching it is written: "Although the minister may be far away from his master, yet his affection will not be affected by the distance. He is so attached to him that he thinks of him every day."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVIII

MOURNING FOR ONE'S PARENTS

CONFUCIUS said: "When a filial son loses his parent, he, of course, cannot help crying piteously. He cannot feel happy when he hears music. He will have no appetite for food, however tempting a savoury. He will greet no visitor, have no regard for elegance of speech, and will put on a mourning-dress instead of a beautiful one. All these tell us the extent of his sorrow for his lost

[p. 32]

parent. What is meant by the saying that he must try to eat something after three days from the death of his parent, though he has no appetite for it? It teaches us that although we have to show great sorrow for the dead, yet we must not sacrifice ourselves on their account, and that we must not carry self-mortification so far as to destroy our life. This is the doctrine laid down by good men of old. That mourning only extends to the period of three years shows that there is a limit for our sorrow.

"For the corpse we make a coffin and some clothes. We set forth the sacrificial vessels, and at the sight of them grief breaks forth afresh. The women beat their breasts, the men stamp their feet, and with weeping and wailing escort the coffin to its resting-place. For its burial we buy a well-drained ground. In memory of our deceased parent we build a shrine. For the purpose of showing our remembrance we offer sacrifices every spring and autumn.

"When our parents are alive, we should treat them with love and respect. When they are dead, we should have sorrow for them. By doing so we shall have performed the duty of mankind, and have done what ought to be done by a filial son, and by the living to the dead.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

THE TWENTY-FOUR EXAMPLES

  

No. I

The Filial Piety that influenced Heaven

Yu SHUN, the son of Ku Sou, had an exceedingly filial disposition; his father, however, was stupid, his mother perverse, and his younger brother, Hsiang, very conceited. His actions are related in the Shang Shu, in the Chung Yung, and in the works of Mencius. Those who speak of him say that Shun cultivated the hills of Li (in the province of Shansi), where he had elephants to plough his fields and birds to weed the grain. So widespread was the renown of his virtue that the Emperor Yao heard of him, and sent his nine sons to serve him, and gave to him two of his daughters in marriage, and afterwards resigned to him the imperial dignity.

Of all those whose virtue and filial duty deserve to be illustrated, Shun is pre-eminent; and his example, in obeying his parents, is worthy of being handed down to posterity, through myriads of ages. Once he was in great danger in a well, into which he was commanded by his father to descend, and his brother cast down

[p. 34]

stones upon him; again, he was in a granary, when it was set on fire; but from these, as well as from many other dangers, he escaped unhurt. He fished, burned pottery, ploughed and sowed, with great toil on the hills of Li. He laboriously performed all these duties, but his parents were not affected, while his brother Hsiang became more insolent and overbearing. His parents alleged crimes against him, but Shun could not find that he had done wrong; he loved and revered them, though they did not requite him with affection. His feelings were grieved at these manifold troubles, and with strong crying and tears he invoked Heaven.

His perfect sincerity was effectual to renovate his family; his parents became pleasant, and his brother more conciliatory and virtuous. Heaven also considered his excellency to be great, and regarded him as truly good, thus establishing his reputation so firmly that it was perpetuated to, and influenced, succeeding ages. Even Confucius is regarded as elevated but a little above Shun, and I would praise and extol them both to coming generations.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. II

Affection shown in tasting Soups and Medicines

The Emperor Wen of the Han dynasty, the third son of his father, Kao Tsu, was appointed

[p. 35]

[paragraph continues] Prince over the country of Tai. His own mother, Po, was Queen-dowager, and Wen was constant in his attendance on her. She was ill for three years, during which time his eyelids did not close, nor was the girdle of his dress unloosed; and she took none of the soups and medicines prepared for her till he had tasted them. This benevolence and filial affection was heard of throughout the empire.

Wen received direction to go and arrange the imperial sacrifices, and requested his mother to accompany him to the royal domains. Morning and evening he visited her in her own apartments, and handed her the fragrant dishes. If the provisions had lost their flavour, he was vexed; and when tasting the medicines he commanded perfect silence. The live-long night his girdle was not loosed, nor for three years were his eyelids closed. By as much as his animal spirits were exhausted, by so much the more did his heart become fixed on the subject of its affection; and for a long time his thoughts were not distracted. Such filial love and virtue so moved upon Heaven's kind regard, that it wrought upon his father to confer the throne upon him as his patrimony.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. III

Gnawing her Finger pained his Heart

During the Chou dynasty there lived a lad named Tseng Ts'an, a disciple of Confucius, who served

[p. 36]

his mother very dutifully. Tseng was in the habit of going to the hills to collect faggots; and once, while he was thus absent, many guests came to his house, towards whom his mother was at a loss to know how to act. She, while expecting her son, who delayed his return, began to gnaw her fingers. Tseng suddenly felt a pain in his heart, and took up his bundle of faggots in order to return home; and when he saw his mother, he kneeled and begged to know what was the cause of her anxiety. She replied: "There have been some guests here who came from a great distance, and I bit my finger in order to arouse you to return to me."

The faculties of mind and body in both mother and son sprang originally from the same source, and are alike; but in common men this connection is broken and interrupted, and they are dull and stupid. Those sages whose nature is heavenly differ from the rest of mankind; and virtue, as in a breath, permeates their whole souls. At a certain time, when Tseng was absent to collect faggots, visitors came and knocked at his door in great haste; and as there was no man at home ready to receive them, his mother was much grieved. He had entered the dense fog on the hills and did not know where he was, when his mother leaned against the door-post and gnawed her fingers as if she would go in quest of him. Her son in the hills is suddenly

[p. 37]

seized with a pain in his heart, and quickly takes up his bundle of faggots to return; although distant, he sympathises with his mother's grief and complaint. The hearts of mother and son are mutually affected, one influencing the other, in the same manner as the amber draws small straws and the loadstone attracts the slender needle. From the remotest period sages have been able to control their dispositions, and in the deepest silence have revolved their actions as in a breath. The moving influence that such minds have on each other the generality of men cannot understand. The devotedness with which they serve their parents and the respect with which they cherish them--who can comprehend.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. IV

Clad in a Single Garment, he was obedient to his Mother

During the Chou dynasty lived Min Sun, a disciple of Confucius, who in early life lost his mother. His father subsequently married another wife, who bore him two children, but disliked Sun. In winter she clothed him in garments made of rushes, while her own children wore cotton clothes. Min was employed in driving his father's chariot, and his body was so cold that the reins dropped from his hands, for which

[p. 38]

carelessness his father chastised him; yet he did not vindicate himself. When his father knew the circumstances, he determined to divorce his second wife; but Sun said, "Whilst mother remains, one son is cold; if mother departs, three sons will be destitute." The father desisted from his purpose; and after this the mother was led to repentance, and became a good and virtuous parent.

The filial piety of the renowned Shun influenced Heaven, whilst that of Min renovated mankind. If Heaven be influenced, all below it will be transformed; if men be renovated, from them will spring a power able to cause their families to become good. In all ages men have exhibited a great love for their wives; but dutiful children have often met with unkindness. Min carefully concealed all his grievances, and refused to indulge in any complaint; even while suffering severely from cold and hunger, he maintained his affection unabated. During the long period which he endured this oppressive treatment, his good disposition became manifest; and by his own conduct he was able to maintain the harmony of the family unimpaired. His father and mother were influenced by his filial devotion; and his brothers joined in extolling his virtues. All his friends and acquaintances, with united voice, celebrated his merits; and the men of his native village joyfully combined to spread the fame

[p. 39]

of his actions. The memory of his agreeable countenance and pleasing manners was perpetuated to the remotest ages; and his example was in many respects like that of Shun, whose parents were equally perverse.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. V

He carried Rice for his Parents

In the Chou dynasty lived Chung Yu, also a disciple of Confucius, who, because his family was poor, usually ate herbs and coarse pulse; and he also went more than a hundred li to procure rice for his parents. Afterwards, when they were dead, he went south to the country of Ch'u, where he was made commander of a hundred companies of chariots. There he became rich, storing up grain in myriads of measures, reclining upon cushions, and eating food served to him in numerous dishes; but, sighing, he said: "Although I should now desire to eat coarse herbs and bring rice for my parents, it cannot be!"

"Alas!" said Chung Yu, "although I was a scholar, yet my parents were poor; and how was I to nourish them?" Exhausted he travelled the long road and cheerfully brought rice for his parents. Pleasantly he endured the toil, and exerted his utmost strength without any commendation. At that time his lot in life was hard and unfortunate, and he little expected the

[p. 40]

official honours he afterwards enjoyed. But when his parents were dead, and he had become rich and honourable, enjoying all the luxuries of life, then he was unhappy and discontented; not cheerful as in the days of his poverty, nor happy as when he ministered to his parents' wants.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. V

With Sports and Embroidered Robes he amused his Parents

In the Chou dynasty there flourished Lao Lai Tzu, who was very obedient and reverent towards his parents, manifesting his dutifulness by exerting himself to provide them with every delicacy. Although upwards of seventy years of age, he declared that he was not yet too old, and, dressed in gaudy-coloured garments, would frisk and cut capers like a child in front of his parents. He would also take up buckets of water and try to carry them into the house; but, feigning to slip, would fall to the ground, wailing and crying like a child; and all these things he did in order to divert his parents.

In the country of Ch'u lived Lao Lai Tzu, who, when so old that he had lost nearly all his teeth, made every effort to rejoice and comfort his parents, constantly endeavouring to gladden their hearts. At times he imitated the playfulness of

[p. 41]

a little child, and arraying himself in gaudy and variegated clothes, amused them by his strutting and gambols. He would likewise purposely fall on the ground, kicking and wailing to the utmost of his power. His mother was delighted, and manifested her joy in her countenance. Thus did Lai forget his age in order to rejoice the hearts of his parents; and affection, harmony, and joy prevailed among the family. If this ardent love for his parents had been insincere and constrained, how could it be referred to as worthy of imitation?

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. VII

With Deer's Milk he supplied his Parents

In the time of the Chou dynasty lived Yen, who possessed a very filial disposition. His father and mother were aged, and both were afflicted with sore eyes, to cure which they desired to have some deer's milk. Yen concealed himself in the skin of a deer, and went deep into the forests, among the herds of deer, to obtain some of their milk for his parents. While amongst the trees the hunters saw him, and were about to shoot at him with their arrows, when Yen disclosed to them his true character and related the history of his family, with the reasons for his conduct.

Do his parents desire some milk from the deer? He is not deterred by the obstacles in the way of

[p. 42]

procuring it; but clothing himself in a hairy garment, he goes carefully seeking for it among the multitudes of wild beasts. He closely imitated the cry, yew, yew, of the fawns, watching for the tracks of the herds. By this mode he obtained the sweet secretion; he also surprised the hunters whom he met in the deep and lonely forest.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. VIII

He sold himself to bury his Father

During the Han dynasty lived Tung Yung, whose family was so very poor that when his father died, he was obliged to sell himself in order to procure money to bury his remains. After this he went to another place to gain the means of redeeming himself; and on his way he met a lady who desired to become his wife, and go with him to his master's house. She went with Tung, and wove three hundred pieces of silk, which being completed in two months, they returned home; and on the way, having reached the shade of the cassia-tree where they met before, the lady bid him adieu and vanished from his sight.

Tung could not endure to behold his father's bones lying exposed, but had not sufficient means to bury them. He saw that his household goods were not sufficient, and he said: "This little body of mine, what is the use of it? If I sell it, I can

[p. 43]

redeem it again, and thus bury my father, who will be saved from dishonour." His filial piety moved Heaven to direct a female spirit in human form to come and help him in fulfilling his engagement; she wove three hundred pieces of silk, and thus procured the redemption of a man of truly filial heart.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. IX

He hired himself out as a Labourer to support his Mother

In the time of the Han dynasty lived Chiang Ko, who, when young, lost his father, and afterwards lived alone with his mother. Times of trouble arising, which caused them much distress, he took his mother on his back, and fled. On the way he many times met with companies of robbers, who would have compelled him to go with them and become a bandit, but Chiang entreated them with tears to spare him, saying that he had his aged mother with him; and the robbers could not bear to kill him. Altering his course, he came into the district of Hsia-p'ei, extremely impoverished and reduced, where he hired himself out and supported his mother; and such was his diligence that he was able to supply her with whatever she personally required.

Passing over the hills and wading through the streams, he carried his mother with much

[p. 44]

difficulty. It was during a year of famine, when all the inhabitants of the land were in confusion from the scarcity of food, and engagements were frequent between the soldiers and the bandits, and signal fires were lighted on the high hills. Chiang was fearful lest the robbers should meet him on the road and plunder him; and they did seize him, regardless of his cries and tears, and were about to rob him; but when they knew of his filial piety and affection for his mother, they permitted him to proceed. While journeying, he was too poor to procure any food beyond the bare necessaries of life; and because he could not provide comforts and delicacies for his mother, he was grieved as if it had been his fault. He went and hired himself for labour; with the greatest diligence he adhered to his purpose to maintain his mother; and soon the stranger obtained an abundance of food and clothing. This success caused his mother to rejoice, and they were both delighted, she forgetting her former hardships in the joy that filled her breast.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. X

He fanned the Pillow and warmed the Bedclothes

In the Han dynasty lived Huang Hsiang, who when only nine years old lost his mother, whom he loved so ardently and remembered so well that all the villagers praised his filial duty. He

[p. 45]

was employed in the severest toil, and served his father with entire obedience. In summer, when the weather was warm, he fanned and cooled his father's pillow and bed; and in winter, when it was cold, he warmed the bed-clothes with his body. The magistrate sent him an honorary banner, as a mark of distinction.

When the heat of summer made it difficult to sleep quietly, the lad knew what would be for the comfort of his venerated parent. Taking a fan, he slowly waved it about the silken curtains, and the cool air, entering, enveloped and filled the pillows and bed. In winter, when the snow threatened to crush in the roof and the fierce wind shook the fences, and the cold penetrated to the bones, making it hazardous to unloose the girdle, then Hsiang warmed his father's bed that he might not fear, because of the cold, to enter the "place of dreams."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XI

The Gushing Fountain and the Frisking Carp

In the Han dynasty lived Chiang Shih, who served his mother with perfect obedience; and his wife P'ang also fulfilled her mother-in-law's commands without the least reluctance. The old lady loved to drink of the water from the river six or seven li away from her cottage, and P'ang used to go to draw it and hand it to her.

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] She was also fond of carp, and when it was obtained, deeming herself unable to consume alone what her children with great toil and trouble continually prepared for her, usually invited some of the neighbours to feast with her. By the side of the cottage there suddenly gushed a fountain, the taste of whose waters was like that of the river, and it also produced two living fishes daily. These were taken out and prepared by Chiang Shih for his mother.

The fish from the river were fresh and delicious, and the water was sweet; the mother of Chiang Shih wished to taste of both daily. Her son went to purchase the fish and her daughter-in-law to bring the water; as constantly as the revolution of morning and evening did they exert themselves in this arduous labour. Having obtained the fish and water, her countenance brightened, and, laughing, she invited in one of the neighbours to rejoice and partake of them with her. Sitting opposite at the table, together they ate them, she foolishly not even regarding, but totally forgetting, her son and daughter, who with so much trouble had prepared them for her. Heaven took pity on these two filial children, and employed its divine power to assist them, sending a spirit to strike the earth with an axe which caused a perennial spring to bubble forth. The taste of the water from the fountain was like that from the river, and two fish continually sported

[p. 47]

about in it, which henceforth Chiang Shih took out for their sustenance, nor was there any fear of the supply failing. To procure the fish now no money was needed, to obtain the water no long and weary walk was to be taken. It was as if the productions of this river and of the water were transferred into the midst of the cottage; and Chiang Shih could support his family with ease for many years.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XII

He carved Wood and served his Parents

During the Han dynasty lived Ting Lan, whose parents both died when he was young, before he could obey and support them; and he reflected that for all the trouble and anxiety he had caused them, no recompense had yet been given. He then carved wooden images of his parents, and served them as if they had been alive. For a long time his wife would not reverence them; and one day, taking a bodkin, she pricked their fingers in derision. Blood flowed immediately from the wound; and seeing Ting coming, the images wept. He inquired into the circumstances, and forthwith divorced his wife.

He remembers his parents, but cannot see them; so he carves wood to represent their persons. He believes that their spirits are now the same as when they were alive, and his quietless

[p. 48]

heart trusts that their spirits have entered the carved images. He cannot rest until he has made their statues, so strong is his desire to nourish and reverence them. He now reveres them, although dead, as if they were alive; and hopes they will condescend to dwell in his ancestral hall.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XIII

For his Mother's Sake he would bury his Child

In the days of the Han dynasty lived Kuo Chu, who was very poor. He had one child three years old; and such was his poverty that his mother usually divided her portion of food with this little one. Kuo says to his wife: "We are so poor that our mother cannot be supported, for the child divides with her the portion of food that belongs to her. Why not bury this child? Another child may be born to us, but a mother, once gone, will never return."His wife did not venture to object to the proposal, and Kuo immediately digs a hole about three cubits deep, when suddenly he lights upon a pot of gold, and on the metal reads the following inscription: "Heaven bestows this treasure upon Kuo Chu, the dutiful son; the magistrate may not seize it, nor shall the neighbours take it from him."

What a foolish action, that the sage Kuo should be willing to bury his own child! Fearing lest his mother should not have enough to eat, he is

[p. 49]

willing to resign his child to death; but when it is dead, what relief will there be for the grief of its affectionate grandmother? When a number of cares come at some future time, who then will be able to disperse them if the child is dead? But at this time the reflection that his mother would be in want filled his breast with grief, and he had no time to think of the future when he would be childless. Heaven having given him a dutiful mind, caused him to take a light hoe for digging the earth. Together Kuo and his wife went, sorrowing and distressed, by the way, until they came to a very hilly place, where they stopped. Having dug into the ground, suddenly a gleam of light shot forth, and the pot of yellow gold which Heaven had deposited there was seen. Taking it up, they clasped their child with ecstasy in their arms and returned home; for now they had sufficient to support their whole family in plenty.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XIV

He seized the Tiger and saved his Father

In the Han dynasty lived Yang Hsiang, a lad of fourteen, who was in the habit of following his father to the fields to cut grain. Once a tiger seized his father, and was slowly carrying him off, when Yang, anxious for his father and forgetting

[p. 50]

himself, although he had no iron weapon in his hand, rushed forward and seized the tiger by the neck. The beast let the prey fall from his teeth, and fled, and Yang's father was thus saved from injury and death.

A tiger suddenly appears in the borders of the field, and seizes the man as lightly as he catches a sheep, and drags him off. Yang Hsiang, seeing the sudden peril of his father, was vexed that he had no weapon with an iron head; but being strongly excited and his feelings roused, he ran forward in the path, crying with a loud voice, and grasped the tiger by the neck. The frightened animal fled, nor stopped in its rapid course until it reached the high hills. Yang then, in a gentle manner, raised his father up and led him home, endeavouring to soothe his mind and dispel his fears, and also presented him the golden wine-cup. Among the great number of sages whose reputations are famous, how few of them have been devoted and filial at the hazard of their lives! But this lad, quite young and fair, as soon as he saw his father's danger, risked his own life; surely his fame will spread throughout the country. We have heard of the lady T'i Ying, who saved her father from banishment, and of young Chu O, who lost her life in trying to rescue her father from drowning; and I think that Yang Hsiang will form a trio with them, and the three be celebrated in the same ode.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

No. XV

He collected Mulberries to support his Mother

During the Han dynasty lived Ts'ai Shun, whose father died when he was young, and who served his mother very dutifully. It happened that, during the troubles of the time, when Wang Mang was plotting to usurp the throne, there were years of scarcity, in which he could not procure food, and Ts'ai was compelled to gather mulberries, which he assorted, putting them into two vessels. The red-eyebrowed robber [**] saw him, and inquired why he did thus. Ts'ai replied: "The black and ripe berries I give to my mother, the yellow and unripe ones I eat myself." The bandit admired his filial affection, and rewarded him with three measures of white rice and the leg of an ox.

Anxious and fearful, he seeks for food; untiring in his toil, he takes up his baskets and penetrates the thickets of the distant forests, where he finds many mulberry-trees. His hunger now has something to satisfy its cravings; he also remembers his mother, and that he must carry some to her. The ripe and unripe berries he does not put together, but divides them, so that mother and son can each have their proper portion. The chieftain heard of his conduct, and highly praised him, conferring a gift upon him,

[p. 52]

and speaking of his filial piety to all around. Taking up his rice and flesh, Ts'ai returned home to his mother with the food; and in their joy they even forgot that the year was one of dearth.

Footnotes

^51:* That is, the usurper Wang Mang himself.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XVI

He laid up the Oranges for his Mother

Lu Chi, a lad six years old, who lived in the time of Han and in the district of Kinkiang, once met the celebrated general Yuan Shu, who gave him a few oranges. Two of them the lad put in his bosom, and when turning to thank the giver, they fell out on the ground. When the general saw this, he said: "Why does my young friend, who is now a guest, put the fruit away in his bosom?" The youth, bowing, replied: "My mother is very fond of oranges, and I wished, when I returned home, to present them to her." At this answer Yuan was much astonished.

On account of his love for his parent, he would not at first taste the present of fruit, but put into his sleeve to carry home the fragrant and luscious gift. I think that when he saw his mother, her pleasant countenance must have brightened, for the fruit filled his bosom and delighted all who came near him. Lu, although so young, had the true heavenly disposition; even in the small matter of an orange he did not forget his parent's wishes. Many children are perhaps like this boy,

[p. 53]

and those who requite their parents for the care bestowed upon them, we hope, are not few.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XVII

On hearing the Thunder he wept at the Tomb

In the country of Wei lived Wang P'ou, a very dutiful child, whose mother, when alive, was much afraid of thunder. After her death her grave was dug in the hilly forest; and whenever it blew and rained furiously, and Wang heard the sound of the chariot of the Thunder-goddess rolling along, he hastened immediately to the grave, and, reverently kneeling, besought her with tears, saying: "I am here, dear mother; do not be alarmed." And afterwards, whenever he read in The Book of Odes this sentence, "Children should have deep and ardent affection for their parents, who have endured so much anxiety in nourishing them," the tears flowed abundantly at the recollection of his mother.

Suddenly the black clouds arise from the wilderness, whirled by the wind; he hears the distant mutter of thunder from the southern hills. Heedless of the rain, hastily he speeds over the rugged path leading to the tomb, and as he goes round the grave his tones of grief and entreaty are heard. The roaring of the dreadful thunder affrights the ears of men, one clap following another in quick succession. If his kind mother,

[p. 54]

when alive, always dreaded the voice of Heaven's majesty, how much more will she now, when lying alone in the depths of the wild forest! If P'ou was with his mother, he knew she would be comforted; and he thinks that if in the green hills she has a companion, she will not be terrified. Afterwards, being successful, he refused to take the duties of an officer under the Emperor Ssu-ma, because he wished to go frequently to visit the grave of his parent. And when he was going and returning from it, he would weep at the recollection of his mother, and ask himself: "If I have not yet recompensed the care and trouble my mother endured for me, what more can I do?" And to this day, whenever scholars read the pages of the Liu O, they remember how tears bedewed the cheeks of Wang P'ou.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XVIII

He wept to the Bamboos, and Shoots sprang up

Meng Tsung, who lived in the Chin dynasty, lost his father when young. His mother was very ill, and one winter's day she longed to taste a soup made of bamboo shoots, but Meng could not procure any. At last he went into the bamboo grove, and, clasping the bamboos with his hands, wept bitterly. His filial love moved Nature, and the ground slowly opened, sending forth several shoots, which he gathered and carried home. He

[p. 55]

made a soup of them, which his mother tasted, and immediately recovered from her malady.

In winter, when the forests are unsightly and bare, and the bamboos sombre and gloomy, for plants to send forth their branches is surprising and unexpected. But it is impossible to root out the true filial nature from men who have it, although senseless and ignorant people, not understanding its power, ridicule them, calling them mad. The young Meng Tsung dutifully served his mother, and morning and evening waited on her to receive her commands. His mother was ill, and desired the delicacy of a soup made from bamboo shoots; but in dreary winter, Nature still concealed her fruits awaited. With anxious haste he goes to the cheerless forest, which he enters, seeking for them; but not finding the shoots, he entreats the bamboos with tears. One petition from his inmost heart ascended to the threshold of heaven, and the deities were delighted, laughing with pleasure. A miracle is wrought, the ordinary course of nature is reversed, and suddenly the pearly shoots appear in the forest.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XIX

He slept on Ice to procure Carp

During the Chin dynasty lived Wang Hsiang, who early lost his mother, and whose stepmother

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Chu had no affection for him. His father also, hearing many evil reports against him, in course of time ceased to regard him with kindness. His mother was in the habit of eating fresh fish at her meals, but winter coming, the ice bound up the rivers. Wang unloosed his clothes, and went to sleep on the ice in order to seek them; when suddenly the ice opened of itself, and two carp leapt out, which he took up and carried to his mother. The villagers, hearing of the affair, were surprised, and admired one whose filial duty was the cause of such an unusual event.

The river is firmly bound up by ice, and the fish are hidden in their deep retreats. Perturbed and anxious, Wang goes out to seek the fish, apparently forgetting that it was winter. His resolution is fixed, and although it is at the risk of his life, he will go. He was not dismayed at the coldness of the snow, nor terrified at the fierceness of the winds. Even the wicked spirits were deterred from injuring him, and dared not molest him. If metals and stones can be opened, shall ice be considered too difficult to cleave? The frisking fish came up on the surface of the water, obedient to the hand of him who would take them out. A thousand ages cannot efface the remembrance of the crack in the ice, nor obliterate the fragrant traces of so worthy a deed.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

No. XX

Wu Meng fed the Mosquitoes

Wu Meng, a lad eight years of age, who lived in the Chin dynasty, was very dutiful to his parents. They were so poor that they could not afford to furnish their beds with mosquito-curtains; and every summer night myriads of mosquitoes attacked them without restraint, feasting upon their flesh and blood. Although there were so many, yet Wu would not drive them away from himself, lest they should go to his parents and annoy them. Such was his filial affection!

The buzzing of the mosquitoes sounds like ying, ying, and their united hum is almost equal to thunder. His tired parents are reclining on their bed, their countenances already sunk in slumber. Legions of mosquitoes fiercely attack them, alternately retreating and advancing. The insects disturb the dreaming sleepers, and with annoyance they toss from side to side. Wu sees them sucking his parents' blood, which causes his heart to grieve; his flesh, he thinks, can be easily pierced, but that of his parents is hard to penetrate. Lying on the bed, he threw off his clothes, and soon feeling the pain of their attacks, he cried: "I have no dread of you, nor have you any reason to fear me; although I have a fan, I will not use it, nor will I strike you with

[p. 58]

my hand. I will lie very quietly, and let you gorge to the full."

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XXI

This story, commemorating Yu Ch'ien-lou of the southern Ch'i dynasty, is best left out.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No XXII

The same applies to this story, commemorating the Lady T'ang of the T'ang dynasty.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XXIII

He resigned Office to seek his Mother

In the Sung dynasty lived Chu Shou-ch'ang, whose mother, Liu, when he was seven years of age, left the family because she was hated by his father's wife; and mother and son did not see each other for about fifty years. It was during the reign of Shen Tsung that Chu resigned his official station and went into the Ch'in country, and there made an engagement with his family "that he would not return until he had found his mother." He then travelled into T'ung-chou, where he discovered his mother, who at that time was over seventy years of age.

Thus Chu exclaimed: "I have a mother; but, alas! separated, we abide in different villages.

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] It was not the free will of my mother which led her thus to forsake her son, but the envious mistress who compelled her to go. Without a mother, on whom shall I rely? to whom shall I pour out my sorrows and cares? Now I am grown older and have become an officer, but as yet I have been unable to return the kindness of my parent. In what place, among all the countries under heaven, does she live? I am determined to resign my office and seek her abode, not deterred from the trouble of the search. To effect it, I will part from my family and no longer be a companion with them; I will not return till I find my mother, and they need not await in expectation of me." Heaven directed his way, and he came into T'ung-chou, where she resided. When the mother and the son met each other, joy and grief arose together--joy for the meeting after fifty years, sorrow that they had been so long apart. But now, in one hour, all their long-accumulated griefs were laid aside, and joy and gladness filled their hearts. Chu possesses the true heavenly disposition, and honours and riches cannot destroy his affection for his mother.

     
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

  

No. XXIV

He watched by his Mother's Bedside

In the Yuan-yu period of the Sung dynasty, Huang T'ing-chien filled the office of prefect.

[p. 60]

[paragraph continues] He was of a very filial disposition, and although honourable and renowned, yet he received his mother's commands with the utmost deference. When his mother was seized with illness, he watched her for a whole year without leaving her bedside or even taking off his clothes; and at her death he mourned so bitterly that he himself fell ill and nearly lost his life.

Well-written poetry flows along like rills meandering among the hills and valleys. This instance of a dutiful heart has not as yet been brought into much notice. For a whole year he tended his parent in her illness; and both she who dwelt in the curtained room (i.e. his mother) and he who remained in the hall (i.e. his father) strove to express the merits of their son. It would be difficult to find another child who would have done so--all would be dilatory and unwilling; and where shall we meet another who would undergo such drudgery himself with keenness and pleasure? Although raised to high office, he does not hesitate to perform the most troublesome and minute duties, for he loves his parents; how then can we suppose that he will change from what he was when young and unhonoured?

Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.

    
The Book of Filial Duty, by Ivan Chen, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

"The following advertisements appeared at the end of the original text. They are included for completeness."

  

THE ORIENT LIBRARY

  

THE WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES

Edited by L. CRANMER-BYNG and Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE HON. ADVISORY COMMITTEE OF THE ORIENT LIBRARY

(WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES)

Lord REAY, G.C.S.I., President.

Sir ARTHUR WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E., Chairman.

L. CRANMER-BYNG and S. A. KAPADIA, Hon. Secs.

          Prof. T. W. ARNOLD (London University College).

       Sir HENRY HOWORTH, K.C.I.E.

     
      Prof. L. D. BARNETT(London University College).

       Dr. S. A. KAPADIA (London University College)

     
      Miss G. BELL.

       Sir ALFRED LYALL, G.C.I.E.

     
      SYED HOSAIN BILGRAMI, C.S.I.

       Sir CHARLES LYALL, K.C.S.I.

     
      Prof. J. F. BLUMHARD (Cambridge University).

       Prof. D. S. MARGOLIOUTH (Oxford University).

     
      Prof. E. G. BROWNE (Cambridge University).

       Mrs. D. S. MARGOLIOUTH.

     
      L. CRANMER-BYNG, Esq.

       Prof. A. A. MACDONELL (Oxford University).

     
      Dr. J. ESTLIN CARPENTER (Oxford University).

       THEODORE MORRISON, Esq., M.A.

     
      A. G. ELLIS, Esq.

       J. MORRIS, Esq. (Japan).

     
      Prof. GREGORY FOSTER (Provost London University College).

       A. H. HALLAM MURRAY, ESQ.

     
      Prof. REGINALD A. NICHOLSON (Cambridge University).

       Prof. RAPSON (Cambridge University)

     
      Dr. M. GASTER

       Miss RIDDING.

     
      Prof. H. A. GILES (Cambridge University).

       SYED AMEER ALI., C.I.E.

     
      LIONEL GILES, Esq., M.A.

       F. W. THOMAS, Esq.,

     
      M.A. Prof. IGNAZ GOLDZIHER (Buda-pest University).

       Prof. ANTON TIEN.

     
      Dr. G. A. GRIERSON, C.I.E.

       Don M. DE WICKREMASINGHE (Oxford University).

     
     

LONDON

  

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

[p. 62]

The Diwan of Abu'l-Ala

By HENRY BAERLEIN. 1/- net.

Brahma-Knowledge: An Outline of the Philosophy of the Vedanta

As set forth by the Upanishads and by S'ankara. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D., Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 2/- net.

The Conduct of Life; or, The Universal Order of Confucius

A Translation of one of the four Confucian Books, hitherto known as the Doctrine of the Mean. By KU HUNG MING, M.A. (Edin.). 1/- net.

The Teachings of Zoroaster and the Philosophy of the Parsi Religion

Translated with Introduction by DR. S. A. KAPADIA, Lecturer, University College, London. 2/- net.

The Persian Mystics

I. Jalalu'd-din Rumi

By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2/- net.

II. Jami.

By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2/- net.

The Way of the Buddha

Selections from the Buddhist texts, together with the original Pali" with Introduction by HERBERT BAYNES, M.R.A.S. 2/- net.

The Sayings of Confucius

A new Translation of the greater part of the Confucian Analects, with Introduction and Notes by LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant in the Department of Oriental Books and Manuscripts of the British Museum. 2/- net.

Musings of a Chinese Mystic

Selections from the Philosophy of Chuang Tzu. With Introduction by LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon,), Assistant at the British Museum. 2/- net.

The Awakening of the Soul

From the Arabic of IBN TUFAIL. Translated with Introduction by PAUL BRONNLE, Ph.D. 1/6 net.

The Religion of the Koran

With Introduction by SIR ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 1/- net.

[p. 63]

The Wisdom of Israel: Being Extracts from the Babylonian Talmud and Midrash Rabboth

Translated from the Aramaic with an Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS. 1/- net.

Sadi's Scroll of Wisdom

By SHAIKH SA'DI. With Introduction by SIR ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 1/- net.

The Instruction of Ptah-Hotep and the Instruction of Ke'gemni

The Oldest Books in the World. Translated from the Egyptian with Introduction and Appendix by BATTISCOMBE G. GUNN. 1/- net.

The Rose Garden of Sa'di

Selected and Rendered from the Persian with Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

The Classics of Confucius

I. The Book of History (Shu-King)

By W. GORN OLD. 1/- net.

II. The Book of Odes (Shi-King)

By L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

The Sayings of Lao Tzu

From the Chinese. Translated with Introduction by LIONEL GILES, of the British Museum. 1/- net.

Women and Wisdom of Japan

With Introduction by S. TAKAISHI. 1/- net.

Arabian Wisdom

Selections and Translations from the Arabic by JOHN WORTABET, M.D. 1/- net.

The Duties of the Heart

By RABBI BACHYE. Translated from the Hebrew with Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS, Hollier Hebrew Scholar, U.C.L. 1/- net.

All literary communications to be addressed to the Editors of

THE ORIENT LIBRARY, c/o DR. S. A. KAPADIA, ORIENTAL
 SECRETARY, NORTHBROOK SOCIETY, 185 PICCADILLY, LONDON, W.

THE object of the Editors of this Series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West, the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour. Finally, in thanking press and public for the very cordial reception given to the "Wisdom of the East" Series, they wish to state that no pains have been spared to secure the best specialists for the treatment of the various subjects at hand.

  

SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS

The Athenaeum.--"We wish that there were more of them; they are dreamy, lifelike, and fascinating."

Pall Mall Gazette.--"No translation of this important work has been made since the beginning of the eighteenth century."

Manchester Courier.--"Worthy of close study by all who would penetrate to the depth of Eastern thought and feeling."

Literary Guide.--"We wish success to this little series of books."

Outlook.--"This Series is published to help in the process of renewing the spiritual and moral life of the West."

The Scotsman.--"This Series should not fail to please readers of the more studious sort."

Southport Guardian.--"This Series will find considerable favour with all Students of Eastern Literature and Eastern Philosophy."

Bristol Mercury.--"We commend these little books to all who imagine that there is no knowledge worth having outside Europe and America."

Glasgow Herald.--"This new Series has a definite and lofty aim, and is deserving of support. The books are small, cheap, and well adapted for the pocket. Every page is regularly refreshing and stimulating."

Field.--"Such books are valuable aids to the understanding of a far-off age and people, and have a great interest for the student of literature."

Irish Times.--"The volumes are charming in form, low in price, and excellent in matter."

 

LONDON: JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: biob.txt =====


    
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

  

BIOGRAPHY OF THE BIBLE

  

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF ITS CHARACTER, AUTHORSHIP, TEXT, TRANSLATION AND INFLUENCE ON THE EVOLUTION OF MANKIND

  

ERNEST SUTHERLAND BATES

  

Editor of

  

THE BIBLE DESIGNED TO BE READ AS LIVING LITERATURE

  

SIMON AND SCHUSTER NEW YORK

  

[1937]

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted at sacred-texts.com, June 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion as required by law at the time.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

Table of Contents

          I.

       GENERAL CHARACTER

       <page 3>

     
       

       "The content of the Bible is   Man."
   Emphasis upon the average man and the social whole, realism in treatment,   freedom in form.

        

     
       

        

        

     
      II.

       THE AUTHORS

       <page 11>

     
       

       "Anonymity, not personality,   affords the clew to Biblical authorship."
   Early folk literature; the traditional authors--Moses, David, Solomon;   the Prophets; Postexilic literature--the legalists, the humanists, the   nationalists; the Apocrypha; the Christian authors.

        

     
       

        

        

     
      III.

       CONFLICT OVER CREED AND CANON

       <page 59>

     
       

       "Blood as well as learning went   into the establishment of creed and canon."
   The Gnostics; the Manicheans; Arians and Athanasians; Homoousians and   Homoiousians; The final victory.

        

     
       

        

        

     
      IV.

       THE BIBLE UNDER MEDIEVALISM

       <page 75>

     
       

       "For a thousand years the Bible   held its place in a confused world wherein learning mingled with   superstition, piety with persecution, love of beauty with hate and cruelty;   and it was interpreted in accordance with all these attitudes."
   The consecration to texts; scholastic methods of interpretation;

        

     
       

       [p. vi]

        

     
       

       the miracle plays; the war on   infidels and heretics; the Biblical themes of art.

        

     
       

        

        

     
      V.

       THE GREAT TRANSLATIONS

       <page 99>

     
       

       "The great translations were   part of a social revolution."
   Early translations; Martin Luther; Tyndale and his successors; the King James   version; typographical errors--''the Hee and She Bibles," "the   Wicked Bible"; the Revised Version; eccentric and literal translations.

        

     
       

        

        

     
      VI.

       THE HIGHER CRITICISM

       <page 132>

     
       

       "There is no mystery about the   so-called 'Higher Criticism'; it is simply the scientific combination of   textual and historical criticism which is used today in the study of all   early literature."
   Hobbes and Spinoza; Jean Astruc; Eichhorn; De Wette; Strauss and Renan; the   Tubingen School; more recent criticism.

        

     
       

        

        

     
      VII.

       THE BIBLE AND THE STREAM OF LIFE

       <page 150>

     
       

       "What was once a tributary,   small, then mighty, which preserved its own hue amidst the larger stream, has   now at last merged into the river, losing the isolation of its identity but   giving something of its color to the whole."
   The Bible and the Jews; the Bible and the world; the Bible in America; the   present and the future.

        

     
   [p. vii]

  

List of Illustrations

          facing page Codex Vaticanus--The oldest complete manuscript of the   New Testament (fourth century)

       24

     
      Codex Sinaiticus (fourth-century manuscript)

       25

     
      Codex Alexandrinus (fifth-century manuscript), sent by Cyril Lucar,   Patriarch of Alexandria, to King Charles I of England

       40

     
      Fourteenth-century manuscript of the Wyclif Bible

       41

     
      Characteristic page from the Gutenberg Bible (1450-55)

       76

     
      Title page of the Coverdale Bible (1535)

       77

     
      Title page of Tyndale's New Testament (1535)

       84

     
      Title page of the Matthew Bible (1537)

       85

     
      Title page of the Great Bible (1539)

       104

     
      Title page of the Douai Bible (1609)

       105

     
      Original woodcut title page of the King James version (1611)

       120

     
      Original engraved title page used at the beginning of the New Testament in   the King James version

       121

     
      Perpetual Easter Calendar from the King James version

       152

     
      The generations of Adam in the King James version

       153

     
      The generations of Noah in the King James version

       168

     
      Title page of John Eliot's Indian Bible (1663)

       169

     
   
     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1][p. 2] [p. 3]

  

ONE

  

General Character

A GREAT BOOK is a living organism. Months, years, or centuries may go into its gestation. When finally composed and written down, it can be said to be born, but only born. It then grows and develops through the interpretations of generation after generation of readers, critics, editors, and translators, each adding something, great or little, to its expanding magnitude.

The life of the Bible, above all other books, is a life made up of countless lives, embodying their joys and agonies, their visions, their defeats and aspirations. Four thousand years cling about it. A full millennium of myths and legends passed into it; another millennium was consumed in the writing; bitter battles over canon and creed occupied a third; a fourth has seen the ever-continuing translations into modern tongues.

No individual, no Caesar or Napoleon, has had such a part in the world's history as this book. Wars, reformations, martyrdoms, religions, lie heavy on its head; men fought and died over its meaning; down

[p. 4]

through the ages it has continued to evolve, affecting for good and also for ill millions and millions of lives.

Not until the fourth century A.D. was it called the Bible. Saint John Chrysostom, the golden-mouthed, well deserved that sobriquet when he named the collection of Jewish and Christian sacred scriptures the Bible--one book, the Book. For in spite of the length of time consumed in its creation and in spite of the greatest diversity in the literary and moral value of the various parts, the unity of the Bible is its most compelling feature, so compelling that centuries after the original work was completed, when men of other races and languages sat down to translate the Bible, although they usually collaborated in large groups, nevertheless under the spell of the original they often found themselves writing as one man. This unusual and significant literary phenomenon appeared even in the Septuagint of the first translators, the legendary two and seventy Jewish elders of Alexandria who, according to the tale, in two and seventy days of the third century B.C. rendered the Old Testament into Greek. In all these cases, the quality of the translation sprang from the quality of the original.

When one asks, however, just wherein resides

[p. 5]

this unity, so evident to sense that it has always been overemphasized rather than underemphasized, the answer is not easy. The older and still customary explanation that it consists in a definite type of religion maintained from first to last will not bear scrutiny. The religion of the earliest parts of the Old Testament is a tribal religion, strong and stern, intolerant, only half ethical and not even consistently monotheistic; the Prophets introduced nothing less than a religious and moral revolution; the later books of the Old Testament reveal the conflict between humanistic and nationalistic aspirations; and the coming of Christianity brought so great a change that the Jews themselves could not accept it. Yet all these varying attitudes are expressed fully and powerfully in the Bible.

Nor can one say with truth that the Bible is unified because it is always inspired by some religious viewpoint, however divergent the successive viewpoints may be. The collection of love lyrics known as the Song of Songs is purely secular, and the greater part of Ecclesiastes is a work of skeptical philosophy. Yet these are included, and one feels that the pattern is not broken.

The one enduring characteristic which does mark the Bible from first to last is a pronounced attitude

[p. 6]

of mind that reveals itself in literary style and content.

The content of the Bible is Man. Alone among the ancient nations, the Jews accepted Man as the object of chief interest. Their religion, while in all its manifold forms preaching absolute submission to God, in another way made God himself subordinate to Man; where half of the Greek myths deal with the doings of the gods among themselves, gods who think only occasionally of the creatures of a day on earth, Jehovah is shown as making the destiny of Man his chief concern. Where the pagan gods are transparent personifications of natural phenomena gradually humanized, Jehovah is fundamentally Man himself gradually idealized to the height of human imaginings of good.

The content furthermore is Average Man. There are no Homeric heroes in the Bible. Abraham is brave and cowardly by turns, Jacob is loyal and a trickster, Joseph indulges in the vainglorious babblings of youth, the noblehearted David under the influence of lust will cause the murder of a devoted servitor, Solomon's wisdom cannot keep him from debauchery. As a result, where Agamemnon and Achilles and all the highborn heroes of Greek tragedy move us but aesthetically, our spirits are

[p. 7]

touched simply and directly by our sorrowful twin brothers who acted so like ourselves centuries ago. We can find Abraham in the flesh on a Vermont farm, meet Jacob in the streets of New York, encounter Joseph in any gentle but pampered favorite child, and discover degenerate Solomons in night clubs from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast.

Finally, the content is Collective Man. Behind these sharply defined individuals, one is always conscious of their ancestors, and stretching before them one sees the long line of their descendants. A compensatory dignity accrues to the persons in the tale from their relation to the social whole. The group, the nation, and ultimately all mankind form a perpetual background against which the characters stand out the more plainly but into which they eventually merge and their relation to which constitutes the criterion of their conduct.

From this interest in the average man and the collective man springs the democratic and revolutionary character of the Bible. The constant admonitions to heed the poor, the widow, and the orphan; the diatribes against the corruptions of the court, the law, the men of power and wealth; the ever-repeated pleas for social justice; to the extent that these have entered into the thought of the

[p. 8]

world we have in the first instance to thank the Bible.

The literary style of the Bible is in harmony with the unusual content. It is a style that moves effortlessly from the familiar to the sublime; from Job scratching himself among the potsherds to the same Job holding converse with God in the whirlwind. The Jews were the first realists.

Even the Jewish myths were localized and definite. Not only does the Ark of Noah come to rest upon Mount Ararat but its exact size is recorded--three hundred cubits by fifty by thirty. Abraham, visited by three angels, has water brought to wash their feet and tells his wife Sarah to "make ready three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth." In the Book of Tobit, Asmodeus, that wicked spirit, slayer of husbands, is put to flight by the homely ritual of raising a smoke from the heart and liver of a fish laid over smoldering ashes. Such precise vivid details lend verisimilitude to the most fantastic narratives. The persistence of the belief in the verbal inspiration of the Scriptures and in their complete inerrancy is largely due to the impression on the reader that he is hearing for the first time a story told by an eyewitness of the events recorded.

[p. 9]

The Jewish imagination, running always to the concrete, emphasized action. One could say with slight exaggeration that the Jews were behaviorists in their psychology, leaving motivation to be inferred from deeds, uninterested in it otherwise. The style moves with the swiftness of narrative as well in reflective passages as in those directly concerned with events. Wisdom is condensed into antitheses and aphorisms. Nature is never presented for itself in set pictures but as momentary illustration or background. All is condensation, concision, brevity. Enlargement comes not through the logical development of an idea but rather through concentration upon a single idea until it is seen to be exemplified everywhere, swelling to amplitude through reiteration, as in music or in life itself the same theme is repeated with multiplying significance.

Thence comes the characteristic parallelism of word, phrase, or strophe which forms the chief basis of Hebrew versification. Less of a deliberate artifact than the quantitative structure of classical poetry or the accentual basis of modern systems, it lay close to prose, in the sense that writers, as their mood heightened or relaxed, could move from prose to verse, from verse to prose, without

[p. 10]

violent transition. While as in other early poetry there is usually present a liturgical flavor of chanting that effectually sets the verse of the Bible apart from modern rhythms, the form undoubtedly suggested the poetic prose and free verse of Ossian, Blake, Carlyle, Ruskin, Walt Whitman, and other moderns.

Thus, both in content and in form, the greater part of the Bible when taken directly and not hardened into dogma, has been throughout history a freeing and liberalizing force. Unfortunately, freedom, obtainable only through law, is often lost through law. Much in the Bible itself proved a bondage to the Jews, and to this very day passages torn from their textual or historical context still furnish instruments to those who love to inflict or suffer bondage. Through its very closeness to life, the Bible has shared the fortunes of life. Its biography, like that of individuals and nations, is a tale of conflicting forces, and of struggles alike internal and external.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

TWO

  

The Authors

THE BIBLE is a unique literary product. Literature normally springs from and reflects national glory in other fields of human endeavor that to a degree at least would be significant in themselves without the literature. The silent Medes still march their armies across the pages of history, and from voiceless Carthage the triremes still row out to battle; had the Greeks and Romans written no word of their own imperial conquests these would nevertheless have molded the ancient world. With the Hebrews, it was quite otherwise. Had there been no Jewish literature, the Jewish nation would have been long since forgotten. Their literature was not so much expression as a molding force which, Antaeuslike, grew stronger with every outward defeat.

The external facts in no wise justified the Hebrews' belief in their own importance. Sober history first knows them as only one of the many nomadic groups that came out of the Arabian Desert in the centuries before 1000 B.C., vainly striving to

[p. 12]

obtain possession of the richer coastland of Palestine then held by the Canaanites, a nation of Phoenician stock, and by those colonizing Cretans who appear in the Bible as the Philistines. Of the invaders, the Hebrews were, it is true, the most nearly successful, as at last, under their warrior king, David (about 990 B.C.), they did establish themselves in the hill country on the edge of the coastland. David's son, Solomon, contracted an advantageous alliance with Hiram, king of Tyre, and was even deemed worthy to wed with a daughter of the reigning Pharaoh of Egypt. But that was the high point of Hebrew political history. In the reign of Solomon's successor there came the disastrous division of his realm into the Northern Kingdom of Israel and the Southern Kingdom of Judah (the former with ten tribes, the latter with but two), both of which thenceforth existed precariously by favor of alliances with one or another of the more powerful neighboring nations. Such slight importance as was possessed by their tiny territory--the two kingdoms together measured only about one hundred miles in length by thirty or forty in breadth--resided solely in their lying across the trade routes from Egypt to the great empires of the East. In that position, they were exposed to constant attacks

[p. 13]

and had enough ado merely to maintain their independence as long as possible. The kingdom of Israel was finally destroyed by Assyria in 722 B.C., that of Judah by Babylon in 586 B.C. Thereafter, the Hebrews ceased to exist as a political entity.

Had this been all their story, history today would reckon them among the most insignificant of ancient nations. They were important only because in their own minds they were important: precisely, indeed, because they refused to be refuted by the evidence of outward fact. Something within them told them they were a great nation in spite of everything. And they proved it, though not in the way that they intended, by their literature.

Behind history lies tradition, which may be called a kind of tribal memory, transmitted orally and growing by accretion from generation to generation. The Hebrews were not content with a nameless origin in the Arabian Desert: they claimed to have won their freedom from an earlier Egyptian bondage (which sober history, thus far, has neither been able to affirm conclusively nor to deny); and their legends went still further back to a period when they had inhabited the very land of Palestine they now desired to conquer--and even beyond that to a time when their ancestors had first come

[p. 14]

into Palestine from far-distant Chaldaea. Back and still back, bringing mythology to the aid of legend, they traced their origin at last to Adam, first born of men.

The raw material of history was thus already at hand when the prosperous reigns of David and Solomon quickened the interest of the Jews in their own past. The times called for historians, and these appeared.

Probably the earliest large portion of the Bible to be written down in anything like its present form was the part of the Second Book of Samuel now included in chapters ix--xx. This is sometimes called by scholars "The Court History of David" because the internal evidence makes not unplausible a pleasant theory that it was the work of some gifted contemporary personally familiar with the events recorded, a contemporary whose general sympathy with the king did not blind his critical judgment to the errors of his monarch.

After this magnificent beginning, subsequent historians worked backwards from the known to the unknown. Brief biographies of the earlier legendary heroes, Gideon, Jephthah, Samson, began to be written. References in the Bible to the now lost "Book of Jashar" and "Book of the Wars of Jehovah"

[p. 15]

indicate the existence of what were probably collections of folk poetry that were made at about this time. Fragments of this poetry were incorporated in the historical narratives, sometimes only a couplet or a refrain, sometimes whole poems. Such are the "Song of Lamech" in Genesis, the "Song of Moses" in Exodus, the "Song of the Well" and the "Prophecy of Balaam" in Numbers, the "Apostrophe to the Sun" in Joshua, the "Song of Deborah"--possibly as early as 1100 B.C. and the "Fable of Jotham" in Judges, and finally, the "Song of the Bow" in Second Samuel. Even though it owed much to Babylonian example, this poetry of the Hebrew dawn already had a distinctive character. While of only ballad length it was far more closely knit than any ballad; possessing an epic sweep and power, it was still essentially lyrical but in its volume and amplitude suggested a nation singing, a nation marching in the confidence that it was led by God. As, for example, in the triumphant "Song of Moses":

"I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously:
 The horses and his rider hath he thrown into the sea . . .
 The Lord is a man of war:
 The Lord is his name.
 Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: [p. 16]
 His chosen captains also are drowned in the Red Sea.
 The depths have covered them:
 They sank into the bottom as a stone."

Often, the narrative element is more stressed, as in the "Song of Deborah":

"The kings came and fought,
 Then fought the kings of Canaan
 In Taanach by the waters of Megiddo;
 They took no gain of money . . .
 The stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
 The river of Kishon swept them away,
 That ancient river, the river Kishon . . .

Blessed above women shall Jael be,
 The wife of Heber the Kenite,
 Blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
 He asked water, and she gave him milk;
 She brought forth butter in a lordly dish.
 She put her hand to the nail,
 And her right hand to the workmen's hammer;
 And with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head,
 When she had pierced and stricken through his temples.
 At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down:
 At her feet he bowed, he fell:
 Where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

The mother of Sisera looked out at a window,
 And cried through the lattice, [p. 17]
 'Why is his chariot so long in coming?
 Why tarry the wheels of his chariots?
 Her wise ladies answered her,
 Yea, she returned answer to herself,
 'Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey;
 To every man a damsel or two;
 To Sisera a prey of divers colours,
 A prey of divers colours of needlework,
 Of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?'

So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord:
 But let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might."

In the "Song of Deborah," as in the medieval ballad of "Chevy Chase," a mere local skirmish acquired a lien on immortality, but how different the spirit of the two poems! The earlier--by nearly three thousand years--is also, in its literary artistry and emotional subtlety, much the more mature. The Hebrew minstrel is less interested in the events themselves than in their significance, and his admiration is given, not to physical courage but to an act of personal treachery redeemed, in his eyes, by loyalty to the nation. The triumph of the Hebrews is enhanced by the dramatic contrast between the overthrow of Sisera and the self-deceived hopes of his

[p. 18]

mother--in much the same way that Aeschylus in The Persians chose to celebrate the Athenian victory at Marathon through the psychology of the defeated instead of through that of the conquerors.

The same mingling of lyrical and epic quality, with a still stronger stressing of the personal note, is found in the "Song of the Bow," attributed by Jewish tradition to King David:

"The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places:
 How are the mighty fallen!
 Tell it not in Gath,
 Publish it not in the streets of Askelon;
 Lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
 Lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph . . .
 Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives,
 And in their death they were not divided:
 They were swifter than eagles,
 They were stronger than lions.
 Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
 Who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights,
 Who put ornaments of gold upon your apparel.
 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle!
 O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high places.
 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan:
 Very pleasant hast thou been unto me:
 Thy love to me was wonderful,
 Passing the love of women. [p. 19]
 How are the mighty fallen,
 And the weapons of war perished!"

When the Prophets should come, they would have but to alter the martial spirit of this early poetry into a still loftier zeal for righteousness and they would find its peculiar rhapsodic form the appropriate medium for their own mature expression.

Truly, the Hebrews seem to have been born old. Their own legends of their great antiquity as a people are countenanced, if not by the known facts of history, at least by the richness of experience embodied in their literature at its first appearance. It is as if they had indeed been the first to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and had assimilated that bitter fruit long before other nations tasted it. It is as if like Adam and Eve they had never known childhood or youth, their gaiety and inconsequence, that lighthearted spirit of play which lurks beneath the gravest meditations of Plato but is found nowhere in the whole of the Old Testament. Jehovah was a jealous deity; he gave his worshipers the strength to survive, he gave them sublimity and tenderness and an exquisite sense of beauty, but all on condition that they should forget that they had ever been children and should devote themselves manfully, seriously, and dutifully to his

[p. 20]

service. And when at last he had settled them in the Promised Land, what service could be more suitable than to expand that fragmentary thanksgiving poetry of Moses and Deborah into a continuous narrative of God's relations with his people?

So it came about that five hundred years before Herodotus the Jews had already begun to write history. Not, of course, history in the modern sense, nor yet exactly in the sense of Herodotus. The Jewish writers were anything but objective-minded: the meaning of all history to them lay in the career of the Chosen People who in their view occupied the center of the stage. They were uninterested in aught that resembled a scientific approach; the direct moral and religious implications of history were all that mattered, and these appeared most clearly in the deeds of individuals. The historical books of the Old Testament resolve themselves into a series of dramatic biographies. From Abraham through Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, on down the long impressive line of judges, kings, and prophets, the series runs, to end at last in the four biographies of Jesus at the beginning of the New Testament.

All this mighty work was essentially a collective enterprise. In order not to go astray in our interpretation at the very outset it is necessary to dismiss

[p. 21]

our exacerbated modern sense of private property even in works of literature. Copyrights, and the ideas that accompany them, are of recent origin. Such glorification of professional authors as we find among the Greeks, with their cherished prizes for the successful dramatists at the Dionysiac festivals, had no counterpart among the Hebrews. Properly speaking, there was no such thing as a class of professional authors among them. Their writers, whether historians, prophets, or poets, wrote for glory, not for gain, and even the glory was that of their nation, not their own. In these circumstances, questions of forgery or plagiarism simply did not exist. The historical writers laboriously collected their materials but afterwards freely annotated and revised them; quite shamelessly, and to the great benefit of literature, they put their own words into the mouths of men long dead; some, more scrupulous toward older records, would retain contradictory accounts of the same events; others, more interested in some larger truth, would rewrite the earlier accounts in order to harmonize them: but always, like the builders of the medieval cathedrals, they were concerned with their achievement, not with themselves. Anonymity, not personality, affords the clew to Biblical authorship.

[p. 22]

Nothing could have been further from the minds of these Jewish authors than any faintest suspicion that the deeds they recorded were intrinsically of less importance than their own recording of them. The historical Ahab and Jezebel were very different from the biased and impassioned portraits of those characters in the Book of the Kings; but the portraits were more valuable than the characters they misrepresented. The portrait painters themselves, however, did not think in such terms. Ahab and Jezebel were to them simply hateful figures who must be shown as such. Conversely, with the good and great--to let them speak as they would, or should, have spoken was no treachery to truth. So it was quite natural, in the absence of early records, to ascribe whatever laws were found to the traditional legislator Moses, just as it was equally natural after the Scriptures were written for the Psalms to be ascribed to King David, traditionally a poet, and for the Proverbs to be ascribed to King Solomon, traditionally the wisest of men.

A real understanding of Old Testament literature first became possible through the discovery of nineteenth-century scholarship that the early historical books are in the main a compilation of four separate documents, all of which may be approximately

[p. 23]

dated. This discovery, when all its implications were developed, necessitated a resetting of the entire Old Testament in new terms of chronology, authorship, and meaning.

Any careful reader can perceive that there are two radically different stories of creation presented in the opening chapters of Genesis, but actually between the naive, primitive account in the second chapter and the highly philosophical version of the first chapter no less than five centuries intervened. So long was the span of time which elapsed during the writing of even Genesis.

The earliest document, known as J from its use of the name Jahveh, or Jehovah, for the deity, was put together in the ninth century B.C. in the Southern Kingdom. It constituted a connected narrative of Hebrew history from the creation through the reign of Saul. A century later, in the Northern Kingdom, was compiled the second or E Document, so called because in it the deity appears under the name Elohim. It begins a little later than J but comes down to the same period. After the downfall of the Northern Kingdom, both documents came into the possession of Southern Kingdom writers who combined them into a single narrative in the seventh century B.C.

[p. 24]

J and E dealt with the same general material of myth and legend but in somewhat different fashion. There is considerable divergence in vocabulary and style and great divergence in moral and religious sentiment. In the earlier narrative, as one might expect, the customs of the people are more savage and the conception of the deity is more frankly anthropomorphic. From J comes the insistence on Jehovah as primarily a god of war. To E we are indebted for the story of Joseph; the treatment of character is subtler than in J, and the god of E's theology, while still a tribal deity, is less vindictive. The two documents furthermore reveal diametrically opposite attitudes toward the institution of monarchy; where J accepts it as of divine origin, E--written when the apostasy of the Northern kings, Omri and Ahab, was in men's minds--regards the inauguration of the monarchy as a decline from the earlier semidemocratic form of government in the period of the judges.

During the eighth and seventh centuries came the prophetic movement which determined the whole later course of Jewish religion and literature. It not only directly inspired what was for the Hebrews in their creative middle period the most

Click to enlarge
Codex Vaticanus--The oldest complete manuscript of the New Testament (fourth century)

[p. 25]

Click to enlarge
Codex Sinaiticus (fourth-century manuscript)

valuable part of the Pentateuch, namely, the book of Deuteronomy; indirectly, it inspired nearly all the rest of the Old Testament in the form in which we have it and even the far distant New Testament as well. The heart of the Bible lies in the prophetic literature rather than in the so-called Mosaic law, the latter itself owing far more to the Prophets than to Moses.

The prophetic movement was without true analogues elsewhere in history. The origin of the Prophets was shabby enough; in the beginning they seem to have been mere soothsayers, foretellers of the future, miraclemongers. Their early representative, Balaam, in the book of Numbers, is little more impressive than Calchas, the mantis kakaios of the Iliad. In Greece, the influence of the soothsayers was replaced by that of the Delphic oracle; in Rome, the soothsayers remained mere soothsayers to the end; in Arabia they became the mad dancing dervishes, and in India degenerated into the self-lacerating fakirs. Among the Hebrews alone they grew into a moral force, ultimately the most profound in the community. Doubtless, some aura of the occult long hung about them, as can be seen from the marvels attributed to Elijah and Elisha, but by the

[p. 26]

time of the eighth century they had come to abjure signs and wonders in favor of a purely spiritual message.

The Prophets stood apart from the regular priesthood, and were often hostile to it. Their credentials were those of their own genius. They were a kind of inspired moral rhapsodist who trusted to inner inspiration and illumination. "The word of the Lord that came unto" Hosea, or Micah, or Zephaniah--so runs the formula. Having no faith in rites or ceremonies, they preached a religion of inner rectitude. They were much concerned about the sufferings of the poor and the exactions of the rich. They were as one in demanding a loftier worship of Jehovah as the God of righteousness, the only God. Through them the Jewish religion was changed from a form of henotheism, a worship of one god as greatest of many gods, to a definite monotheism. Jehovah ceased to dwell upon Mount Sinai: his dwelling became the universe; he ceased to be a god of war and became a god of justice.

In politics, the Prophets were intense nationalists, isolationists. When Amos, the first of the literary Prophets appeared as early as 750 B.C., the desperate situation of Israel and Judah was already evident. In fact, it was the national peril that

[p. 27]

brought the Prophets upon the scene. One and all, they strove to strengthen the morale of their people by bidding them abstain from the idolatries of the surrounding nations, by pleading with them to search their own hearts, by exhorting them to faith in Jehovah. The essence of their political message was that the Hebrews must look to themselves for salvation rather than to their ever-shifting alliances with this or that neighboring monarch.

The moral revival initiated by Amos, who came from the South to preach in the North, and carried on a decade later by his Northern follower, Hosea, did not avail to stay the fall of Israel. But neither did that terrifying event halt the prophetic movement. Rather, it gave new impetus to it in the Southern Kingdom, where the sense of national peril bred men of a caliber to meet it.

Greatest of them was Isaiah of Jerusalem, probably the most influential of all Old Testament writers. The first city dweller among the Prophets, an aristocrat at home in the court, he was a statesman whose wise advice was sought and taken by King Hezekiah, and after the defeat of Sennacherib, which he foretold, his prestige redounded to the benefit of the whole prophetic movement. Preaching both before and after the fall of Israel, he foresaw

[p. 28]

inevitable disasters for the Southern Kingdom also, but placed his hope in the formation of a morally disciplined "saving remnant" who should be strong enough to survive and, under some future leader, restore the glory of the nation. From him first sprang the Messianic hope which was to grow stronger instead of weaker as century after century, postponing the realization, would make the need the greater.

Contemporary with Isaiah was Micah the Morasthite, the "Prophet of the poor." A plebeian and a countryman, he was yet a twin brother of the spirit with the urban aristocrat of Jerusalem. The two were equally unsparing in their censure of the exactions of the rich; the extortionate landlords and the venal judges, who existed then as now equally in city and countryside, were excoriated by them in ringing tones. Both sensed the connection between economics and war; and both looked forward beyond the trying present to an eventual period of social justice and universal peace:

And they shall beat their swords into plowshares,
 And their spears into pruninghooks:
 Nation shall not lift up a sword against nation,
 Neither shall they learn war any more.
 But they shall sit every man under his vine [p. 29]
 And under his fig tree;
 And none shall make them afraid.

All of these Prophets were poets, Isaiah the greatest. Amos' verse was a bugle call to battle for righteousness--he dealt almost solely in denunciation; the more pastoral Hosea preferred the method of entreaty and the note of flutes; Micah's verse had the richness of organ tones; but Isaiah's was a mastery of every instrument. It is not surprising that the reputation of Isaiah grew so great that the poems of numerous unidentified later Prophets (one of them his equal in loftiness if not in range) came to be added to his own in the collection under his name in the Old Testament (chapters XL to LXVI).

Shelley's conception that poets are the natural lawgivers of society was now literally fulfilled for perhaps the only time in history. The book of Deuteronomy, composed directly under prophetic influence, was nothing less than a revision and expansion of the Mosaic law designed to harmonize it with the poetic insight, the high moral principles, and the monotheistic theology of the Prophets. The authors of the book are not known, nor has its date been certainly established. But it was probably written during the reign of Hezekiah or in the early part of that of his son, Manasseh, who became king

[p. 30]

at the age of twelve, fell under pagan influence, turned idolater, and endeavored to exterminate the Prophets. According to Jewish tradition, Isaiah himself suffered martyrdom by being sawn asunder. Yet the prophetic movement was not killed. As usual in such cases, it was merely driven underground. At some time during the persecution, the book of Deuteronomy was hidden for safekeeping in the Temple where it was not discovered until 621 B.C. when the priest Hilkiah carried it to the friendly King Josiah, an idealistic youth of eighteen, who at once made it the basis of extensive legal reforms, as is related in the twenty-third chapter of the Second Book of the Kings.

The Deuteronomic legislation was accepted as of Mosaic origin. The Deuteronomists themselves could scarcely have been aware how little of their work actually stemmed from such an august source. It was based upon what is known as "The Book of the Covenant" (Exodus xx. 22-xxiii. 19), then universally ascribed to Moses, but actually no later in most of its legislation than the beginning of the monarchy. Even the Ten Commandments (Exodus xx. 1-17) are now generally considered to have been of eighth century rather than of Mosaic origin. Yet parallels have been found to the Code of Hammurabi,

[p. 31]

the great Babylonian legislator of about 2250 B.C., and where the influence of Hammurabi has been detected that of the much later Moses may be assumed, even though today it be impossible to assign any single law to his certain authorship. Jewish legislation, like every other, was a gradual growth, but all of it which endured was traditionally ascribed to Moses. The Deuteronomists, though innovators, were deeply imbued with a sense of the past greatness of their nation; they felt that they wrought in the spirit of Moses; in giving their work the literary form of a series of discourses delivered by Moses in the land of Moab beyond Jordan just before the Children of Israel entered the Promised Land, they chose the most suitable time and place, as well as author, to lend it the utmost authority.

The motivating principle of the Deuteronomic legislation was the conception of the oneness and perfection of God. Symbolizing this oneness, they sought to centralize worship in the Temple at Jerusalem (an attempt that would have been hopeless before the fall of the Northern Kingdom and utterly meaningless in the actual time of Moses). As God's care extended to all his people, the Deuteronomists tried to create a parallel to the divine beneficence

[p. 32]

through legislation for all. Particular aid was given to the poor and lowly who most needed it: every seventh year there was to be a general remission of debts and a freeing of all Hebrew slaves; fugitive slaves were not to be returned to their masters; after fields and vineyards had been once gleaned the residue must be left for the wayfarer; laborers must be paid their wages daily; the taking of interest among Jews was forbidden; the divorce laws were liberalized to the advantage of women. And all this humanitarian legislation was persuasively enforced by the reminder, "Thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt."

During their period of favor at court the Deuteronomists were extraordinarily active. After the revision of the law, they turned to the production of revisionist history. They rewrote the Hexateuch (the Pentateuch plus the Book of Joshua) and threw the scattered narratives of the Book of Judges into connected form; drawing upon "The Court History of David" and other sources now lost--"The Book of the Acts of Solomon," "The Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel," and "The Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah"--they composed the Book of Samuel and the Book of the Kings (each

[p. 33]

first divided into two in the Septuagint translation), with the exception of the final chapters of the latter added during the Exile. Thus, when they had finished, they left behind them a consecutive history of the Jews from the creation down to their own period, a history which was also a grandiose philosophy of history into which the book of Deuteronomy was neatly fitted in its assumed chronological position.

Well it was that the Deuteronomists wrought so feverishly, for their time was short. The eighty-odd Deuteronomic laws established a series of ideals most of which are ideal still today, but they did not long remain in force as actual laws. The death of King Josiah at the battle of Megiddo in 608 B.C. was followed by another melancholy period of reaction, during which the reforms were successively abandoned. The weak and vacillating Jewish monarchs drifted from one unwise political intrigue to another, and their veering course ended in the total destruction of their kingdom by Nebuchadnezzar (more properly, Nebuchadrezzar) of Babylon in the year 586 B.C.

During this period of gloom Judah never lacked a Prophet. Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah turned their eyes abroad or to the distant future,

[p. 34]

but Jeremiah struggled vainly with the desperate present. Denounced as unpatriotic by monarchy and priesthood because he opposed the suicidal war with Babylon, he was a conscientious objector familiar with the stocks, imprisonment, and exile. Although in manner a preacher rather than a poet, his nature was essentially poetic, introspective, tender, and sensitive, shrinking from the conflicts that his conscience nevertheless forced upon him. This first of many Hamlets was not even permitted to share the captivity of his people by the waters of Babylon but unwillingly was carried off to Egypt by a group who desired the prestige of a Prophet in their midst. There, the loneliest of men, he died.

The anonymous book of Lamentations came to be ascribed, in the time of the Septuagint, to Jeremiah, for no better reasons, apparently, than that it deals with the fall of Jerusalem and shows the influence of the prophetic point of view. Although it contains enough of the latter to make it probable that it was written by some follower of Jeremiah, the literary style of the poem is utterly different from that of any of the Prophets. It is a work of highly self-conscious art, a kind of choral dirge, composed in the difficult form of an elaborate

[p. 35]

acrostic, each line beginning with a different letter of the alphabet, yet with such a complete mastery of its artificial technique that this is kept wholly subordinate to the cadences of deep mournful emotion that rise and fall in a psychological rhythm not unlike the movement of the choral odes in Greek classical tragedy.

Dealing with a minor theme connected with the overthrow of Jerusalem, the short and relatively unimportant poem of the Prophet Obadiah lashed out in furious invective against the neighboring nation of the Edomites who had joined the Babylonians during the war in an unnatural alliance which seemed to the Prophet an act of treason both to kindred and to God.

The period of the Exile lasted for fifty years. The Hebrew people had definitively lost all political power; their nation was divided between the larger portion resettled in Babylonian captivity and the small discouraged remnant left to haunt the hills of Jerusalem where palace and temple were destroyed and foreign overlords held sway: it might have been expected that the two Southern tribes would disappear from history as the ten Northern tribes had done. But when the Northern Kingdom fell, Israel had no sacred literature other

[p. 36]

than the recently compiled E Document and the heretical prophecies of Hosea. The tribes of Judah and little Benjamin, on the other hand, went into captivity bearing with them the complete Deuteronomic account of Jewish history from Genesis through Kings, the Book of Deuteronomy itself, and the prophetical writings of Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Zephaniah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Jeremiah. On them, their nation was based more firmly than it could have been on any political organization.

Of all this mass of literature, the work of the Deuteronomists was the most important. Their conciliation of Prophet and priest inured at first to both. Ezekiel, the last of the three major Prophets, was himself a priest who shared the exile of his people. Of all the Prophets, he was the most constructive. Essentially a mystic, subject to trances and visions, he united prophetic fervor with an intense love of ritual; in a strange apocalyptic style which carried to excess the symbolic manner to which the Prophets were addicted, he unrolled a cosmic panorama before the eyes of his hearers and made them feel not only that they were its center but that their actions could take on a mystical significance when performed through a ritual suffused

[p. 37]

with inner meaning. He thus unwittingly prepared the way for the later formalism of the priests, but at the moment the effect of his work was to preserve the morale of the Hebrews under captivity by giving definition to their religious practices and by encouraging their hope of return to Jerusalem, the sacred city. The enduring influence of his style is seen not only in the books of Daniel and Revelation, written directly under his influence, but also in the "Paradiso" of Dante, the Paradise Lost of Milton, and the Prophetical Books of William Blake.

Ezekiel wrote in prose, but the Exile was not to end without the appearance of another mighty poet, of unknown name, whose work, fully equal in value to that of Isaiah, was collected under the latter's name and now forms the bulk of chapters XI to LXVI in the Book of Isaiah of our Old Testament. This great poet, who is sometimes called the Second Isaiah or Deutero-Isaiah, had an original intuition of Jewish destiny which gave him unprecedented hope and confidence. Hitherto, the misfortunes of the Hebrews had been explained as a chastisement for their sins, and the Unknown Prophet occasionally reverted to this view, but when his insight was deepest it seemed to him that the very function of the good was to suffer on ac-

[p. 38]

count of and for the sake of the wicked so that both might at last be saved. The sufferings of the Hebrews could thus be interpreted as part of a world mission. Personifying his people in the figure of God's Servant, the Unknown Prophet drew into it the lives of the tortured Isaiah and Jeremiah and, for the first time in history, glorified the career of sacrifice and martyrdom.

Remember these, O Jacob and Israel;
 For thou art my servant:
 I have formed thee;
 Thou art my servant:
 O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me. . . .

Behold, my servant shall deal prudently,
 He shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.
 As many were astonished at thee;
 His visage was so marred more than any man,
 And his form more than the sons of men:
 So shall he sprinkle many nations;
 The kings shall shut their mouths at him:
 For that which had not been told them shall they see;
 And that which they had not heard shall they consider. . . .

Surely he hath borne our griefs,
 And carried our sorrows:
 Yet we did esteem him stricken,
 Smitten of God, and afflicted. [p. 39]
 But he was wounded for our transgressions,
 He was bruised for our iniquities:
 The chastisement of our peace was upon him;
 And with his stripes we are healed.
 All we like sheep have gone astray;
 We have turned everyone to his own way;
 And the Lord hath laid on him
 The iniquity of us all.

[paragraph continues] It is not surprising that the Christians should have later found in this incipient doctrine of vicarious atonement a clear foretelling of the coming of Jesus of Nazareth.

After the Second Isaiah, prophecy dwindled. With the return of the Hebrews from captivity, attention was concentrated on the institution of the church, which now must be both church and state for them. The Prophets Haggai and Zechariah did indeed find in the delayed rebuilding of the Temple a worthy theme which inspired them to a momentary eloquence, but Joel merely aped the grand manner on the insufficient occasion of a locust plague, while the anonymous Book of Malachi (Malachi meaning messenger or messiah) was written in the rationalistic style of the rabbis.

The rehabilitation of the Jews in Palestine was a long and weary process. After the conquest of

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Babylonia by Cyrus the Persian, they were given permission to return in 538 B.C., but they did not do so all at once. They came back in small bands year after year, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem was proportionately slow. Not until 444 B.C. were the walls re-erected through the enthusiasm of Nehemiah as related in his autobiographical account, and not until 397 B.C. did the late-returned priest Ezra promulgate the code of laws that was henceforth to regulate the worship of Jehovah.

Ezra's code is now considered to have consisted of the Book of Leviticus probably composed as early as 500 B.C. under the influence of Ezekiel. Its exilic origin is evident in its emphasis upon the Sabbath, an institution that received additional stress when the captives found it important to have one day out of the week specially devoted to the religious services that preserved their national memory. The priestly origin of the work is evident in its institutional character throughout.

Like the Deuteronomists, the priests supplemented their codification of the laws by a revision of Jewish history such as to give the authority of tradition to their work. Their special contribution, now known as the P or Priestly Document, constituted the last of the four great strands of separate

Click to enlarge
Codex Alexandrinus (fifth-century manuscript), sent by Cyril Lucar, Patriarch of Alexandria, to King Charles I of England

[p. 41]

Click to enlarge
Fourteenth-century manuscript of the Wyclif Bible

narrative to be woven into the single account in the completed Old Testament. Of priestly origin that first chapter of Genesis wherein the creation itself is turned into a stupendous glorification of the institution of the Sabbath, of priestly origin the many accounts which sought an ancient basis for the Temple ritual and such ceremonials as circumcision and the keeping of the Passover. Capable at their best of loftiness and even sublimity, the priests were likewise capable of infinite pedantry. Anything connected with the Temple worship seemed to them of world importance. To stress the role of the priestly class in earlier history they compiled the two books of the Chronicles, an arid retelling of Kings given liveliness at the end by the addition, though in the wrong order, of the memoirs of Nehemiah and Ezra. They were the codifiers, the Alexandrians, of the Old Testament. They ended by turning the inner religion of the Prophets into a matter of outer rites and ceremonies, the very thing against which the Prophets had rebelled. They preserved the religion of Jehovah at the cost of formalizing it.

But though the priests came to control Jewish life, they did not control later Jewish literature. The Prophets were dead, but humanists arose in

[p. 42]

their place, quite free from the prevailing ecclesiasticism. Less impassioned than the men of old but more philosophical, they brought into literature a new tone of urbanity.

The Books of Ruth and Jonah were direct protests against the narrow nationalism of the priestly legislators. During the period of the Exile, the Hebrews left in Jerusalem had intermarried freely with the surrounding peoples; the stern new lawgiver Ezra annulled these marriages and disinherited their offspring. Hence the social significance of the Book of Ruth with its pastoral tale of a foreign woman taken in marriage by the Hebrew Boaz and becoming an ancestress of David himself. A work of propaganda--but never before or since was propaganda presented in so sweet and winning a manner. Similarly humanistic was the Book of Jonah, whose intolerant prophetic hero was shown to be rebuked by God himself. In the same emotional key, though less definite in its meaning, was the delightfully fantastic tale of Tobit, one of the earliest of those included in the Apocrypha.

Of uncertain date but certainly postexilic is the most perplexing work in the Old Testament, the Song of Songs. Manifestly a collection of secular love lyrics recited at some wedding ceremony, the

[p. 43]

whole is sufficiently dramatized to suggest a connected narrative, but seems in too fragmentary a condition to make this narrative at all clear. Tantalized modern critics have been tempted to make all manner of fanciful reconstructions of the poem, usually interpreting it as a dramatized story of the unsuccessful rivalry of King Solomon with a rural swain for the love of a Shulamite shepherdess. This romantic conception is much less plausible than that which sees in the poem a fragmentary masque adapted for a marriage ceremony in which bride and groom took the conventional characters, now of king and queen and now of shepherd and shepherdess. Fortunately, the sensuous beauty and lyric rapture of the Song remain the same in any case.

A garden shut up is my sister, my bride;
 A spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
 Thy shoots are an orchard of pomegranates, with precious fruits;
 Henna with spikenard plants,
 Spikenard and saffron,
 Calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense;
 Myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices.
 Thou art a fountain of gardens,
 A well of living waters,
 And flowing streams from Lebanon.

Misinterpreted in antiquity as a symbolic poem depicting

[p. 44]

the love of Jehovah for his people, this secular work crept into the Jewish sacred canon and from it was transferred to the Christian canon with the further misinterpretation that it symbolized the wedding of Christ and his Church. Conceived in this light, it was the favorite reading of the German medieval mystics, Eckhart, Tauler, and Suso, as well as that of both the antagonistic religious leaders of New England, John Winthrop and Roger Williams.

From the end of the fourth century came the collection of the half-secular, half-religious gnomic verse known as the book of Proverbs, really a collection of collections, including the proverbs originally attributed to Solomon, a later compilation of the time of Hezekiah, and others attributed to a mysterious "King Lemuel" and to "Agur, the son of Jakeh." The book of Proverbs is an example of what the Hebrews called "wisdom literature," a term of broad significance covering prudential folklore maxims such as are common to all nations and also highly philosophical discourses in which human reason was regarded as identical in nature with the divine "wisdom" revealed in the order of the universe. On the one hand, we find:

[p. 45]

Go to the ant, thou sluggard;
 Consider her ways, and be wise.

And, on the other:

"I wisdom have made subtilty my dwelling,
 And find out knowledge and discretion. . . .
 The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
 Before his works of old.
 I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
 Or ever the earth was.
 When there were no depths, I was brought forth;
 When there were no fountains abounding with water.
 Before the mountains were settled,
 Before the hills was I brought forth:
 While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields,
 Nor the beginning of the dust of the world."

Wisdom literature in its loftiest form is found in the Book of Job. Building upon the framework of an old pre-Deuteronomic folk tale, the unknown fourth-century author constructed a dramatic poem which took up again more poignantly that problem of evil which had embarrassed Habakkuk and Jeremiah--the question of how to reconcile God's justice with the suffering of the innocent. Though he probed deeply, he found no answer other than

[p. 46]

that such suffering seemed a necessary part of a general scheme of things which in its grand totality he was fain to accept, but in his central figure he created, not the "patient Job" of popular tradition but a Promethean character, the most rebellious in the Bible, whose insistence upon personal integrity recalled the old prophetic strain here re-enunciated with an intensity unequaled elsewhere in the Old Testament.

Oh that I had one to hear me!
 (Lo, here is my signature, let the Almighty answer me);
 And that I had the indictment which mine adversary hath written!
 Surely I would carry it upon my shoulder;
 I would bind it unto me as a crown.
 I would declare unto him the number of my steps;
 As a prince would I go near unto him.
 If my land cry out against me,
 And the furrows thereof weep together;
 If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money,
 Or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life:
 Let thistles grow instead of wheat,
 And cockles instead of barley.

A century or more later, the book of Ecclesiastes carried the questionings of Job still further to the point of doubting the objective basis of the entire system of human values.

[p. 47]

"Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher; vanity of vanities, all is vanity. What profit hath man of all his labour wherein he laboureth under the sun? . . .

"I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I perceived that this also was a striving after wind. For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow. . . . For of the wise man, even as of the fool, there is no remembrance for ever; seeing that in the days to come all will have been already forgotten. And how doth the wise man die even as the fool! . . . All is vanity and a striving after wind."

This profoundly pessimistic work, in which reason seemed to turn its subtlest weapons against itself, would hardly have been admitted into the Jewish sacred canon but for the additions of a pious redactor which served to blunt its point. Even with these conventional scholia attached, Ecclesiastes has remained the favorite Old Testament reading of philosophical skeptics.

Probably as late as the second century B.C. was made the world's most important collection of sacred poetry called the Book of Psalms. Many of these were of pre-exilic origin, some possibly even going as far back as the time of King David, but the

[p. 48]

great majority were unquestionably postexilic. They make up the most varied book in the entire Bible: all the inner conflicts of the Hebrews are expressed in it--the struggles between sacerdotalism and the individual conscience, between nationalism and humanism, between vindictiveness and tolerance, between despair and the uttermost of faith. Because these conflicts were permanently human as well as Hebrew, because the positive tone of hope and thanksgiving usually emerged triumphant, and because of the tender yet exalted notes of highest poetry often present, the Psalms have always been the best-loved portion of the Bible. Divided by the Hebrews into five books, a division not usually retained in modern translations, they were sung in the synagogues to the accompaniment of musical instruments and early became the chief hymnbook of the Church.

In the centuries after the return from captivity, great events had happened in the outer world leaving the isolated community in Judea long untouched by them. The glory that was Athens had waxed and waned in the interval, Sparta and Thebes had risen and fallen, Alexander had overthrown the Persian Empire, and it was parceled out among his generals. All this meant nothing to the subject nation

[p. 49]

of the Hebrews, who passed unmurmuring from subjection to the Persians to subjection to the Greeks. But when that unusually intolerant Greek, King Antiochus Epiphanes, attempted in the middle of the second century to root out the Jewish religion, the nation rose in arms under Simon Maccabeus and his son Judas. The literary fruits of their heroic and ultimately successful rebellion were the three works of patriotic fiction, the partially apocalyptic Book of Daniel, the Book of Esther, and the Book of Judith, together with the last of the Biblical narratives, the two Books of the Maccabees.

Judith, the two Books of the Maccabees, and the earlier mentioned Tobit belong in the collection known as the Apocrypha which also includes two notable works of wisdom literature, the book of Ecclesiasticus, written by Jesus, the son of Sirach, in the second century and translated from Aramaic into Greek by his grandson, and the later Wisdom of Solomon, the only book of the Old Testament to reflect the influence of Greek philosophy and the only one to breathe any strong hope of personal immortality; the charming tale of Susanna and the elders, added at the beginning of the Book of Daniel, and a less worthy addition at the end of the same work, the exaggeratedly fantastic "Destruction

[p. 50]

of Bel and the Dragon"; also a poetic interpolation in the Book of Daniel, "The Song of the Three Children," which is included in the Prayer Book of the Church of England; an unauthentic "Prayer of Manassas King of Juda When He Was Holden Captive in Babylon"; seven rather stupid chapters added to Esther; a book attributed to Baruch, Jeremiah's secretary, followed by a letter of Jeremiah; and the two Books of Esdras consisting of a Greek expansion of the Hebrew Ezra.

The books mentioned in the preceding paragraph were excluded from the Hebrew canon of sacred literature, not because of literary inferiority, which characterizes most but not all of them, but because the canon reached its final formulation in the triple division of the Law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa (or Writings) at the end of the second century B.C. before the Apocryphal works had become widely known and indeed before some of them had been composed. The Greek canon adopted later by the Jews of Alexandria included the Apocrypha, and it formed an integral part of the Septuagint and Vulgate translations. Although some question of their value always existed, the Roman Catholic Church officially placed the Apocryphal books on an equality with the other books

[p. 51]

of the Bible by action of the Council of Trent (1545-63). The more skeptical Protestants admitted them usually with the qualification that they were to be read for "edification" but not for the "establishment of doctrine." They were included in the King James version and regularly appeared in editions of it until, beginning with 1827, they were arbitrarily omitted in the millions of copies circulated by the British and American Bible Societies. As a result, the great majority of British and American Protestants have long since come to regard as the true Bible one artificially limited, not by the official action of any of their churches but by the decision of semiprivate missionary agencies. Thus the British and American Societies, which should be given credit for the greater part of the popular knowledge of the Bible which now exists, must also be held responsible for the regrettable ignorance of the Apocrypha. From the literary and historical points of view, at least, a Bible without the Apocrypha is a truncated Bible.

From the same points of view it is regrettable that Jewish sacred writings of the first century B.C. such as the very influential Book of Enoch and Book of Jubilees were omitted, because of their late date, from both the Hebrew and the Greek canon. As

[p. 52]

matters stand, there is a gap of over a century between the Old and the New Testaments, and it was precisely in the literature of that period, unrepresented in our Scriptures, that a number of the ideas taken for granted in the New Testament were first fully developed: the doctrine of personal immortality, the belief in the immediate coming of the Messiah, and the expectation of the imminent destruction of the world.

 

Thousands of books have been written and will continue to be written on the New Testament. For the purposes of the present volume, however, it may be treated much more briefly than the Old Testament, and this for several reasons. Its writing occupied little more than fifty years instead of a millennium. To all but orthodox Jews it is now much more familiar than the Old Testament. And it presents fewer purely historical problems.

The order of the books as they appear in the New Testament is, of course, as far from chronological as is that of the Old Testament. They are arranged, very roughly, according to importance, with little regard to the date of writing. A chronological rearrangement would place most of the Epistles first, then the Synoptic Gospels, then a

[p. 53]

few late Epistles and the Book of Revelation, and finally the Gospel and Epistles of John.

The earliest Christian compositions were the Epistles of Paul, written in Greek, like the rest of the New Testament, during A.D. 50-61. It is hardly too much to say that the labors of the Apostle in those few years transformed Christianity from a local cult into a world religion. Certainly no other man ever achieved results of such magnitude in so short a space of time. His success arose as much from the direct influence of his powerful personality on his many missionary journeys as from the persuasiveness of his writings; yet the popularity of these with Christians of all ages is the best evidence of their enduring power. Much in them was highly legalistic, but whenever their author freed himself from the entanglements of rabbinical learning and the involvements of argument, his language became simple yet eloquent, moving with ease from moods of emotional tenderness to passionate invective. His influence was so great that other writers soon attempted to wield his pen. Of the Epistles attributed to him, the unquestionably genuine ones were, in the order of composition, First Thessalonians, Second Thessalonians, Galatians, First Corinthians, Second Corinthians, Romans,

[p. 54]

Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon. The authenticity of the excellent Epistle to the Ephesians is more doubtful; those to Timothy and Titus are now generally rejected; and the great Epistle to the Hebrews has long been recognized as not of Pauline authorship.

Little is known of the writers of the minor Epistles in the New Testament. Jude is only a name; the two ascribed to Peter were really anonymous, as were the three attributed to John, the author of the latter, however, being probably also the author of the Gospel according to John. The Epistle of James may just possibly have been the work of James, the brother of Jesus; at any rate, its spirit is close to that of the Synoptic Gospels in its protest against social injustice and in its emphasis upon salvation by works rather than upon salvation by faith.

If all we knew about the life of Jesus of Nazareth were derived from Paul and his followers, it would be next to nothing. Paul had ample opportunity to have familiarized himself with the details of Jesus' life through his personal acquaintance with the original disciples, but he seems to have been little interested in the human Jesus; it was the resurrected Jesus who was valuable to him as a sign of God's

[p. 55]

redemptive love for man, and in spite of the famous passage in First Corinthians--"Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity"--Paul's emphasis was normally laid upon faith in the divine Christ rather than upon the moral teachings of the actual Jesus of Nazareth.

The first record of the latter is believed to have been a lost collection of the "Sayings of Jesus" made by Matthew, which is mentioned by the early Christian writer Papias (about A.D. 130). There was also, presumably, a lost Aramaic account of the life of Jesus. Most likely on this basis, John Mark, a missionary companion of both Peter and Paul, produced in about A. D. 70 his Gospel in Greek, a simple biographical account which included few of the parables or other teachings,--followed, perhaps a decade later by the Gospel according to Matthew which made much use of the lost "Sayings" together with some use of Mark and the lost Aramaic Gospel. Finally, after still another decade, Luke, the most accomplished literary artist among the Gospel writers, combined Mark and Matthew, together with fresh material gathered through his own researches, in a finished and complete biography. When, afterwards, Luke added his invaluable account of the early Christian

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Church in the Acts of the Apostles, what may be called the historical portion of the New Testament was completed. The Fourth Gospel was written much later, probably in the first quarter of the second century A. D., and under the influence of Greek philosophy as expressed in the work of Philo Judaeus; though it contains some fresh material such as the incident of the woman taken in adultery, as a whole it seems to represent a conscious rearrangement of the Synoptic narratives in order to emphasize the divinity of Jesus.

Mark's Gospel was much the briefest of the four and can easily be read at a single sitting--as indeed it should be to obtain the full effect of its swift dramatic narrative. Matthew's, more massive and inclusive, was written primarily for the Jews, with many quotations from the Old Testament to buttress the new teachings; it is less vivid than Mark's and not well unified, but it has the inestimable value of containing the collection of parables. Only about a third of Luke's Gospel was original, but this section introduced sixteen fresh parables, several Christian hymns, and a number of characters, mainly women, who do not appear in the other Gospels; its shorter form of the Sermon on the Mount seems to represent an earlier version than

[p. 57]

that in Matthew; it is the tenderest of the Gospels, foreshadowing the feminine element in Christianity to be developed centuries later in the Catholic worship of the Virgin and the saints; and although a compilation, it was so skillfully constructed that its parts blend beautifully into a consistent whole. The author of the Fourth Gospel was the mystic among the Gospel writers, interested chiefly in the symbolic meaning of the events recorded, this meaning being brought out in the conversations and long discourses with which the book abounds. Nearly all the great theological disputes of the next three centuries turned on the doctrines of this Gospel, which exercised a greater influence on the immediate future than the other three together.

Probably about the year A.D. 90 was written the book of Revelation, which now stands at the end of the New Testament. While it is chronologically misplaced and while ethically it represents a reversion to a pre-Christian way of thought, dramatically it is exactly where it should be. Picturing, in a series of apocalyptic visions almost blinding in their splendor, the destruction of the earth and the final conflict between the armed hosts of good and evil, this, the most Hebraic of the New Testament writings, breathing the spirit of the Prophets

[p. 58]

and thunderous with shouts of battle and cries of victory, formed a fitting conclusion to a thousand years of literature that was born of suffering and heroic struggle.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

  

THREE

  

The Conflict over Creed and Canon

THE CHRISTIANS of the first century A. D. lived in expectation of the second coming of Christ, therefore they felt no need of a permanent creed or sacred canon. As most of them were converted Jews, they naturally accepted the Old Testament, known to those outside of Palestine in the version of the Septuagint (completed in the first century B.C.), but beyond that they had only such fragmentary Christian writings as their particular congregations happened to possess.

When during the second century the hope of Christ's immediate return gradually faded and the necessity of finding some definite body of doctrine to hold the Christian communities together began to be recognized, the difficulties in the way were almost insuperable. The Christian congregations were scattered throughout the separate cities of the Roman Empire. The enhancement of the value of the individual brought by the Christian emphasis upon personal immortality, while it was one of the main reasons for the rapid spread of the new religion,

[p. 60]

was also a danger in that it tended to foster highly individualistic and divergent interpretations of this new religion's meaning. Far greater than the likelihood of its being crushed by the sporadic and inefficient Roman persecutions was the possibility that Christianity would split up into a number of mutually hostile sects.

To arrive at any settled system of dogma it was necessary to answer a number of perplexing questions. Assuming that the Apostolic writings could be separated from the pseudo-Apostolic imitations that now began to appear in large numbers, were they to be considered as of greater, equal, or lesser authority in comparison with the literature of the Old Testament? To just what degree was the Mosaic law still binding upon Christians? What was the true relation between the human and the divine natures united in the Christ? And how answer the old question as to the existence of evil in a world ruled by a perfect deity? Upon these points, Christianity was time and again threatened with dissolution.

In contrast to paganism and to the rival Oriental religions, Mithraism and Isis worship, Christianity had the immeasurable advantage of possessing the imposing body of sacred scriptures in the Old

[p. 61]

[paragraph continues] Testament. For a time, however, it was doubtful whether this immense advantage would not be thrown away at the outset. The Jews had rejected Jesus; the temptation was strong for the Christians to retaliate by rejecting everything Jewish. There was much in the Old Testament, particularly in its early parts, which was thoroughly inconsistent with the teachings of Jesus. Why retain the scriptures of a religion whose priests had brought about the crucifixion of the Christ?

Thus the question of the inclusion of the Old Testament in the Christian Bible was at the outset involved in the larger question as to the meaning of Christian salvation--whether it was to be salvation in the world or salvation from the world. On this issue the future of Christianity turned: whether it should become a negative religion like Buddhism or Zoroastrianism or should follow the more positive path laid down by its founder. At the moment the forces making for the negative and pessimistic interpretation were numerous and powerful. The Roman Empire was full of Oriental cults practicing various forms of mystical asceticism. Greek philosophy which in its palmy days would have offered a defense was now tending downward in the same direction. Plato's identification of evil

[p. 62]

with matter was bearing dark fruit in an ever-increasing dualism between the spirit and the body. Warred upon from right and left by the sensuality of paganism and by the asceticism of its own extremists, it took Christianity more than a century to find its way into the open.

The stoutest fighter for the preservation of Christianity as a monotheistic religion was the mighty Origen (Origines Adamantius), the chief Christian theologian of the third century and the first great textual critic. Born in Alexandria, the son of a Christian martyr, he was so precocious a student that at the age of eighteen he succeeded Clement of Alexandria as head of the catechetical school. The most prolific of writers, reputed author of six thousand works, he still devoted twenty years to a study of the Scriptures which resulted in his Hexapla, the first polyglot Bible, in which he arranged in six parallel columns the Hebrew Old Testament, his own Greek transliteration of it, the Septuagint, and three second-century Greek translations by Aquila, Theodotion, and Symmachus. Although in his youth he had emasculated himself in literal fulfillment of the supposed commandment of Christ in Matthew xix. 12, he was not a literalist in his general interpretation of the

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] Bible. The Scriptures, he held, should be read in three ways: as a record of facts, as a moral allegory, and as religious symbolism.

By the end of the third century, the danger that Christianity might abandon the Old Testament definitely passed. There had also by this time come to be accepted the nucleus of a canonical New Testament, consisting of the four Gospels and the Pauline Epistles. But the final status of the other New Testament works was still undetermined, as well as that of various Christian apocryphal writings. Out of a mass of early Christian "gospels" and "epistles," most of which were of little worth, several works possessed survival value, the Epistle of Barnabas, the Epistle of Clement of Rome, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Apocalypse of Peter. Two second-century works were also very highly esteemed: the Testament of Our Lord, which professed to be the very "testament or words which Our Lord spake to His Holy Apostles when He rose from the dead," and the Apostolic Constitutions, a collection of eight books ostensibly recording the words of the Apostles as written down by Clement of Alexandria. Popularly attributed to the Apostles also was the anonymous Apostles' Creed, which in practically its later form already circulated during the second

[p. 64]

century. This creed, however, did not attempt to define the precise relations between the Father and the Son, much less to explain the nature of the Trinity. Such creedal formulation, as well as the precise limitation of the canon, did not come until the establishment of Christianity as the religion of the Roman Empire accomplished a more definite unification of divergent tendencies and doctrines.

This occurred in the early part of the fourth century after Constantine the Great had been led to favor Christianity because, according to the accepted legend, Just before the decisive battle which made him emperor he saw in the sky a miraculous cross bearing the words in Greek, "By this, conquer." When Constantine chose Byzantium, renamed Constantinople, as the capital of the Empire, he presented the churches of the city with fifty magnificent copies of the Bible prepared at his expense.

A new heresy led to the formulation of a new creed. In Antioch the presbyter Lucian had been preaching strange doctrine, namely that Christ, since he had been created by the Father, could not be held equal to the Father. He was the first created of beings, created before all worlds, but he could not be considered coeternal with the Father without violating all logic. One of Lucian's pupils, the

[p. 65]

presbyter Arius, taught the same doctrine in Alexandria where he was indignantly answered by another Alexandrian cleric, Athanasius. The bishop of Alexandria, after some hesitation, supported the latter, but Arius found an almost equally powerful adherent in another of Lucian's pupils, Eusebius, who had become bishop of Nicomedia. The quarrel spread from church to church; bishop anathematized bishop; the dispute at last became so scandalous that in 325 Constantine, in order to bring peace to the warring clergy, called the first ecumenical council at Nicaea in Asia Minor.

It was probably the most important gathering in the whole history of Christianity, for its decision would determine the official creed of the Christian Church for centuries to come. Arianism was a first faint beginning of what would today be called a Unitarian conception of Christianity; the Athanasians, on the other hand, were the stoutest of Trinitarians. The issue was decided neither by reason nor by the authority of the Scriptures, but by the relative strength of the contending parties. The Nicene Council resembled a truce between hostile armies rather than a peaceful convocation; both sides came armed, and physical conflict was narrowly averted; only when the Arians found

[p. 66]

themselves decisively outnumbered did they accept a creed which anathematized their teachings.

The creed of 325 is popularly supposed to have been the Nicene Creed of later prayer books, but in reality it was merely an early and incomplete draft of that creed. It read:

"We believe in one God, the almighty Father, creator of all things visible and invisible; and in one Lord, Jesus Christ, born of the Father, only-begotten--that is, of the substance of the Father, true God from the true God, born, not made, homoousion--that is, with the substance of the same Father, through whom all things were made which are in heaven and on earth; who, for the sake of us men and for the sake of our salvation, descended, and was incarnated, and was made man, suffered, and arose again on the third day, ascended to heaven, whence he will come to judge the living and the dead; and in the Holy Ghost.

"However there are those who say: there was a time when he was not, and before he was born he was not, and that he was not created out of any substance, or who say that he was transformed from some other substance or essence--that is, that the Son of God is changeable or mutable--these

[p. 67]

the Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes."

Homoousion--"of one substance"--or homoiousion--"of like substance"--on this question of a single word the Christian Church was rent apart for many years. Although the Homoousians seemed to have won a definitive victory in the adoption of the creed of 325, following which Athanasius was made bishop of Alexandria, the Homoiousian Arians had given only a nominal submission. They intrigued successfully at court, another council was held at Tyre, Athanasius was deposed, and Arius returned to Alexandria in triumph. It was now the turn of the Athanasians to intrigue; a third council, two years later, held at Sardica, restored Athanasius to his diocese. Another two years, and he was again deposed. So the struggle went on, year after year. Five times Athanasius was driven into banishment, five times he was restored.

Meanwhile, the Arians, who were energetic missionaries, made many converts among the Northern barbarians. Ulfilas translated the Bible into Gothic, thereby making what is generally considered the first beginning of Teutonic literature. Believing that his converts were already sufficiently

[p. 68]

warlike, he is said to have omitted the Book of the Kings from his translation lest it further increase their military ardor. It would have been well for the cause of peace had theological controversies also been eliminated in the process of converting the barbarians. Stammering their first Latin, the Goths became divided into Homoousians and Homoiousians, and the subtle words of a learned creed served as cause of battle in distant Gaul and Spain.

After fifty years of conflict, verbal and physical, the Athanasians emerged triumphant. The Council of Constantinople in A.D. 381 adopted the Nicene Creed in its present form (with the exception of a single word, to be discussed later) and further declared this creed to be unamendable. Henceforward, the creed originated by Athanasius possessed an authority equal to that of the Bible itself; it had become a third Christian sacred scripture, brief but fully as potent as the Old and New Testaments.

The creedal triumph of Athanasius was accompanied by the acceptance of his personal canon of Biblical Scripture. Under the influence of Jerome and Augustine, the Athanasian canon was formally adopted by successive synods in A.D. 382, A.D. 393,

[p. 69]

and A.D. 397. Thus it came about that the Bible contains the books which it now does.

The final acceptance of the canon was made certain, not only by the decision of the Church, but by the great Latin translation of Jerome (completed after fifteen years of labor in A.D. 405), which included none but the canonical books. An earlier anonymous translation of the Bible, known as the Old Latin translation, had been circulated since the second century, but with great divergence among the copies, particularly between the European and African versions of it. Pope Damasus commissioned Jerome to make the necessary revision, which he did most thoroughly, retaining the Old Latin only for the Apocrypha and for the rest of the Old Testament going directly to the Hebrew text, though this unfortunately, as of course he could not know, actually represented a later version than that of the Septuagint on which the Old Latin had been based.

When the Vulgate, as Jerome's translation came to be called, was put before the people, it was bitterly attacked because of its alteration of familiar passages. Jerome was charged by his popular accusers, whom he contemptuously denominated "two-legged asses," with having impiously changed

[p. 70]

the words used by the inspired writers of the Bible. It required a century and a half for his work to win general favor. But after that for a thousand years it was the only Bible known to western Europe.

In spite of the labors of Athanasius and Jerome, there still remained disputed points of dogma unmentioned in the creeds and unaffected by the canon. These questions were settled for orthodox Christianity by the master mind of Augustine, author of one of the most poignant of autobiographies, author of the most influential of all theological works, The City of God. In this last he gathered up and attempted to synthetize four centuries of Christian thought. With Paul he held to the dogma of predestination: that by Adam's fall the human race was corrupted so that men are born in a condition of original sin from which they can only be redeemed by God's grace operating usually through the ministrations of the Church. The harshness of this doctrine he tried to mitigate by holding with Origen that evil is mere privation of the good, thus introducing a hierarchy of relative goods wherein worldly possessions are regarded as legitimate so long as they do not turn the mind from higher things, marriage is still a sacrament

[p. 71]

though celibacy is more blessed, and the State is beneficial as an earthly institution though the Church, concerned with spiritual things, is far higher, while highest of all is the Church within the Church, the City of God, composed of the Elect united in that love of God which is the supreme good. Thus Augustine found a place in his system for both the flesh and the spirit, the exoteric and the esoteric, worldly compromise and pure monasticism, in a system as broad and complex as was the Church for whose glory it was conceived.

One more heresy arose, indeed, even in Augustine's own time: that of the British monk, Pelagius, whose follower Coelestius, was condemned by the Synod of Carthage for holding "seven mortal errors," the most damnable of which were the assertions that Adam would have died even if he had not sinned, that the human race as a whole was unaffected by his sin, that unbaptized children might be saved, and that men were free to will the good without a special act of God's grace. The simple island monk's humanitarianism could make no headway against the subtle dialectic of Augustine, trained in the methods of the Greek philosophers.

Thenceforth for a thousand years there was little danger from individual heresy. The Church was in

[p. 72]

possession of the Bible, clearly defined creed built upon it, and of a great mass of literature culminating in the work of Augustine which could be used to defend the Church's claims. It was well organized under its established system of bishops, presbyters, and deacons, centered in the twin seats of empire, Rome and Constantinople. Thus equipped and organized it would be able to survive even when the empire fell.

Nevertheless, internal unity had not been achieved. Impregnable as it had become against outside assaults or local rebellions, the Church still had two heads, and this was one too many. The long quarrel over the creed had expressed a struggle for power between East and West, the East being more liberal as it was less ecclesiasticized. Under the leadership of Athanasius, Jerome, and Augustine, the West had won many battles, but the conflict was not ended. The further growth of the Church of Rome was destined to breed irreconcilable differences.

From the first, the Roman Catholic Church had claimed a priority based on the alleged martyrdom in Rome of Peter, the "Rock" on whom Jesus in Matthew xvi. 18-19, had said that he would build his church, giving to him "the keys of the kingdom

[p. 73]

of heaven." As early as the second century Pope Victor I had threatened to excommunicate the Eastern churches if they did not accept the Roman date for Easter, a festival which had taken over the old pagan holidays in celebration of the Spring. In the Athanasian Creed reference is made to "the Catholic Faith" and "the Catholic Religion" rather than to the "Christian" faith or religion. After the fall of the Empire in 476 the Papacy secured control of the city of Rome with vast estates elsewhere in Italy, Sicily, and Africa. Politics and religion became inextricable in a church which thus enjoyed both spiritual and temporal power.

Meanwhile, over in Constantinople its Patriarch, who had secured the primacy among the churches of the East, watched the growth of his western rival with jealous eyes. The secret enmity between the two heirs of the Empire came to a head in the ninth century when Pope Nicholas I and the Patriarch Photius excommunicated each other. Officially, the quarrel was over the Nicene Creed. In the form of that creed used in the Roman Catholic Church the word filioque--"and from the Son"--had been added to the description of the Holy Spirit as "proceeding from the Father." Photius, the greatest scholar of the age, declared that this

[p. 74]

addition, after the Council of Constantinople had declared the creed unamendable, was sufficient to convict the Roman Church of heresy. Boasting an Apostolic origin older than that of the Church of Rome, the Greek Church became "The Holy Orthodox Catholic and Apostolic Oriental Church" in opposition to "The Holy Orthodox Catholic Apostolic Roman Church," each denying to the other the right to any of these titles save the geographic one.

Thus Christianity moved into the Middle Ages divided. But the Greek Church was early hampered by the growth of Mohammedanism, and aside from its extension into Russia had all that it could do to maintain itself at home. The Christianization of western Europe was to be accomplished by the Roman Catholic Church alone. Centralized and authoritarian as this body had become, without these qualities it could hardly have succeeded in its mission.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

  

FOUR

  

The Bible under Medievalism

THE MISSIONARIES went forth to Christianize the Northern barbarians with the Bible in their hands. As later with the American Indians, its simple touching stories of piety and suffering won the hearts of the rude tribesmen as could no other appeal. Without the Bible, the medieval Church would have been powerless to accomplish its enormous task of bringing a thousand warring nations and subnations, of divergent stock and traditions, into some kind of spiritual unity. That the whole of Europe came at last to accept, not merely nominally but actually, the same religion, with the same general code of moral obligations for all, was a testimony primarily to the enduring efficacy of the Bible.

In the beginning, vernacular renderings of the Bible were encouraged, and wherever this occurred its fecundating influence was soon apparent. Especially was this the case in England where, aside from Beowulf and a few fragments, Anglo-Saxon

[p. 76]

literature began with paraphrases and translations of the Bible.

For the English-speaking peoples special interest attaches to these early Anglo-Saxon undertakings. Like the prophetical books of the Bible, they were born of men's need in time of turmoil and distress, when the few Christians in the British Isles stood in danger of being wiped out by the Danish invaders even as the Hebrews had been environed by the hostile Assyrians and Babylonians. Being special objects of attack from the looting Danes, the little centers of learning in the monasteries founded by the missionaries, such as those at Ely, Wearmouth, and Yarrow, on the isle of Lindisfarne, and at Lastingham in the North Riding, were one and all decimated by the great plague of 664 which took particularly heavy toll in the congested quarters of the monks. It was in this period of terror and in the exposed Yorkshire town of Streonshalh (later to be sacked by the Danes and renamed Whitby) that the work of Biblical translation was begun, calmly and serenely, in the Benedictine monastery founded by Saint Hilda.

The moving tale is told by the Venerable Bede in his Ecclesiastical History of how an illiterate cowherd named Caedmon, attached to the monastery,

Click to enlarge
Characteristic page from the Gutenberg Bible (1450-55)

[p. 77]

Click to enlarge
Title page of the Coverdale Bible (1535)

was discovered to possess such a native power of putting into verse the Biblical stories which he heard that the Abbess Hilda took him into the order and had him instructed until he was able to paraphrase in Anglo-Saxon verse a large part of the Vulgate as it was translated for him by the other monks. Of his work but a single manuscript remains, containing parts of Genesis, Exodus, and Daniel, together with original poems on the fall of the Angels and the temptation of Man. These fragments show Saint Hilda's cowherd to have well deserved her patronage.

The literary movement thus begun was continued in the religious poetry of the Northumbrian Cynewulf in the eighth century, during which England also produced one of the foremost scholars of the day in the person of the great Alcuin (Ealhwine in Anglo-Saxon). Invited to France by Charlemagne, Alcuin as abbot of Tours became the center of a new religio-literary movement in that country.

Charlemagne was an impatient Christian. When the continental Saxons scoffed at his religion, he gave them the choice of baptism or death, justifying his intolerance, as Augustine had done, by Christ's words, "Constrain them to come in" (Luke xiv. 23) in his parable of the slighted invitation.

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] Once the Saxons had accepted baptism, however, he sent them missionaries who taught so successfully that within a few years Saxon literature produced the long Christian epic of the Heliand.

In truth, Charlemagne was more enlightened than the official leaders of the Church at Rome. The text of Jerome's Vulgate, through incessant copying and recopying, had already become much corrupted, and Charlemagne, at the beginning of the ninth century, undertook the task of revision which the Church itself postponed until the sixteenth century. He sent for scholars from all over Europe, who under the leadership of Alcuin made one revision; then Theodulf, bishop of Orleans, dissatisfied with this, made, singlehanded, another; it was in one or the other of these revisions that the Vulgate was henceforth known in northern Europe.

Charlemagne considered himself the head of both Church and State. Not approving of the Papacy's attitude toward the worship of images and pictures, he composed, with Alcuin's assistance, a treatise on the subject. As he knew both Latin and Greek and had mastered the learning of the period, he was no mean polemicist. His legal code was fashioned on the Biblical model, with laws prohibiting

[p. 79]

the taking of interest on loans (Deuteronomy xxiii. 19) and enforcing observance of the Sabbath and the payment of tithes. In the church services he required the priests to translate the sermons and the readings from the Bible into the vernacular for the benefit of the common people.

Inspired by Charlemagne's cultural example, Alfred the Great of England endeavored to go still further in the way of familiarizing his people with the Scriptures and with later Christian literature. At the head of his legal code he placed the Ten Commandments, translated by him from the Book of Exodus, and he also found time amidst the cares of state to translate the Pastoral Care of Pope Gregory the Great, the History of the World by Orosius, and the Consolation of Philosophy by Boethius. Finally, he gathered about him the ablest scholars of the realm to carry on this work of translation, in the magnificent hope that "all the freeborn youth of my people . . . may persevere in learning . . . until they can perfectly read the English Scriptures."

Under the stimulus of Alfred's influence and example, the writers of his and subsequent reigns produced an abundance of Christian literature. Aelfric the Grammarian, in addition to numerous religious homilies, made a paraphrase of the first

[p. 80]

seven books of the Old Testament known as "Aelfric's Heptateuch." Aldheim, Abbot of Malmesbury, and Guthrac, a hermit of Croyland, produced versions of the Psalms. Completed in this period, though begun earlier, were the Lindisfarne Gospels and the Rushworth Gospels, both of them glosses--that is, literal word-by-word translations without regard to sentence structure. By the time of the Norman Conquest there were also in existence translations of the Books of Kings, Esther, Job, Judith, and the Maccabees. In other words, the English people already possessed, in one form or another, most of the Bible in their own language, and only awaited some great Anglo-Saxon Jerome to make the complete translation.

The Norman Conquest eliminated all possibility of his coming. The Norman-French, at first imposed by the conquerors upon the language of the conquered and later assimilated with it, produced a new composite language so that the old Anglo-Saxon literature was no longer intelligible. By the twelfth century it was evident that new versions of the Bible were needed. But these did not appear, for the attitude of the Church toward the use of the vernacular had gradually changed.

To understand the indifference and even hostility

[p. 81]

of the medieval Church toward the popular reading of the Bible, a number of points must be borne in mind. The leaders of the Church considered the unification of Europe to be their all-important task, and they were not eager to foster national literatures to develop the spirit of local independence. Among a people too ignorant to understand the Scriptures correctly, the reading of them, it was thought, would merely lead to heresies and schisms. Far better to let the knowledge of them come through the priests who could tell as much or as little as the individual case required. Was it not better to give the people concrete help through the confessional and indulgences, through the exhibition of relics to heal their sicknesses, and through rich ceremonials appealing to their senses? So the Church was easily able to justify a course that gave it greater and greater power over the people.

The medieval period was torn as perhaps no other between the demands of the spirit and the flesh. To the former, the monks were specially consecrated, and after the great monastic revival of the sixth century under Saint Benedict learning and education were left primarily in their care. Well the Benedictines wrought in their early years;

[p. 82]

theirs was the leading part in the Christianization of Europe; in a world made up largely of robber barons and their serfs the monasteries were little islands of fraternity and peace in whose libraries the monks labored over their illuminated manuscripts and from which they went forth to carry their messages of human brotherhood. But they could not escape the fate that makes the spirit's triumph transient and breeds failure from success. They mingled with the world too much, too much with politics; their monasteries became too powerful to preserve their simple rules of life. By 1354 it is estimated that the order had acquired thirty-seven thousand monasteries and had numbered among its members twenty emperors, ten empresses, forty-seven kings and fifty queens, twenty-four popes, two hundred cardinals, more than one thousand canonized saints, seven thousand archbishops, and fifteen thousand bishops. No order could fail to be corrupted by such a superfluity of worldly glory.

As the system of feudalism developed, all care for the cultural development of the common people was abandoned. Popular reverence for the Bible was excessive, popular knowledge of its contents was abysmally small. More and more it was devoted

[p. 83]

to magical purposes, a practice that went back to the Roman Empire. One of the first uses to which parchment was put when it began to supplant papyrus in the fifth century was to furnish little strips, inscribed with verses from the Bible, to be fastened on chair backs or around the necks of babies as charms to keep away the demons. The Lord's Prayer and various Psalms were regarded as particularly efficacious spells. The Roman custom of consulting the Virgilian lots, that is, of opening the Aeneid and taking the first verse on which the eye lighted as a prophecy of the outcome of some contemplated enterprise was succeeded by a similar superstitious use of the Bible during the Middle Ages.

The worship of relics led to organized pilgrimages to famous shrines, such as that described by Chaucer in The Canterbury Tales; of these, the most highly regarded was the difficult pilgrimage to the traditional Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem. Those who had accomplished it were known as palmers and enjoyed on their return double honors as specially sanctified beings and as explorers of strange lands who brought back marvelous tales with no possible check upon their stories. Only if one bears in mind the romantic place of the Holy Land in

[p. 84]

medieval imagination can one understand the two hundred years' fanaticism of the Crusades.

Mohammedanism had been more successful than Christianity in civilizing the nations who accepted it. True, the religion of Islam had a somewhat easier task. Its peoples were all more nearly of the same stock, its lands were nearer to the sources of classical civilization, and its sacred book, the Koran, taught a more familiar ethics. Through these and perhaps other causes, the Moorish kingdom in Spain and the Saracen cities of the East had attained a higher level of learning and culture than existed at that time anywhere in Christendom. After the victory of Poitiers in 7 32 when Charles Martel turned back the Mohammedan invasion of the West, Christianity had felt secure. But in the eleventh century, its old foe, immensely wealthier and more powerful, menaced it from the East. Constantinople was endangered, and in 1095 Pope Urban II preached what was to be the first of seven Crusades for the rescue of the Eastern capital and the recovery of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.

All the contradictions of medieval Christianity came to the front in the Crusades. A war in honor of the Prince of Peace, begun to tumultuous cries of "God Wills It!" was conducted in a manner that

Click to enlarge
Title page of Tyndale's New Testament (1535)

[p. 85]

Click to enlarge
Title page of the Matthew Bible (1537)

would have shamed the heathen races in the Old Testament. The Crusaders, wearing the Cross on their breasts, soon lost the memory of their original purpose in an indiscriminate bloodlust. Every successive Crusade was marked by horror and disaster.

Before the First Crusade could be properly organized, the common people, roused to frenzy by the preaching of Peter the Hermit and others, set out in undisciplined hordes, murdering and looting as they went, to be destroyed by the Christian Magyars, Slays, and Greeks before they ever reached the Turks. After the knightly armies that followed had captured Jerusalem, all the Jews in the city were burned alive in the synagogue and the rest of the population, estimated at seventy thousand, was massacred. Then the Crusaders returned home burdened with loot but left so small a force to defend Jerusalem that it was soon again endangered, when a Second Crusade was preached to secure the gains of the first. It failed utterly after two great armies had been defeated and the nobility had fled by sea, leaving the common soldiers to be slaughtered. Jerusalem was taken by the Saracens, and the Third Crusade was preached. It too failed: the death of one hundred thousand soldiers in the victory at

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] Acre was made useless by the subsequent quarrels between the leaders, Philip Augustus and Richard Coeur-de-Lion. The Fourth Crusade was diverted through the intrigues of Enrico Dandolo, the doge of Venice, to an attack on Christian Constantinople, which was sacked and burned. Then came the two pathetic Children's Crusades--"armies" of twenty and thirty thousand children, led by shepherd boys: one group dissolved after terrible losses in the frozen Alps, and the other, more luckless, persisted until the children reached Egypt where they were sold into slavery. In the Fifth Crusade, the wily politician, Frederick II, succeeded in recovering Jerusalem by treaty instead of by force of arms, but his achievement, widely condemned for its un-knightly character, was of no permanent significance as the city was soon retaken by the Moslems. In the Sixth Crusade, Saint Louis, king of France, was captured with his entire army in Egypt, and it taxed the resources of the French realm to pay the enormous ransom that was demanded. The Seventh and last Crusade, led by the same Saint Louis, ended ignominiously in Tunis when the king fell ill and died.

What had all this record of savagery and failure

[p. 87]

to do with our immediate theme of the Bible? A great deal.

The Crusaders, always in want of money and provisions, early adopted the practice of sacking the Jewish quarters of the towns through which they passed. The anti-Semitism from which Europe has suffered, to a greater or less extent, ever since, definitely began with the Crusades. Before that time the Jews had been generally tolerated; it was recognized that they at least held sacred the older half of the Bible, which was still the source of their ritual and the object of their constant study; there was hence a kind of distant relationship between them and the Christians. But after the Crusades, the Christians were reluctant to admit any kind of connection with the Jews. The unpleasant fact that all the Christian Sacred Scriptures had actually been written by the Jews could not be denied, but it could be ignored if men would but refrain from investigating origins at all. Any historical study of the Bible was therefore unwelcome and was delayed by this obscurantist attitude until well into the nineteenth century.

There was, it is true, another side to the Jewish persecutions. The book of Deuteronomy had brought

[p. 88]

about a strange situation in the medieval world. In accordance with its provisions, Christians were forbidden to take interest on loans. The Jews, on the other hand, were permitted to exact interest from foreigners. Enjoying a monopoly of money-lending, they often yielded to the temptation to raise the rates of interest to usurious heights. It is perhaps not surprising that the exasperated Christians often retaliated by seizing the wealth of those whose special privileges in the money market seemed to them so unfair.

But the spirit of persecution once aroused is rarely limited to its initial victims. The Jews were not the only victims of the revival of intolerance which accompanied the Crusades. Christians also suffered. At the beginning of the thirteenth century, the Papacy declared a crusade against the large Albigensian sect in southern France, accused of Manichaean tendencies because of their pacifistic ethics, and in the campaigns that ensued whole cities were exterminated. The stage was already set for the persecutions of the Protestants three centuries later.

A contemporary movement often confused with the Albigensian was that of the Waldensians, the followers of Peter Waldo. This man, a prosperous

[p. 89]

merchant of Lyons, suddenly decided in 1176 to take literally the injunction of Jesus, "Sell all that thou hast and distribute unto the poor" (Luke xviii. 22). He carried out his resolution and formed a sect, known as "the Poor Men of Lyons," who, like the Albigensians, were complete pacifists, refused to take oaths, and held aloof from civic life. If this was what came from the reading of the Bible, Pope Innocent III determined to cut off the evil at its source; he forbade laymen henceforth even to touch the Bible, much less read it. But the Waldensians managed to survive the Albigensian persecution, became Protestants during the Reformation, and continue to exist in small numbers even to this day.

Not unsimilar in aim was the movement initiated by Francis of Assisi which, being conducted more judiciously, found shelter within the bosom of the Church. His monastic order, with its triple vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, was founded, like the Waldensian heresy, on strict observance of the Scriptures. To Francis the reading of the Bible was a religious ecstasy. He meditated so intently on the history of the Lord's passion that the signs of the stigmata appeared on his own body. His most difficult act of almsgiving occurred when he parted with his sole possession, the New Testament,

[p. 90]

to a poor widow. Dying, he had the thirteenth chapter of the Gospel of John read to him, so that the last words he heard on earth were those in which Jesus foretold his own death.

These various movements, alike in their care for the common people and in their reliance on the Bible, testified to a new spirit abroad in the land. Something was happening to the feudal system.

Emerson, in his poem "Uriel," introduces a young seraph who shocks the angels with his heretical proclamation:

In vain produced, all rays return
 Evil will bless, and ice will burn.

[paragraph continues] An apparent illustration of Uriel's philosophy may be seen in the further effects of the Crusades. In the amount of needless suffering and horror produced, few greater evils have befallen Europe than the Crusades. And yet without the Crusades, the glorious thirteenth century which marked the culmination of all that was best in medievalism could never have occurred. Acquaintance with Arabic philosophy, and through it a closer acquaintance with the Greek philosophy on which it was based, fitted in with the broader outlook on the world induced by

[p. 91]

foreign travel to stimulate a zeal for learning which found expression in the establishment of universities throughout western Europe and in the development of the incipient Scholastic movement in philosophy, until this produced, in the persons of Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, and Duns Scotus, with others only a little less eminent, thinkers almost on a par with the greatest of antiquity. And this, the intellectual aspect of the new age, was superficial in comparison with the fundamental changes that were going on in the whole social order.

The Crusaders, in order to finance their expeditions, had been forced to borrow heavily from the towns and cities so that there grew up a creditor class of merchants and burghers with a whip hand over the nobility. The latter were further weakened by the death of so many turbulent barons in or on the way to Palestine. For the moment, the decrease in the strength of the first estate, the nobility, benefited the second estate, the Church, which effected an alliance with the rising power of the cities, now well on the way to form a significant third estate. The new regime meant a vast enlargement of human opportunity. And as usually happens, enlargement

[p. 92]

of opportunity brought a rebirth of literature and art. By way of literature and art, its ancient friends, the Bible began to come back into its own.

A Biblical history, the Historia Scholastica, was written by Petrus Comestor for the use of scholars. For the unlettered was circulated the Biblia Pauperum, a kind of Biblical picture book showing famous scenes from the Bible. The greatest familiarity with the Bible, however, was to come through drama.

Modern drama, like the classical drama, developed out of religious liturgy. As early as the tenth century, the Benedictine nun, Hrotswitha of Gandersheim, had vaguely sensed the possibilities of religious drama, and in order to wean the nuns from reading the profane works of Plautus and Terence had written six Latin comedies with highly moral implications. But she was on the wrong track. The future lay not in imitation of the classics but in the use of elements much nearer at hand. The elaborate ceremonies of the medieval Church already possessed a wealth of dramatic material in the processionals, the changes of persons and costumes during the service, the washing of feet on Maundy Thursday, the representations of the manger at Christmas and of the tomb at Easter.

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] Gradually, the Christmas and Easter celebrations took on more and more of an explicitly dramatic character: additional personages were introduced, such as Roman soldiers, the Magi and the shepherds, the women at the tomb, and angels, with rhymed dialogues written for all of them; finally, laymen were allowed to participate in the role of evil characters like Herod, Judas, and the impenitent thief. Thus, during the twelfth century, well-rounded Christmas and Easter plays were presented by the clergy in the churches and churchyards all over western Europe. Essentially the same everywhere, they were known by different names: miracle plays in England, mysteries in France, ludi in Germany, autos in Spain.

The popularity of the plays brought great crowds to see them, rude and boisterous crowds whose conduct was often indecorous, yet for whose benefit the writers began to introduce numerous scenes, such as a quarrel between Noah and his wife, which shocked the sensibilities of stricter clerics. So in 1210, Pope Innocent III, the same who preached the Albigensian Crusade and forced Frederick II to go unwillingly to Jerusalem, forbade the clergy to take any further part in the development of popular drama.

[p. 94]

The plays, transferred to the market place and taken over by the guilds, were greatly enlarged after they fell into the hands of the laity until they came to represent the entire cycle of Biblical events from the creation to the resurrection. There they were halted by the nature of Christian dogma; unlike the Greek myths which could be handled freely by the Athenian dramatists to the extent of completely changing both plots and characters, the Christian stories could not be fundamentally altered without impiety. The creative genius of dramatic writers sought relief through the introduction of allegorical figures who gradually came to swamp the stage. From this resulted the new type of morality play, wholly allegorical in character, and this in turn, with the coming of the Reformation, was easily transformed into the satirical interlude, usually directed against the Catholic Church. Forced into the realm of the abstract in order to gain freedom, the drama came back to the concrete through satire, and in Protestant England there resulted the great period of purely secular Elizabethan drama which culminated in Shakespeare. The religious origin of the drama, however, still directly influenced the great plays of Calderon in Spain and can be seen, indeed, as late as the

[p. 95]

seventeenth century in the Esther and Athalie of the Catholic Racine.

If the Church early relinquished its part in the development of drama, the same thing did not happen in the realm of architecture. The noblest expression of the medieval spirit in its uttermost reach of aspiration was found in the twelfth- and thirteenth-century Gothic architecture which was fostered equally by church and town. Rising high above the market place, the houses, and all other public buildings, the cathedrals in their erection gave employment to thousands of the common people, enlisted the support of the guilds, afforded sanctuary for the tombs of the nobility, enshrined the legends of the Bible and the saints in their multicolored windows of stained glass, and presented religion in a guise of beauty which yet did not obscure its austerity. Rather, in them, austerity itself became beautiful. Each cathedral was the pride of its city. As far its lofty towers could be seen, men were comforted by its presence.

Gothic architecture was an embodiment of a final combined effort of the three estates of feudalism before they fell apart forever. Sculpture and painting, beginning as an adjunct of architecture, were, on the other hand, to reach their highest development

[p. 96]

during the more individualistic period that followed when the merchant princes of Italy erected their little separate courts and vied with one another in patronizing the arts and also the new learning that was brought from Greece after the fall of Constantinople in 1453.

Sculpture and painting reflected the general movement of culture in their choice of themes. During the medieval period these were drawn mainly from the lives of the saints, or from events in the Bible, both alike interpreted according to the medieval standards of asceticism; very gradually, the meager limbs and wrinkled faces of the anchoritic ideal were supplanted by the more well-rounded bodies and ruddier faces of the Renaissance. The painters, originally often monks, eventually became a professional class dependent upon private patrons rather than the Church; mythological themes tended to replace the Biblical; and the artists at last became entirely cynical, taking their mistresses as models for either a Venus or a Madonna, whichever happened to be called for. The deeply religious Michelangelo, to be sure, infused a prophetic spirit into his work, and in his statues of David and Moses, as well as in the frescoes of the Sistine Chapel, he achieved a marvelous harmony of the

[p. 97]

Biblical, the medieval, and the pagan; but of his two most gifted contemporaries, Raphael contentedly painted the courtesan La Fornarina as the Virgin Mother, and Leonardo used the same model for both his Bacchus and his John the Baptist. The later Venetian School still affected Scriptural subjects, but the interest was no longer in any kind of characterization, Christian or pagan, but in the sheer beauty of the flesh, the texture of garments, the overwhelming joy of deep, rich colors. Venice, whose commercial prosperity after the Crusades was the first harbinger of the decay of medievalism, was also the first to announce that medievalism was dead, through the paintings of Titian, Tintoretto, Veronese, and Giorgione, who had lost even the memory of the long medieval centuries that preceded them.

In all this art, interest in the Bible was ultimately swallowed up in broader, if less lofty, interests, but till the end the Biblical aspects of art continued to keep alive the Scriptural stories. Through the miracle plays and the religious paintings, during the centuries when the Bible itself could not be generally read, even when this was permitted, since to the great majority Latin had become an unknown tongue, the common people

[p. 98]

came to know, at least vaguely, the old legends that still after fifteen hundred years retained the power of religious inspiration. The popular demand for translations in the vernacular which the Protestant reformers were to meet and satisfy arose in no small part from the but half-gratified curiosity of the later Middle Ages.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

  

FIVE

  

The Great Translations

IT IS NOW recognized that the Reformation and the great translations of the Bible which accompanied it were incidents in a social revolution. The Catholic Church was a part of the dying feudal system; its prelates were noblemen, its estates rivaled those of earls and dukes. Even in England, where the Church was weaker than on the Continent, its monasteries are estimated to have owned one-tenth of the national wealth. Of the "nyne and twenty in a companye" that gathered at the Tabard Inn in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, more than a third were connected, directly or indirectly, with the ecclesiastical hierarchy. To maintain this enormous bureaucracy, the land was burdened with tithes and taxes. The Papacy no longer even pretended to have a spiritual mission: the licentiousness and crimes of Alexander VI, the political intrigues and ruthless wars of Pope Julius II, the rivalry of the double Popes of Rome and Avignon, these were known to all. Idealists were shocked by the corruptions of the Church,

[p. 100]

and materialists envied it its wealth. As a new middle class arose through the extension of trade and commerce in the late Middle Ages its members begrudged both the nobility and clergy their special privileges. Of the two the clergy were the more hated because they took their orders from Rome, offending the spirit of nationalism that had begun to develop, particularly in northern Europe. Thus, moral, political, and economic reasons all lay behind the Reformation.

The reformers were drawn to the Bible by natural affinity. Theirs was the cause of the people against the rich and powerful; the Prophets had fought for the same cause. In the struggle of the Hebrews against idolatry, the reformers saw an analogue to their own struggle against the ritualism and relic worship in the Catholic Church. Their emphasis upon the individual conscience drew inspiration from the Gospels; Paul's teaching of justification by faith brought them courage and consolation. Inevitably, the Bible became the chief weapon of the reformers in their war upon the Catholic Church.

The greater the distance from Rome, the less the power of the Catholic hierarchy. So it was at the outer edge of Christendom, in England, that there

[p. 101]

appeared during the last half of the fourteenth century the "morning star of the Reformation," John Wiclif (whose name is spelled in twenty-eight different ways). Trained in scholastic philosophy at Oxford, fellow of Balliol, Master of Balliol, in favor at the courts of Edward III and Richard II, he was statesman, philosopher, theologian, and reformer. Largely due to his efforts was the defeat of Pope Urban V when the latter claimed from England the payment of feudatory tribute. Five papal bulls against him failed to shake his influence. He sent out his students as itinerant preachers against the corruptions of the Church, and he organized a group of scholars to translate the Bible from the Vulgate into the vernacular. But when his study of the Scriptures led him to deny the doctrine of transubstantiation (the literal presence of the body and blood of Christ in the bread and wine of the Communion service), which had been a subject of dispute from the time of Justin Martyr until Pope Innocent III declared it an article of faith in 1215, then Oxford University turned against its leader and deprived him of his office. He was forced to retire to the living of Lutterworth where he died in 1384.

Two years before Wiclif's death, however, the

[p. 102]

translation of the Bible which had been projected by him was finished, the first part as far as the middle of the Book of Baruch being chiefly the work of his disciple Nicholas of Hereford, the rest being possibly the work of Wiclif himself. In 1388 the whole was revised by another disciple, John Purvey, after which for over a hundred years the "Wiclif Bible" remained the only English translation in existence.

The Lollards, as the followers of Wiclif came to be called, developed into a mighty social force. They denied the papal authority and the temporal lordship of the clergy; they denounced the worship of images and relics, the pilgrimages to the shrines of saints, and the ceremony of the mass; they were opposed to all wars, and to capital punishment. The Church was forced to adopt more and more vigorous measures against them: from excommunication and imprisonment it proceeded at the beginning of the fifteenth century to burnings at the stake. The circulation of the vernacular Bible, the source of all the Lollard "errors," was strictly forbidden. The persecutions continued through the reigns of Henry V and Henry VI, and the Lollard movement was eventually broken up, though probably not so much by the persecutions

[p. 103]

as by the devastating Wars of the Roses which held back all learning and social progress in England for over fifty years.

The Lollard movement left to posterity the one work of medieval English poetry worthy to rank with Chaucer's--The Vision of Piers Plowman by William Langland, and it left the Wiclif Bible--which continued to circulate in secret, despite the suppression, to such an extent that no less than one hundred and eighty copies have come down to us--and it gave birth to the Reformation.

John Huss, rector of the University of Prague, was deeply influenced by Wiclif: he taught much the same doctrine and instituted a translation of the Bible into the Czech vernacular, for which he paid with his life by burning at the stake in 1415. A hundred years later, Martin Luther, a monk of Wittenberg, deeply influenced by Huss, preached the same doctrines, but this time, though he was excommunicated there was no burning, for he had a nation behind him. So little had all the persecutions availed to halt the spread of ideas that were needed and sought after by the people.

The reformers, however, would hardly have succeeded, or succeeded so soon, but for two extraneous events. The first was the fall of Constantinople

[p. 104]

before the Turks in 1453. Hundreds of Greek scholars, bearing with them treasured manuscripts, fled to western Europe where they became influential teachers. The New Learning, consisting in a revival of Greek culture, gained adherents everywhere. And scholars, at least, could no longer be satisfied with a Latin version of the New Testament when the original Greek was once more accessible.

A still greater boon to the reformers was the invention of printing, generally attributed to Johann Gutenberg, about the middle of the fifteenth century. The first complete work to issue from the Gutenberg press at Mainz was a Latin edition of the Bible, printed in the manuscript style to which men were accustomed, and illuminated by hand. Forty-five copies have been preserved of this the first and most beautiful of all printed books.

The reformers were quick to take advantage of the new invention. A French translation of the Bible was brought out as early as 1474, and Germany already possessed eighteen vernacular versions when Luther's translation appeared in 152234. In two of these earlier German translations, through a pre-Puritan puritanism, the Song of

Click to enlarge
Title page of the Great Bible (1539)

[p. 105]

Click to enlarge
Title page of the Douai Bible (1609)

[paragraph continues] Songs was left in Latin lest it prove a corrupter of youth.

Luther's rendering was by far the most accurate that had yet appeared. For the New Testament he used the Greek text of Erasmus' edition (published hurriedly in 1515 in order to forestall a Spanish publisher, but thoroughly revised in 1519); for the Old Testament he used substantially the Masoretic text which had been preserved from generation to generation in practically the second-century form by a guild of Hebrew scholars known as the Masoretes, who consecrated their lives to this one purpose; only in the case of the Apocrypha was Luther content with the inferior Latin text. But his translation had a greater merit than mere accuracy. He was a master of words, not their slave; interested not in any pedantic adherence to literalness but in giving the full meaning of the original as forcefully and vividly as possible; the result was that he produced a work of literature so influential that, mainly because of it, the High German in which he wrote eventually displaced Low German and became the national tongue.

Although Luther included all the books of the Bible in his translation, he was far from holding the view which later arose among Protestants that

[p. 106]

all parts of the Bible were equally inspired. Reverencing especially the writings of Paul, whose doctrine of justification by faith became the cornerstone of his own teaching, he recognized the non-Pauline authorship of Hebrews, considered the anti-Pauline Epistle of James as of relatively little worth, and doubted the value of Esther, Jonah, Jude, and Revelation. Disputes over the canon, together with much hairsplitting as to the exact nature of Christ's spiritual presence in the bread and wine of the Communion, alienated Luther from the Swiss reformers, Zwingli and Calvin, to the great detriment of the progress of the Reformation.

England, which had once led in the translation of the Scriptures, now lagged behind the other nations. Not only were there versions in French and German but also in Spanish, Danish, Dutch, Swedish, Russian, and Bohemian, before the English, exhausted by their civil wars, made any attempt to replace the suppressed Wiclifite translation, now outmoded in its clumsy antiquated prose, by some more faithful and readable translation. But when the work was once begun, although it brought death to its originator, it was

[p. 107]

carried through to a more glorious conclusion than in any other land.

William Tyndale, who suffered martyrdom to give us the basis of the English Bible that we now possess, was born no one knows when or where or of what parents. The most probable conjectural date is some time between 1490 and 1495, the most likely place somewhere in Gloucestershire on the Welsh border. He was entered at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1510, took his M.A. there in 1515, and went for further study to Cambridge which the fame of Erasmus had made a center of Greek and theological learning. After being ordained to the priesthood, he acted as tutor to the children of Sir John Walsh at Little Sodbury, Gloucestershire, from 1521 to 1523, during which time he also preached in neighboring villages and possibly at Bristol. His liberal views giving offense to the local clergy, he was summoned before William of Malvern, the chancellor of Worcester, on charges of heresy, but was allowed to depart for London without censure. That he already cherished the design of making a vernacular translation of the Scriptures is evident from an incident that occurred during his residence at Little Sodbury. Becoming

[p. 108]

involved one day in theological argument with a visiting ecclesiastic, when the latter exclaimed, "We were better without God's laws than without the Pope's," Tyndale indignantly replied, "If God spare my life, ere many years I will cause a boy that driveth the plough shall know more than thou dost." Seven hundred years after Alfred the Great and two hundred after Wiclif, their still undefeated spirit was reborn.

In London, Tyndale's plans received encouragement from laymen but none from the clergy. He lived for a year as chaplain in the house of Alderman Humphrey Monmouth, meanwhile preaching at St. Dunstan's-in-the-West, beginning his translation of the New Testament, and striving vainly to win the ear of the bishop of London, Cuthbert Tunstall. The bishop, he found, was irreconcilably opposed to his project and, if it were completed, would prevent its publication. At last Tyndale came to understand, in his own words, "not only that there was no room in my Lord of London's palace to translate the New Testament but also that there was no place to do it in all England."

Determined to pursue his task, nonetheless, even at the cost of exile, Tyndale went to Germany, where, after probably visiting Luther at Wittenberg,

[p. 109]

he settled with his amanuensis, William Roy, in Cologne, and completed his work on the New Testament. An edition was already on the press when a zealous Catholic named Johann Dobneck learned of the undertaking and immediately reported it to John Cochlaeus, dean at Frankfurt, who persuaded the senate of Cologne to interdict the printing. Tyndale took the sheets already finished and fled to Worms where two editions, quarto and octavo, were brought out on the press of Peter Schoeffer in 1526.

Copies were smuggled into England in bales of cotton, but many of them were seized and destroyed through the diligence of Cardinal Wolsey and Bishop Tunstall. In order to suppress the edition entirely, the Bishop sent a special agent to Antwerp to buy up all the copies of this "pestilent New Testament." The Antwerp Protestants gratified him to some extent and then immediately sent the money on to Tyndale to finance larger undertakings of the same nature!

Tyndale's translation of the New Testament, judged by its influence, was the greatest work of English prose ever achieved by a single individual. Following, like Luther, the Greek text of Erasmus, he also made good use of Luther's own translation,

[p. 110]

and rivaled the great German in a style which so successfully combined dignity, brevity, and familiarity that it worked a revolution in English prose. Tyndale's New Testament was substantially the New Testament of the King James version, which was, as we shall see later, essentially a revision of earlier translations. Even when the King James version was in its turn revised in 1881, the editors testified that eighty per cent of the words in the Revised Version of the New Testament were still the words of Tyndale.

The translator's personal reward for this masterwork was hardship and danger. Harried from place to place, he took refuge for a time with Philip of Hesse at Marburg but found it advisable to move about under such concealment that his wanderings cannot be traced today. Nevertheless, these years were rich in literary production. Having learned Hebrew for the purpose, he finished the translation of the Pentateuch in 1530 and that of the Book of Jonah, which, unlike Luther, he valued highly, in 1531. Meanwhile, his breach with the Church was completed by his following Wiclif and the Swiss reformer Zwingli in a denial of transubstantiation. He set forth his views on the authority of the Scriptures over the Church and on the separation of

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] Church and State in his Parable of the Wicked Mammon (1528) and Obedience of a Christen Man (1528), which drew forth a reply by Sir Thomas More, author of the Utopia, this in turn eliciting a rejoinder by Tyndale. In spite of his hostility to the Catholic Church, he could not stomach the brutal method of Henry VIII's divorce from Catherine of Aragon, and in his Practyse of Prelates (1530) he excoriated both the Church and the king.

In 1535 he was at Antwerp, busied with further translation, when he was betrayed by Henry Phillips, an Englishman whom he had befriended. For fifteen months he was confined in Valverde Castle, six miles from Brussels, awaiting trial as a heretic. His friends tried desperately to secure the intercession of Henry VIII, but that monarch, who had become a Protestant in 1534 merely because of the Pope's refusal to validate his divorce, was not the man to forget Tyndale's attack upon him. He did permit Thomas Cromwell to write letters in Tyndale's behalf to Archbishop Carandolet, president of the council, and to the governor of the castle, but without more active intervention these were quite useless. The prisoner, who had serenely turned his confinement to good account by carrying on his translation of the Old Testament through

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] Second Chronicles, was condemned as a heretic, and on October 6, 1536, he was executed by strangling, and his body was publicly burned. To the end, he thought only of his great task, and his last words were, "Lord, open the King of England's eyes."

The opening of the King's eyes occurred the very next year but in a somewhat devious manner. Miles Coverdale, an English reformer of about Tyndale's age and, like him, educated at Erasmus' Cambridge, had found it necessary to spend the troublous years 1528-35 on the Continent rather than in England. According to an unsupported statement of John Foxe, he had met Tyndale in Hamburg and had given him some assistance in his translation of the Pentateuch. However that may be, he had by 1535, without going back to the original texts, completed a translation of the entire Bible in an English style less forceful than Tyndale's but with more of purely literary grace. While sufficiently courageous and a powerful orator, Coverdale was by nature pacific and not averse to the use of tact in a good cause. Accordingly, he dedicated his translation to King Henry VIII and "his dearest just wyfe, and most vertuous Pryncesse, Queen Anne." Since the King had not yet

[p. 113]

fallen into the mood to execute this dearest wyfe, he accepted the compliment and graciously allowed Coverdale's work to be admitted into England. A complete Bible in English now at last existed and could be freely read.

Coverdale's work, however, contained numerous errors, and in 1537 a better translation appeared over the name of Thomas Matthew, a pseudonym for John Rogers, Tyndale's literary executor. It included all of Tyndale's translations, published and unpublished, and where Tyndale was not available it made use of Coverdale. But the fiery notes of the editor were much too democratic in character to please the ruling powers, so one Richard Taverner was encouraged to rush through a hasty revision of "Matthew's Bible," omitting most of the notes, which was published in the same year, 1537.

This, too, proved unsatisfactory, and Coverdale was commissioned to make a new translation. As printing was cheaper in France, the work was brought out there, but just when the first impression of twenty-five hundred copies was off the press, these were seized and burned by order of the Inquisition. Coverdale was able to rescue a few copies which one of the officers of the Inquisition

[p. 114]

had privately sold to a haberdasher for waste paper; with these and the presses and types, Coverdale returned to England, where in 1539 the work was published in a huge folio, known from its size as the "Great Bible." A second edition, published in 1540, was called "Cranmer's Bible" from a long introduction by Archbishop Cranmer. With it, Coverdale's major work in the translation of the Scriptures was completed. Much of it was incorporated in the King James version, and Coverdale's rendering of the Psalms, adopted as the Psalter of the first Book of Common Prayer under Edward VI, still appears in the Anglican and Protestant Episcopal Prayer Books. Not an impeccable scholar, Coverdale was a felicitous writer with a delicate ear for all niceties of language; the English Bible owes more to him than to any other man except the mighty Tyndale.

In 1551 Coverdale became bishop of Exeter, but the accession of the Catholic Queen Mary, under whom all English versions of the Bible were suppressed, brought him a year's imprisonment, after which he fled to Geneva whither the more radical reformers had preceded him. There all came under the influence of Calvin and his Scottish follower, John Knox. The result was the appearance

[p. 115]

in 1560 of the "Geneva Bible," edited chiefly by William Whittingham, Thomas Sampson, and Anthony Gilby, possibly assisted by John Knox and, more doubtfully, by Coverdale. It was the most accurate translation yet produced: its editors were better Hebrew scholars than Tyndale, and in their rendering of the New Testament they had the advantage of possessing the excellent Latin translation made by the reformer, Theodore Beza, in 1556, as well as a revision of Tyndale's New Testament brought out by Whittingham himself in 1557. In the latter, the more readable Roman type had been substituted for the black letter previously used, and this sensible innovation was retained in the "Geneva Bible" which, designed for popular consumption, was also made of portable size and was published at a very moderate price. It was popularly known as the "Breeches Bible" from its translation of Genesis III. 7: "They sewed figge tree leaves together, and made themselves breeches." Later virtually adopted as the authorized version of the Scottish Kirk, it was more widely read even in England than any of the earlier versions. One hundred and sixty editions were published. As the Bible of early Massachusetts and Virginia, it must always have a special interest for Americans.

[p. 116]

And yet, with all its merits, the Geneva version proved a hindrance rather than an aid to the true understanding of the Bible. In 1551 a French printer, Robert Estienne, in publishing a Greek translation of the New Testament, had divided it into verses for the sake of easy reference in a concordance which he had in mind to bring out. The same method was followed in Whittingham's New Testament, and in the Geneva edition was extended to the entire Bible. The effect of thus breaking up a coherent discourse into isolated fragments, divided with little regard to their meaning and each printed as a separate paragraph, was to make it difficult to follow the sequence of thought and to encourage what became the besetting sin of later times--the habit of regarding all parts of the Bible as of equal value so that one could snatch any verse out of its context and hurl it at the head of an opponent in a theological argument.

A minor defect of the "Geneva Bible," which also came from Whittingham's New Testament was the pedantic custom of printing in italics words not found in the original, thus emphasizing the very words that were of most doubtful authenticity and value.

Although the "Geneva Bible" was dedicated to

[p. 117]

[paragraph continues] Queen Elizabeth with an exhortation to show no mercy to Roman Catholics, the violent notes with which it abounded were almost as critical of the Church of England as the Church of Rome. It was essentially a Puritan Bible and as such could find no favor with the ruling hierarchy. To offset its influence, Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, organized in 1564 a committee of bishops to produce an "official" translation. Known as the "Bishops' Bible," this appeared in 1568 in a sumptuous edition adorned with woodcuts and copperplate portraits of Queen Elizabeth, the earl of Leicester, and Lord Burleigh. But unfortunately the bishops were neither as good scholars nor as good writers as the reformers. Their New Testament, which was practically Tyndale's, was satisfactory, but there was such an outcry against their translation of the Psalms that in the third edition in 1573 they restored Coverdale's old translation, printing it in parallel columns with their own. This edition was known in popular parlance as the "Leda Bible" because some of the type heads had been previously used for an edition of Ovid's Metamorphoses so that the initial at the beginning of the Epistle to the Hebrews happened to be a rather unsuitable representation of Leda and the

[p. 118]

swan. On the whole, the elaborate "Bishops' Bible" was a costly failure which did not in the least serve to displace the "Geneva Bible" from popular affection.

One specific legacy of the "Bishops' Bible" to subsequent translations was of considerable importance in the matter of ecclesiastical discipline. This was the substitution of "church" as the rendering of the Greek ecclesia for the more accurate "congregation" used by Tyndale and Coverdale. The motivation of the change was the desire of the bishops to conceal the democratic character of the early Christian assemblies and to give the impression that their organization resembled that of the Anglican Church. The point was later deemed so significant by King James I that he specially prohibited the editors of the Authorized Version from returning to the usage of Tyndale and Coverdale.

During these years the Roman Catholic Church had at last awakened to the need of meeting the reformers on their own ground. Although the Church had in its possession the oldest existing manuscript of the New Testament, written on vellum in the fourth century, this manuscript (now known as the Vatican Codex) had lain unnoticed in the library of the Vatican century after century

[p. 119]

while the Church had done nothing to correct the increasing corruption of the Vulgate text. The condition of the latter had, however, become so scandalous by the time of the Council of Trent in 1546 that a revision of it was authorized, although little was actually done until in 1586 Pope Sixtus V appointed a revisory commission, headed by Cardinal Caraffa, which completed its work within four years. The new text was issued in 1590 with an anathema upon any who should henceforth dare to change it. It proved to contain so many errors that in the next year Pope Gregory XIV appointed a second revisory commission, which within twelve months produced a text differing from that of Sixtus V in 2,134 places. This was issued in 1592 by Pope Clement VIII with a new anathema upon any subsequent changes. To modify any disagreeable impressions that might arise from the difference between the two revisions, the later like the earlier was attributed to Sixtus V.

In 1582 an English translation of the Vulgate New Testament was published by a group of Roman Catholic scholars at Rheims; a translation of the Vulgate Old Testament was prepared at the same time, but lack of funds caused the postponement of publication until 1609 when, after revision

[p. 120]

in accordance with the textual changes noted above, it was brought out at Douai. As polemical in purpose as the "Geneva Bible" or the "Bishops' Bible," changing "cup" to "chalice" and "repentance" to "penance," its renderings were sanctioned by the Roman Catholic Church whose members were forbidden to read the Protestant translations. The chief editor, Gregory Martin, and his colleagues, William Allen and Richard Bristow, were competent scholars but they were not really in sympathy with the purpose of their own work. As if to emphasize their contempt for the vulgar herd they deliberately adopted a heavily Latinized style which obscured the meaning. Thus, for example, the phrase "He humbled himself" became "He exinanited himself." Similar words virtually unknown to the English language outside of the "Douai Bible" are "colinquination," "correption," exprobate, "obsecration," "scenopegia." A Protestant taking up the "Douai Bible," with its unfamiliar headings such as First and Second Paralipomenon, Osee, Micheas, Sophronias, and Aggeus, will feel that he is reading a different work from the Bible that he has always known. In one respect, however, the "Douai Bible" was much superior to the later Protestant versions from the literary point

Click to enlarge
Original woodcut title page of the King James version (1611)

[p. 121]

Click to enlarge
Original engraved title page used at the beginning of the New Testament in the King James version

of view: it did not contain the irrelevant and confusing division into numbered verses.

At the time of the accession of King James I in 1603, the situation had wholly changed from that of a century before when there was no English Bible in existence. Now there was a bewildering number of them. The need seemed to be for standardization rather than for further new translations.

In 1604, at a conference of churchmen called by the King at Hampton Court to consider "things pretended to be amiss in the church," Dr. John Reynolds, President of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, pointed out the desirability of a revised version of the Bible. The suggestion was welcomed by the learned monarch, who declared, "I have never yet seen a Bible well translated into English, and the worst of all . . . is the Genevan." He proposed that the work be done "by the best learned in both Universities, after them to be reviewed by the Bishops, and the chief learned of the Church; from them to be presented to the Privy Council; and lastly to be ratified by his Royall authority, and so this whole Church to be bound unto it, and none other."

The churchmen were less eager in the matter than was King James, but through his pressure a

[p. 122]

group of "four and fifty learned men" was appointed during the ensuing year, of whom only forty-seven seem actually to have taken part in the great undertaking which was finally begun in 1607. No company of better scholars ever worked together on a common task. Headed by Dr. Lancelot Andrews, dean of Westminster--who is the subject of a charming essay by T. S. Eliot--the group was mainly composed of the leaders of learning at the universities of Cambridge and Oxford. It was divided into six committees, to each of whom was assigned a separate portion of the Scriptures, the whole work being later gone over by a single committee. The undertaking consumed substantially four years (three and a half in the editing and six months in the printing). The Authorized Version, which incidentally owes its title to the printers, as the King's plan of formal authorization was never carried out, appeared some time in 1611.

Dr. Reynolds, who shared with King James the honor of initiating the work, did not live to see its completion. One of the ablest of the editors, much consulted by the others, he was stricken with tuberculosis but labored on to the very last, so that as we are told "in the very translation of the book of life, he was translated to a better life."

[p. 123]

In the preface to the 1611 edition, drawn up by Dr. Miles Smith, afterwards bishop of Gloucester, the editors modestly disclaimed all originality. "Truly (good Christian reader)," they said, "we never thought from the beginning, that we should need to make a new Translation, nor yet to make of a bad one a good one . . . but to make a good one better, or out of many good ones, one principal good one." This is an exact statement of what the editors actually accomplished. The Authorized Version was essentially a revision of revisions. It was based upon a revision of the "Bishops' Bible" which was a revision of the "Great Bible" which was a revision of "Matthew's Bible" which was a combination of Tyndale and Coverdale. The last two were the main sources of the King James version. But the editors consulted all the existing translations and were deeply influenced by the interpretations of the "Geneva Bible" and by the sonorous Latin of the Douai Old Testament. Their catholicity reaped its reward in what was unquestionably the best translation yet made, both in accuracy and in richness and variety of style.

Like Jerome's Vulgate, the Authorized Version was slow to win its ultimate position of unquestioned supremacy. The radical wing of the Puritans

[p. 124]

continued to prefer the "Geneva Bible," selections from which were republished in 1643 as "The Soldier's Pocket Bible" in pamphlet form for the use of Cromwell's army. During the Civil War in the United States, about fifty thousand copies of this were reprinted for circulation among the Northern troops.

In spite of the utmost care, the King James version was from the outset bedeviled by printers' errors. The two impressions of the first edition were known respectively as "the Great Hee Bible" and "the Great She Bible" because the one rendered Ruth iii. 15 as "Hee went into the city," while the other read "She went into the city," both forms still appearing in modern Bibles. Another error that has never been corrected was the substitution of "at" for "out" in Matthew xxiii. 24, giving the oft-quoted mistranslation, "straining at a gnat." There was also much inconsistency in the spelling of Hebrew names, some of which has never been eliminated.

The errors were, in fact, so numerous that a revised edition was called for as early as 1615, to be followed by others every few years. In each new edition, however, new errors cropped up. That of 1631 was called the "Wicked Bible" because it

[p. 125]

gave the seventh commandment as "Thou shalt commit adultery." Cromwell was reputed to have paid out a thousand pounds in bribes to the 1638 revisers to induce them to change "we" to "ye" in Acts vi. 3 so that the power of appointing officers should seem to have belonged to the people instead of to the Apostles. An elaborate edition put out by the University of Oxford in 1727 was nicknamed the "Vinegar Bible" because a headline to the parable of the vineyard in Luke xxii read "The Parable of the Vinegar."

At last in 1762, in the "Standard Edition" prepared by Dr. Thomas Paris of Trinity College, Cambridge, a work appeared almost free from printers' errors, and with modernized spelling and punctuation; but at the same time some demon of pedantry inspired the editor to start the evil custom of elaborating the marginal reference notes. Succeeding generations of editors indulged in the same pastime until the Bible came to assume its familiar modern form in which, to quote Professor Goodspeed of the University of Chicago, "It often looks more like a surveyor's manual than a work of literature."

Cross references to other passages of a translation are of little service to genuine scholarship if

[p. 126]

the whole translation is based on a faulty text. Gradually it became evident that this had been the case with the King James version, at least so far as the New Testament was concerned. The translators had conscientiously consulted the Greek text of Erasmus as the best then known, but Erasmus himself had had no manuscripts earlier than the eleventh century. Only seventeen years after the publication of the Authorized Version, Cyril Lucar, Patriarch of Alexandria, presented King Charles I with a fifth-century manuscript, the Codex Alexandrinus, which embodied a text differing in many places from that of Erasmus. During the next three centuries, fifth-, fourth-, and even third-century manuscripts of parts of the New Testament came to light in increasing numbers. (The total of New Testament manuscripts now in existence is estimated at four thousand.) The additional knowledge furnished by these was reinforced by an ever closer study of the early Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Arabic, and Persian versions. It was inevitable that many new English translations should be attempted.

In fact, between the King James version and the Revised Version nearly a hundred such translations were published. Most of them were produced

[p. 127]

solely in the interest of greater accuracy, but two of the translators, Principal George Campbell of Aberdeen, in 1788, and Gilbert Wakefield, fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1789-91, had enough literary sense to abandon the verse divisions for modern paragraphing. In 1798 Nathaniel Scarlett made an interesting experiment: in order to emphasize the conversational character of much of the New Testament, he arranged it as dialogue, putting the speakers' names at the side as in drama. The most important of all these translations, however, was Challoner's thorough revision of the Catholic Rheims-Douai Bible in 1749.

Recognition of the need for an official revision of the King James version was voiced in 1810 by Dr. Marsh, Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity at Cambridge. With true Anglo-Saxon conservatism, nothing was done about it until 1856 when another Lady Margaret professor, Dr. Selwyn, brought the matter up in the Canterbury Convocation, thus provoking a motion in the House of Commons for the appointment of a Royal Commission to consider various "amendments" to the King James version and report back to the House--much as if the Bible had been a set of legal statutes. Finally, in 1870, through the efforts of

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] Bishop Wilberforce and others, the Convocation of Canterbury appointed a committee of seven to have general charge of a complete revision of the King James version. The enterprise was conducted in a broad and tolerant spirit which was something new in Biblical history: scholars of other denominations were invited to co-operate, with the further assistance of an American Revision Committee headed by Dr. Philip Schaff, editor of the Schaff Herzog Encyclopaedia of Religious Knowledge. Owing to the thoroughness of their work, it took the revisers more than six times as long to complete their task as it had taken the King James editors. The New Testament was published in 1881, the Old Testament, without the Apocrypha, in 1885, and the Apocrypha itself in 1895.

The Revised Version proved to be a very conservative revision. All radicalism was eliminated at the outset by the adoption of a set of rigid rules: to introduce only such changes as were absolutely necessary on account of the meaning; to accept no changes in the text except by a two-thirds vote; and to adhere so far as possible to the language of the King James version. The American Revision Committee took these rules less literally than did their British cousins, with the result that there was

[p. 129]

considerable diversity of opinion between the two committees. More than a thousand of the American suggestions were indeed incorporated in the British edition, but the more important of them were relegated to an appendix. Furthermore, what has since become the accepted Greek text of the New Testament, that prepared by Westcott and Hort, was not published until 1881, and though both of these great textual critics were members of the British committee their suggestions were frequently not adopted. For these reasons, the American Revision Committee felt justified in continuing its own work, which resulted in the publication of the American Revision in 1901.

Of all the official and semiofficial editions of the Bible, the American Revision of 1901 (the edition circulated by the Gideons) is by far the best from the point of view of literal accuracy. Unfortunately, from the point of view of literary value it is one of the worst ever published. It came out during the period when American scholarship, justifiably proud of its learning and its new methods of technical research, looked with suspicion on all literary attainment as a kind of concession to emotional weakness. Both the British and American revisers recognized the absurdity of the verse paragraphing

[p. 130]

in the King James version, but they went to the opposite extreme of adopting unconscionably long paragraphs even in conversational passages. The unreadability of these was increased in the American Version by the inclusion of the old verse numbers within the paragraphs, so that the reader often had to hurdle two or three of them in a single sentence. And whereas the British revisers had had the courage to remove the network of marginal notes enmeshing the text, the American edition dutifully restored this smothering parasitic growth.

It was left for an individual to do what the churches and the groups of organized scholars had signally failed to do--present the greatest literary work of all time in a literary form--one which should bring out the meaning, emotional as well as intellectual, instead of obscuring this meaning in conformity with dogmas of religion or pedantry. Professor Richard Green Moulton of the University of Chicago began in 1895 to publish the books of the Bible separately--thus calling attention to the distinctive character of each--in an edition named "The Modern Reader's Bible" in which the text of the British Revision was presented in an attractive form, with verse printed as verse, prose as prose, and the latter paragraphed with some regard to

[p. 131]

meaning. His work was a great improvement upon anything that had gone before, but it was still, like the English Revised Version on which it was based, a compromise. Professor Moulton was not quite willing to be so radical as to accord the Bible the full advantages possessed by other works of literature. His paragraphing was so heavy that today it already looks archaic; he seemed to share with previous editors a feeling that there was something profane in the use of quotation marks (although he did finally consent to introduce them in the Gospel of John); and he obstinately refused to recognize the conclusions of the Higher Criticism with the result that he was occasionally led into serious errors--such as his endeavor to reconstruct the Song of Songs as a connected drama. His edition, completed and published in a single volume in 1907 (unfortunately in a print so fine that it did not encourage reading), was the last important one to disregard, even partially, the Higher Criticism. The development of the latter has proved so fundamental not merely to individual translations and editions but to the entire understanding of the Bible that its story demands a separate chapter.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

SIX

  

The Higher Criticism

THERE IS no particular mystery about the so-called "Higher Criticism." It is simply that study of the meaning of the Bible which employs the same combination of textual and historical criticism that is used today in the study of all ancient literature.

Originally, the term referred to any criticism concerned primarily with meaning as contrasted with "lower" or merely textual criticism. Owing to the fact that the study of the meaning of the Bible proved to be so peculiarly significant, the term eventually came to be restricted to it alone, although, of course, textual investigation was always one of the chief resources of Biblical Higher Criticism.

As usual, the philosophers were the first to come forward with a rational attitude. Thomas Hobbes in his Leviathan (1651), discussing Biblical dates and authorship, ventured a number of shrewd conjectures which lagging scholarship was to verify only after two centuries. He pointed out many passages

[p. 133]

in the Pentateuch clearly not of Mosaic authorship; the historical books were evidently written later than the events they recorded; Psalms and Proverbs, at least in their final form, were late. Hobbes glimpsed the fundamental truth that the Bible was a compilation of many books that were put together and revised by other hands than those of the original authors.

The Jewish philosopher, Benedict Spinoza (Baruch de Espinoza), went much further. Looked upon in his precocious youth as the coming glory of the Amsterdam synagogue, he had early mastered the Talmudic interpretations of the Bible and from them advanced to the more inspiring study of the Jewish medieval philosophers, Maimonides, Levi ben Gerson, Hasdai Crescas, Ibn Ezra, and Moses of Cordova. From them he acquired an independent habit of thought which soon brought him into collision with the authorities of the synagogue--for orthodoxy, Jewish or Christian, was everywhere equally intolerant. At the age of twenty-four, Spinoza was tried for heresy and excommunicated according to a formula which was a veritable masterpiece of gruesomeness.

"With the judgment of the angels and the sentence of the saints, we anathematize, execrate,

[p. 134]

curse, and cast out Baruch de Espinoza, the whole of the sacred community assenting, in presence of the sacred books with the six-hundred-and-thirteen precepts written therein, pronouncing against him the malediction wherewith Elisha cursed the children, and all the maledictions written in the Book of the Law. Let him be accursed by day, and accursed by night; let him be accursed in his lying down, and accursed in his rising up; accursed in going out and accursed in coming in. May the Lord never more pardon or acknowledge him; may the wrath and displeasure of the Lord burn henceforth against this man, load him with all the curses written in the Book of the Law, and blot out his name from under the sky; may the Lord sever him for evil from all the tribes of Israel, weight him with all the maledictions of the firmament contained in the Book of the Law; and may all ye who are obedient to the Lord your God be saved this day.

"Hereby then are all admonished that none hold converse with him by word of mouth, none hold communication with him by writing; that no one do him any service, no one abide under the same roof with him, no one approach within four cubits length of him, and no one read any document dictated by him, or written by his hand."

[p. 135]

Thus cut off from the Jewish community, Spinoza withdrew to the outskirts of Amsterdam where he earned a frugal living as a grinder of lenses, devoting his leisure to thinking and writing and refusing all the offers of patronage and financial assistance that became more frequent as his reputation gradually extended. In the first of his works, the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (published anonymously in 1670), he outlined in some detail the proper method for the historical study of the Bible, and, like Hobbes, he pleaded for an interpretation based upon the Bible itself instead of upon extraneous dogmas. But knowledge of the Bible itself included in his eyes a knowledge of its natural environment: ". . . that is, the life, the conduct, and the studies of the author of each book, who he was, what was the occasion, and the epoch of his writing, whom did he write for, and in what language." Further, Spinoza demanded an inquiry "into the fate of each book: how it was first received, into whose hands it fell, how many different versions there were of it, by whose advice was it received into the Bible, and lastly, how all the books now universally accepted as sacred, were united into a single whole."

Here was a complete outline for the science of

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues] Higher Criticism. But it came a hundred years too early.

The eighteenth century proved to be critically minded but not historically minded. Advances in physical science had led to the conception of a lawful universe difficult to harmonize with the primitive scientific notions of the early Hebrews. The miracles, formerly urged as a proof of revelation, now became a stumbling block, needing defense in their turn. Skeptics such as David Hume pointed out that if miracles were breaks in the order of nature they needed to be supported by extraordinarily strong evidence, whereas in reality the evidence was extraordinarily weak unless one previously admitted the idea of revelation which the miracles themselves were supposed to prove. Apologists such as Bishop Butler usually attempted to meet this argument by denying that miracles were breaks in the order of nature: they were to be explained either as natural events misinterpreted by the narrators (this explanation supporting the events at the expense of the narrators) or as elaborate metaphors for moral or religious truths (this supporting the narrators at the expense of the events). Both these explanations explained away, since neither of them upheld the genuineness of the

[p. 137]

miracle as it was actually reported. Thus the literal authority of the Bible was undermined as much by its defenders as by its critics. Neither party had the faintest glimpse of the importance of the miraculous, precisely because it was miraculous, in all primitive thought.

The religious arguments of the eighteenth century turned on the scientific authority of the Bible rather than on ultimate moral or religious questions. Most of the critics, such as Bolingbroke, John Toland, Samuel Reimarus, Voltaire, Volney, Rousseau, and Paine, were deists, believing in a perfect deity, considered to be the creator of nature and its beneficent laws. Even when they were atheists, such as Diderot, Holbach, and the early Shelley, they were devoted to the Christian doctrine of the brotherhood of man. Looking back upon the conflict today, one is impressed by the fact that the critics of the Bible possessed much more of its true spirit than did its orthodox defenders. The critics were social reformers, fighting as had the Hebrew Prophets against the injustice of aristocratic and ecclesiastical domination; the apologists, on the other hand, were primarily concerned to defend the vested interests of Church and State. Thus, as during the Reformation, the

[p. 138]

discussion of the Bible was incidental to a larger social revolution, and the same classes who had once tried to suppress popular knowledge of the Bible, now, having taken the Bible over and established a private monopoly in it, consistently opposed any further extension of knowledge about it. In both instances, the conservative dread of new ideas was motivated by the fear of social change.

On the main question of the scientific authority of the Bible the rationalists of the Enlightenment were, of course, victorious. More logical and more intellectually honest than the eighteenth-century apologists, the rationalists were on the side of progress. But so far as specific knowledge of the Bible was concerned, they could do no more than pave the way for it; they could tell what the Bible was not; they could not tell what it was.

The situation is illustrated by the most famous of all the eighteenth-century attacks, The Age of Reason, by Thomas Paine, written during the stormiest period of the French Revolution when the author was in danger of his life. Paine believed in God, in personal immortality, and much more than most Christians in human brotherhood. But when he found errors in the Bible he considered them to be instances of deliberate falsehood; when

[p. 139]

he found repetitions, he scented plagiarism; when he found books ascribed to the wrong authors, he talked of forgery; in a word, he treated the Bible as if it were a contemporary eighteenth-century production, and denounced it for what, measured by the customs of his own time, seemed grave moral evils. As against his antagonists who reasoned from the same premises but denied the existence of the errors, repetitions, and wrong ascriptions of authorship, Paine was in the right, although most of his positive conclusions about the Bible itself were wide of the mark.

The Age of Reason, with its forceful, if occasionally vulgar, use of irony and wit, was welcomed by the disaffected of Paine's generation, and it continued to enjoy a kind of succes de scandale throughout the nineteenth century, giving rise in America to agnostic groups who continued to repeat Paine's arguments long after they were utterly outmoded. So, in the last quarter of the century, Paine's views, without Paine's sincerity, were echoed in the meretricious rhetoric of Robert Ingersoll. Meanwhile, unknown to both the professional agnostics and their Fundamentalist opponents, there had arisen in Europe a new school of criticism which made all this noisy disputation meaningless.

[p. 140]

The effect of the eighteenth-century attacks upon the Bible had been to lead European scholars at last to follow the advice of Hobbes and Spinoza to try to find out how and when and where and why the Bible actually was written. A beginning was made as early as 1751 by a French Roman Catholic physician, Jean Astruc, who proved from the internal evidence that there were at least two separate documents combined in the Pentateuch. In the same year Lowth discovered the system of parallelism in Hebrew poetry and thus began the study of the Bible as literature. But the real father of Higher Criticism was J. G. Eichhorn whose monumental Einleitung (1780-83) laid a sure foundation for future scholarship. Eichhorn distinguished between the priestly legislation of Leviticus and the popular legislation of Deuteronomy, showed that parts of the Book of Isaiah could not have been written by that Prophet, and gave a late date to Ecclesiastes, the Song of Solomon, and Daniel. After Eichhorn the fruitfulness of the historical method in the study of the Bible could no longer be intelligently questioned.

The next great landmark in Biblical criticism was furnished by the work of the Dutch scholar De Wette, who in 1806-07 proved the correctness

[p. 141]

of the guess of Thomas Hobbes that Deuteronomy was the lost book of the law found by Hilkiah in the Temple during the reign of Josiah and further indicated the key position of Deuteronomy as a product of the seventh century. For fifty years, critical debate raged over the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch, but in the end the general conclusions of De Wette were vindicated. Through the labors of Reuss, Graf, Kuenen, Wellhausen, and many others on the Continent, supplemented by those of S. R. Driver, T. K. Cheyne, W. Robertson Smith, and others in Great Britain, the various documents of the Pentateuch were disentangled; the traditional order of Leviticus, Deuteronomy, Psalms, Prophets, was replaced by the correct order of Prophets, Deuteronomy, Leviticus, Psalms; Leviticus and Psalms were proved to have been postexilic collections; all the books were at least approximately dated; and a totally new understanding of the entire character of the Old Testament was gained. Scholarship has no greater triumph to show in any field.

With regard to the New Testament the situation is somewhat different. There, the critical chapter is still unfinished. At the outset for several generations the Higher Criticism of the New Testament

[p. 142]

lagged behind that of the Old Testament until attention was aroused by the challenging Leben Jesu (1835) of David Friedrich Strauss (translated into English by George Eliot). Strauss denied all historical value to the Gospels, tracing their origin to popular mythology and Messianic expectations. Later knowledge concerning oriental religions of the sacrificed god (Osiris, Attis, Adonis), as set forth, for instance, in The Golden Bough by Sir James Frazer, has served to revive the "myth theory" of Jesus in recent years. Such able twentieth-century scholars as Loisy and Bultmann accept as genuine only the sayings of Jesus and remain skeptical as to all the recorded details of his life. The extreme myth theory, however, has never gained acceptance among anything like the majority of critical scholars, chiefly because of the difficulty, if not impossibility, of reconciling it with the unquestionable historicity of Paul and the disciples of Jesus whom Paul mentions.

Another once influential position now somewhat discredited was that of Ferdinand Christian Baur, founder of the Tubingen School which flourished at about the middle of the nineteenth century. According to Baur and his followers, the point of departure for New Testament criticism should be

[p. 143]

found in the conflict between the Judaizing tendencies of the original disciples and the anti-Mosaic teachings of Paul, a conflict finally harmonized in the Gospels and the Acts, which Baur accordingly dated in the second century. That there was a conflict, perpetuated by the Gnostics, is of course evident, but later critics have shown successfully that Baur greatly overemphasized it, and have restored an early date for the three Synoptic Gospels. The second-century date of the Johannine Gospel, on the other hand, is now generally accepted, the most that is claimed by conservative critics being that it contains earlier elements, possibly from the hand of John the disciple. That the Fourth Gospel and the Apocalypse could not possibly have been written by the same author is all but universally admitted.

Much less ultimately important than the work of Strauss or Baur, both of whom originated fruitful lines of investigation even though these did not bear out their own major conclusions, was the enormously popular Vie de Jesus (1863) of Ernest Renan, of which three hundred thousand copies were sold in France alone. Renan's later works in the long series, L'Histoire des origines du Christianisme (1863-80), and his L'Histoire du peuple d'Israel 

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] (1888-94) were more valuable. Through the charm of his style, if not through the profundity of his thought, he exercised great influence upon a whole group of French writers among whom Anatole France, at least, was a world figure.

At the close of the nineteenth century it seemed unlikely that any fresh sources of information about the New Testament would ever be forthcoming. Then, most unexpectedly, excavations in Upper Egypt by Flinders Petrie, Grenfell, and Hunt brought to light a mass of Greek papyri which opened up an entirely new line of approach.

The story of these discoveries is a modern romance. Most of the papyri were found in mummies, having been used as part of their wrappings, but the most important collection of all was unearthed at Oxyrhynchus in a rubbish heap long overblown by sand, where Grenfell and Hunt discovered the contents of a Roman record office. The papyri had been taken to the rubbish heap to be burned, but the fire had died out leaving many undamaged, and the sand blowing over them had preserved them for nearly twenty centuries. To this fortuitous good we owe sixteen quarto volumes of Greek texts, which have revolutionized our knowledge of the New Testament. Later findings were equally

[p. 145]

romantic, one of them consisting in the discovery of a number of mummified crocodiles, apparently useless to the explorers until an irritated workman hit one of the sacred reptiles over the head and the gash revealed that they too were wrapped in papyri covered with precious writings of the Roman era.

Much publicized in the press was the news that the Oxyrhynchus discoveries included a page of "Lost Sayings of Jesus," probably from an Egyptian Gospel. But the importance of the discoveries did not lie in these probably unauthentic Sayings but in the contents of the record office, including letters, contracts, wills, documents of marriage and divorce, and all manner of legal proceedings. These startlingly revealed the fact that the spoken Greek of the New Testament period was very close to the Greek of the New Testament itself, which hitherto had been usually adjudged to be imperfect literary Greek. The full import of this discovery will be realized when it is said that the style of the New Testament, instead of being like that of the King James version, is much more like that of a well-written modern newspaper.

This had indeed already been suspected by a few clairvoyant scholars, one of whom, Ferrar Fenton,

[p. 146]

had published a translation of Paul's Epistles in Modern English as early as 1883. As soon as their conjectures were verified by the excavations, a number of scholars were quick to respond with modern speech translations. First in the field was a Roman Catholic, Francis A. Spencer, who in 1898 published a translation of the Gospels endorsed by Cardinal Gibbons. A similar translation was brought out the next year by F. S. Ballantine. More ambitious was the Twentieth Century New Testament published by a group of twenty scholars, representing various denominations, in 1899-1900. Then came the valuable Historical New Testament of Professor James Moffatt in 1901 and the New Testament in Modern Speech by Richard Francis Weymouth in 1903. The chief criticism to be brought against all of these experiments is that in spite of their titles they were not modern enough; the translators were haunted by echoes of older versions, which filled their pages with annoying suggestions of familiar rhythms and phrases entirely out of keeping with the new style. Of many later attempts in the same vein--there were more than twenty-five in the first quarter century, chiefly in America--the most successful was The New Testament: an American Translation by Professor Edgar

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] J. Goodspeed published in 1923 and republished in 1931 as part of The Bible: an American Translation, in which the Old Testament was translated by a group of scholars under the editorship of J. M. Powis Smith. In literal accuracy, this last edition at present holds the foremost place.

At present. But New Testament criticism was never more alive than it is today, and we have learned to expect surprises. New Testament scholarship is still creative because its problems have not yet been fully solved. Many passages in the original Greek still remain so obscure as to be virtually unintelligible, although this would scarcely be guessed from the translations, since the translators, when in doubt, have simply done the best they could without mentioning their difficulties.

Quite recently, Professor Charles Cutler Torrey of Yale has advanced what may possibly prove an epoch-making solution of this textual problem. Having discovered that many of the obscurities can be explained as Greek mistranslations of Aramaic words or phrases, so that the passages become perfectly clear when rendered into their presumable originals, he has followed this clew to its extreme conclusion, namely, that all four Gospels are compilations of lost Aramaic documents. Believing that

[p. 148]

only by translating the Greek into Aramaic and then translating the Aramaic into English could the true meaning be recovered, he himself carried through this tremendous undertaking, publishing its results in The Four Gospels: a New Translation (1933). Obviously, this process of double translation is extremely hazardous, and, unfortunately, its value can be judged only by competent Aramaic scholars of whom there are relatively few. Should Professor Torrey's work be accepted in its entirety, it would bring the original composition of the Gospels close to the time of Jesus and would lend much added weight to the Fourth Gospel. Such good fortune rarely awaits any individual work of scholarship, however, since the achievements of scholarship are directly due to its collective character wherein the conclusions of one are checked and modified by those of his successors. But dramatically, at least, the bold Aramaic theory is a fitting consummation of the long adventure of the spirit that has gone into the making of our New Testament.

The problem of Biblical translation does not seem completely solvable. From the fact that the writers of the New Testament were able to infuse the spirit of a new and thrilling religion into conversational

[p. 149]

[paragraph continues] Greek, it by no means follows that this spirit can be recaptured by using twentieth-century conversational English. Modern English is saturated with scientific connotations equally foreign to the Greek of the New Testament and to Elizabethan English; it possesses qualities of force and precision, lacking in the older language, but it is essentially the speech of prose, whereas the prose of the King James version was itself half-poetry. Language forever changes and doubtless a time will come when the King James version will be no longer intelligible. Happily, we are still far from that period. The rhythm and diction and poetic quality of the greatest of all translations as yet remains closer to our hearts than the language of the market which we employ in our daily lives.

No one should any longer dream of consulting the Authorized Version to settle any disputed question of literal meaning. For that we will turn to the modern translations that we already have, or, in due time, to those others still to come. Each such new rendering will be welcomed, some of them with appropriate enthusiasm. But for literary appreciation and enjoyment, and for moral inspiration, we shall still do well to turn to the matchless King James version.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

SEVEN

  

The Bible and the Stream of Life

HEINRICH HEINE, with customary grace, wrote as follows of the Bible:

"The Bible, what a book! Large and wise as the world based on the abysses of creation, and towering aloft into the blue secrets of heaven. Sunrise and sunset, promise and fulfilment, birth and death--the whole drama of humanity--are contained in this one book. It is the Book of Books. The Jews may readily be consoled at the loss of Jerusalem, and the Temple, and Ark of the Covenant, and all the crown jewels of King Solomon. Such forfeiture is as naught when weighed against the Bible, the imperishable treasure that they have saved. If I do not err, it was Mahomet who named the Jews the 'People of the Book,' a name which in Eastern countries has remained theirs to the present day, and is deeply significant. That one book is to the Jews their country. Within the well-fenced boundaries of that book they live and have their being; they enjoy their inalienable citizenship, are strong to admiration; thence none can dislodge them.

[p. 151]

[paragraph continues] Absorbed in the perusal of their sacred book, they little heeded the changes that were wrought in the real world around them. Nations rose and vanished, States flourished and decayed, revolutions raged throughout the earth,--but they, the Jews, sat poring over this book, unconscious of the wild chase of time that rushed on above their heads."

The Jews wrote the Bible, and the Bible preserved the Jews. In antiquity it saved them from being absorbed and assimilated in the life of their Babylonian and Persian conquerors, from, losing their language and their laws, as the Briton yielded his to the Saxon and the Saxon his to the Norman. It enabled them to resist the intellectual Greek and the all-powerful Roman. And now, for nearly two thousand years it has kept them alive, even without a nation or a home. Their survival has not been due to any biological peculiarities of the "Jewish race," for ethnology recognizes no such race. The blood of every nation runs in Jewish veins today. But their religion, their laws, and their customs, enshrined in the Bible, have constituted a cultural inheritance outrunning space, outlasting time. That there are Jews in the world today is solely owing to the enduring influence of the Bible in their lives. Their experience is the supreme example in history of the

[p. 152]

power of the written word. What all the Greek poets, philosophers, and scientists could not do for Greece, what all the Roman statesmen and legislators could not do for Rome, the Bible has done for the Jews.

This is remarkable enough: but it is little compared with the gifts brought by the Bible to the immensely larger non-Jewish world. The most national of books has proved itself to be the most international, the most local, also the most universal. With the words of Heine quoted above may be bracketed those of two other writers, one an Englishman, the other an American. From Robert Louis Stevenson:

"Written in the East, these characters live forever in the West; written in one province, they pervade the world; penned in rude times, they are prized more and more as civilization advances; product of antiquity, they come home to the business and bosoms of men, women, and children in modern days."

And from Walt Whitman:

"How many ages and generations have brooded and wept and agonized over this book! What un-tellable joys and ecstasies, what support to martyrs at the stake, from it! To what myriads has it

Click to enlarge
Perpetual Easter Calendar from the King James version

[p. 153]

Click to enlarge
The generations of Adam in the King James version

been the shore and rock of safety--the refuge from driving tempest and wreck! Translated in all languages, how it has united this diverse world! Of its thousands there is not a verse, not a word, but is thick-studded with human emotion."

Through the Bible, an alien religion became the most cherished possession of peoples infinitely stronger politically and economically than the Jews had ever been. It was more reverenced by the later Greeks than their own Homer, more by the later Romans than their own Virgil. When the Roman Empire perished, the Bible did not perish, because in it every successive wave of the barbarians found the answers to their deepest questions, the food for their most desperate hunger, until in far-distant parts of Europe nations still unborn when the Bible first was written learned from it themselves how to write and built new literatures upon its foundations. Again when later the Church, its guardian, forgot the treasure committed to its care, men sought the Bible out in time of need and deemed life but a little thing to give in its exchange. On its basis, religion was a second time reformed, to usher in the modern world.

In this modern world three nations above all others have known the Bible best: Germany, Great

[p. 154]

[paragraph continues] Britain, and the United States of America. The rhythms of Martin Luther are said to pervade German literature. Of that, one not native to the language can hardly judge. But what American will fail to recognize the varied accents of the Bible, its solemn roll and swell and breaking crests and the movement of its inmost spirit in these passages from English classics--passages to which could not a thousand parallels easily be found?

In the Urn Burial, that meditation upon death of Sir Thomas Browne, most philosophical of all physicians:

"Five languages secured not the epitaph of Gordianus. The man of God lives longer without a tomb than any by one. . . . If in the decretory term of the world we shall not all die, but be changed, according to received translation, the last day will make but few graves; at least quick resurrections will anticipate lasting sepultures: some graves will be opened before they be quite closed, and Lazarus be no wonder, when many that feared to die shall groan that they can die but once. The dismal state is the second and living death, when life puts despair on the damned; when men shall wish the coverings of mountains, not of monuments, and annihilation shall be courted."

[p. 155]

In the Jerusalem, half verse, half-rhythmic prose, of William Blake who saw the foot of Calvary between South Molton Street and Stratford Place, and took oath to build Jerusalem where England's dark Satanic mills obscured the sun:

The City of the Woods in the Forest of Ephratah is taken!
 London is a stone of her ruins, Oxford is the dust of her walls,
 Sussex and Kent are her scatter'd garments, Ireland her holy place,
 And the murder'd bodies of her little ones are Scotland and Wales.
 The Cities of the Nations are the smoke of her consummation,
 The Nations are her dust, ground by the chariot wheels
 Of her lordly conquerors, her palaces levell'd with the dust.
 I come that I may find a way for my banished ones to return.
 Fear not, O little Flock, I come. Albion shall rise again.

In the peroration of De Quincey's Joan of Arc when he summons to ironic trial Joan's accuser and judge, the bishop of Beauvais:

"My lord, have you no counsel? 'Counsel I have none; in heaven above, or on earth beneath, counselor there is none now that would take a brief from me: all are silent.' Is it, indeed, come to this? Alas! the time is short, the tumult is wondrous, the crowd stretches away into infinity; but yet I will search in it for somebody to take your brief; I know

[p. 156]

of somebody that will be your counsel. Who is this that cometh from Domremy? Who is she in bloody coronation robes from Rheims? Who is she that cometh with blackened flesh from walking the furnaces of Rouen? This is she, the shepherd girl, counselor that had none for herself, whom I choose, bishop, for yours. She it is, I engage, that shall take my lord's brief. She it is, bishop, that would plead for you; yes, bishop, she--when heaven and earth are silent."

In Carlyle's passionate outcry against the aristocracy, his passionate eulogy of labor, toward the end of Past and Present:

"Gamepreserving aristocracies, let them 'bush' never so effectually, cannot escape the Subtle Fowler. Game seasons will be excellent, and again will be indifferent, and by and by they will not be at all. The Last Partridge of England, of an England where millions of men can get no corn to eat, will be shot and ended. Aristocracies with beards on their chins will find other work to do than amuse themselves with trundling-hoops.

"But it is to you, ye Workers, who do already work, and are as grown men, noble and honorable in a sort, that the whole world calls for new work and nobleness. Subdue mutiny, discord, widespread

[p. 157]

despair, by manfulness, justice, mercy and wisdom. Chaos is dark, deep as Hell; let light be, and there is instead a green flowery world. . . .

"Unstained by wasteful deformities, by wasted tears or heart's-blood of men, or any defacement of the Pit, noble fruitful Labor, growing ever nobler, will come forth,--the grand sole miracle of Man; whereby Man has risen from the low places of this Earth, very literally, into divine Heavens. Ploughers, Spinners, Builders; Prophets, Poets, Kings; Brindleys and Goethes, Odins and Arkwrights; all martyrs, and noble men, and gods are of one grand Host; immeasurable; marching ever forward since the beginnings of the World."

In the social idealism of Carlyle's disciple, Ruskin, at the conclusion of his bitter-sweet lecture, Traffic:

"Solomon made gold, not only to be in his own palace as stones, but to be in Jerusalem as stones. But even so, for the most part, these splendid kingdoms expire in ruin, and only the true kinghoods live, which are of royal laborers governing loyal laborers; who, both leading rough lives, establish the true dynasties. Conclusively you will find that because you are king of a nation, it does not follow that you are to gather for yourself all the wealth of

[p. 158]

that nation; neither, because you are king of a small part of the nation, and lord over the means of its maintenance--over field, or mill, or mine,--are you to take all the produce of that piece of the foundation of national existence for yourself. . . .

"But if you can fix some conception of a true human state of life to be striven for--life good for all men as for yourselves--if you can determine some honest and simple order of existence; following those trodden ways of wisdom, which are pleasantness, and seeking her quiet and withdrawn paths which are peace;--then, and so sanctifying wealth into 'commonwealth,' all your art, your literature, your daily labors, your domestic affection, and citizen's duty, will join and increase into one magnificent harmony. You will know then how to build, well enough; you will build with stone well, but with flesh better; temples not made of hands but riveted of hearts; and that kind of marble, crimson-veined, is indeed eternal."

It is a far cry from such language to the stammering doggerel of the first work printed in America, the Bay Psalm Book of 1640. And yet, if we bear in mind the special conditions of their task, it may be said that Richard Mather and the other editors wrought in the spirit of the great translators. It

[p. 159]

was neither perversity nor literary deafness that led them to so transmogrify the work of Coverdale; they knew the Psalms well and loved them, knew them so well indeed that they knew they were written to be sung, and on the barren coast of New England were determined to raise the ancient paeans of praise as valid there after all the centuries as they had been in Palestine. But they were limited in their resources; they had only short-meter tunes; it was necessary to cut the pattern of their verse to suit the music. They knew they were not writing poetry and confessed as much in their preface. They were simply endeavoring to incorporate a portion of the Bible in the daily life of the people, and this they accomplished.

Nowhere was there a more strenuous effort to take the Bible as the standard of conduct than in New England. The laws of Massachusetts Bay constantly quoted Biblical sources as authority. When in 1639 the colony of New Haven was founded and all its freemen were assembled to decide the form of civil rule, John Davenport arose and put the question whether the Scriptures "do hold forth a perfect rule for the direction and government of men in all duties," and the answer was a unanimous affirmative.

[p. 160]

Unfortunately, but inevitably, men living under primitive conditions tended to stress the primitive parts of the Bible. The harshest sections of the so-called Mosaic law were reinforced by the dark theology of Calvin with its doctrines of predestination, total depravity, and the joy of the elect in the damnation of sinners. Particularly in Massachusetts, the Puritan magistrates and clergy early yielded to a lust for power and left behind them a black record of judicial crimes. Their devotion to the Bible, however earnest, was never pure but from the beginning was sullied by personal and class ambition.

Much deeper and more fundamentally sincere was the Biblical devotion of their victims. To Roger Williams and Anne Hutchinson the Bible brought a message of spiritual freedom; where the masters of Massachusetts Bay searched the Scriptures for texts to sanction persecution, the Baptists and Quakers, reading more profoundly, found in them sustenance for their own democratic and humanitarian aspirations. Rhode Island and Pennsylvania counterbalanced Massachusetts and Connecticut, and in the long run Puritanism was conquered, though not without bequeathing an evil legacy in the form of a

[p. 161]

tradition of censorship and suppression with which American liberalism has had to battle ever since.

But on one point conservatives and liberals were from the first agreed: the importance of religious education. In 1649 the General Court of Massachusetts took measures for the establishment of schools throughout the colony and gave the reason for this legislation: "It being the chief project of that old deluder Satan to keep men from the knowledge of the Scriptures, as in former times by keeping them in an unknown tongue, so in these latter times by persuading from the use of tongues, that so at least the true sense and meaning of the original might be clouded by false guesses of saint-seeming deceivers; that all learning may not be buried in the grave of our fathers in the church and commonwealth, therefor be it ordered. . . ."

Biblical learning never lapsed in Massachusetts. Cotton Mather, grandson of the editor of the Bay Psalm Book, also translated the Psalms in his Psalterium Americanum and spent fifteen years in preparing a huge commentary on the Bible in six folio volumes, to be called Biblia Americana, which, unfortunately, was never published. His son, the less massive Samuel Mather, made an original translation

[p. 162]

of the Lord's Prayer from the Greek, the first instance in America of such direct translation. But the most interesting of these colonial ventures in scholarship, and also one of the earliest, was the Bible for the Indians brought out in 1661-63 by John Eliot, one of the coeditors of the Bay Psalm Book.

Eliot learned the Algonquin dialect soon after coming to America and had lived and taught among the Indians for twenty years before venturing upon his translation. He was probably the most successful of all missionaries in that field, winning eleven thousand converts, training more than twenty native teachers, establishing fourteen Indian schools, and organizing twenty-four Indian congregations. He wrote several interesting accounts of his labors, in which he told of the embarrassing questions sometimes asked by his converts, such as:

"Why does not God, who has full power, kill ye devil that makes men so bad?

"Whether there might not be something, if only a little, gained by praying to ye devil?"

In spite of his familiarity with the native dialect, Eliot found the task of translation extremely difficult, since he had first to transpose the spoken tongue into its written equivalent, thus, as it were,

[p. 163]

creating ad hoc a written language. Even with the assistance of an Indian interpreter, he occasionally fell into blunders as when the parable of the ten virgins became that of "the ten pure young men" because the Indians regarded chastity as a masculine virtue and had no word for it of feminine gender.

Twelve years after Eliot completed his translation, King Philip's War broke out and scattered his congregations to the winds. Gradually all knowledge of the dialect in which he wrote was lost until, it is said, no man living today could retranslate his translation into English. The final failure of his great missionary enterprise symbolized the melancholy fate that lay in readiness for future undertakings of the same character.

The final failure of Eliot's great missionary enterprise was but a new chapter in an old story. The Roman Catholics were already cruelly familiar with it. For two centuries Franciscans and Jesuits labored with the utmost heroism and devotion to Christianize the Indians; more than a hundred priests suffered martyrdom for the cause; the noble names of Marquette, Lamy, De Smet, and Serra still shine like beacon-lights across that stormy period of treacheries, massacres, and scalpings wherein the

[p. 164]

whites were quick to adopt the most savage customs of the natives and, indeed, often bettered their instructions. If the Indians were, as a whole, exterminated instead of being absorbed as a constituent part of the community the fault was not with the missionaries, Catholic or Protestant, but with the land-grabbers, shyster traders, and gold hunters responsible for that long exploitation of the natives eloquently and indignantly described in Helen Hunt Jackson's A Century of Dishonor (1881). In truth, the Americans had to Christianize themselves before they could well Christianize the Indians.

American life developed on the edge of the wilderness; if men penetrated too far into its fastnesses, they soon relapsed into barbarism. That they did not do so more completely, that in the long run it was not the wilderness that conquered men but men the wilderness, was largely owing to the influence of the Bible. As in the medieval period, religion was the mother of education. Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, all founded for the training of clergymen, were followed by hundreds of other religious colleges that bore the brunt of the struggle against ignorance all through the pioneer days and carried the values of civilization ever westward.

[p. 165]

Once more, as in medievalism, literature arose out of religion. The Unitarian movement at the end of the eighteenth century and in the early part of the nineteenth was the direct precursor of the literary efflorescence of the eighteen-forties and fifties. The great achievements in literature of those decades were proportionate to the moral aims. The co-operative movements and Utopian societies of the time were no accident. Religion, blessedly freed from dogma; a morality that had outgrown the limitations of Puritanism and looked forward to the creation of positive goods instead of stressing the eternal conflict with the Evil One; and a literature inspired by the new spirit and conscious of its own civilizing function: all these worked together to a common end. Of the creative personalities in that period an amazing number were clergymen who became writers, writers who became clergymen, or men who were both clergymen and writers all the time: the Unitarian ministers, William Ellery Channing, Theodore Parker, and James Freeman Clarke; the Universalist, Adin Ballou, the founder of Hopedale; George Ripley, the founder of Brook Farm; Emerson himself; Orestes Brownson, who tried nearly every form of Protestantism and at last found a permanent haven

[p. 166]

in the Roman Catholic Church where he became internationally known; these and many another.

One might continue almost indefinitely with the story of Biblical influence, direct and indirect, on American life. An excellent work, The Bible in America (1936), by the Reverend P. Marion Simms, is devoted to the literal influence alone, telling of the various Bibles used in different localities, of the scores of American translations, and of the gigantic missionary efforts of the American Bible Society. And this is only the smallest part of the story, for there remains the history of the great competing Protestant denominations who have flourished in America--the Quakers, the Congregationalists, the Presbyterians, the Episcopalians, the Unitarians, the Baptists, the Methodists, and the Disciples, each based upon a slightly different interpretation of the Bible, and each deserving a volume to itself, with at least one other separate volume for the treatment of American Catholicism, another for Mormonism--a heretical form of Christianity--and several for the almost innumerable minor sects from the Ephrata Community to the Buchmanites--all testifying, in one form or another, to the diversity and independence of American religious thought, yet almost all, in the last analysis, loyal

[p. 167]

to the fundamental American ideal that religion should function as a moral force in the daily works of man.

And yet it would be treason to the highest spirit of the Bible to end its story in this vein of easy optimism. In the Book of Job, Satan appears as the Accusing Angel in the very courts of heaven. It is as necessary now as then to listen to the worst that can be said, particularly when it is being said on every hand today. That plausible worst runs about as follows:

"Christianity has been anything but the religion of peace and human brotherhood that it pretends to be. Jesus may have preached tolerance, but Christianity has always been the most intolerant of religions. Were not the Catholic Crusades against the Moslems immediately followed by the Catholic Crusade against the Albigensian Catholics? Were the Protestants more than barely safe from the rack and thumbscrew of the Inquisition before they set their wits to devise torments for other Protestants? Even in a new country the terrors of the wilderness and hostile Indians could not unite them, as the persecuted Baptists and Quakers with their slit noses and cropped ears could well report. The wilderness was kinder to Roger Williams than

[p. 168]

were his devout fellow Protestants of Boston, and the Indians were less clever in devising tortures than were the magistrates of Massachusetts Bay.

"It took only the pitifully feeble Negro insurrection of Nat Turner to scare the Southern clergy into forgetting their Christianity and to send them hurrying pell-mell to the defense of slavery with the marvelous discovery that Abraham too had been a slaveholder. And it is but twenty years since, in the words of a noted Presbyterian clergyman, 'The Church threw itself into the World War and made itself, next to the daily press, the most powerful agency in repeating the lying propaganda that fed the flames of hatred.' Today in Germany Hitler treads down Luther with a fabricated Nazi Gospel of Saint John made up of passages carefully mistranslated to countenance a persecution of the Jews worse than the Middle Ages ever saw. Admit that man is a bloodthirsty beast, and that the quicker this human carnivore destroys himself the better."

Many bitter truths, which yet do not sum up to one single truth. History, indeed, and never more so than today, often seems a nightmare in which one may easily go mad. The outlook for the future

Click to enlarge
The generations of Noah in the King James version

[p. 169]

Click to enlarge
Title page of John Eliot's Indian Bible (1663)

never seemed so bright as at the end of the nineteenth century, rarely has it seemed darker than now. Western civilization may well be on the eve of self-destruction through wars and revolutions. Still one knows what one knows, and time is not yet done.

It is no news that the Bible has often been turned to most unworthy uses. Men have found in it what they wanted to find. A living book will always take on some of the characteristics of its readers. Noble books will be chosen by the noble-minded, base books by the base, but the base will also lay their hands upon the noble books and turn them to dishonor. Worse still, nobility itself is never pure: no book, no man but shares the imperfections of humanity. All this is granted.

Yet it is no great task to refute the specific charges against the Bible. Why remember the religious persecutors and not the religious persecuted? Were not the Christian martyrs closer to the spirit of Jesus than the hairsplitting theologians of a later time? Joan of Arc was as real as the bishop of Beauvais, Tyndale as real as his judges, Roger Williams as real as the magistrates of Boston, and it is these persecuted ones whom humanity

[p. 170]

has chosen to honor and in whom one recognizes the compeers of the writers of the Bible. Strange choice for a "bloodthirsty beast" to make!

If the Church's assumption of omniscience led it to oppose, jealously and benightedly, the development of modern science, that assumption was the Church's, not the Bible's--and even so, it is but fair to remember that the Church first created the schools, thus making that development possible. The list of specific humanitarian efforts directly traceable in whole or part to the Bible is a long one: the care for the poor and the sick, the wounded and the dying, the institution of hospitals, almshouses, poorhouses, the building of libraries, the long struggle against usury, the dignifying of the family relationship, the improvement in the lot of women. If the slaveowners of the South were able to derive comfort from the example of Abraham, the slaves themselves derived far more consolation, often almost their only consolation, from the one book which offered them any hope, creating out of it those Negro spirituals, glowing and pathetic, the most significant example of folk literature in modern times. And it is hardly a mere coincidence that the Anti-Slavery movement itself originated with the Quakers, of all sects the one most vitally

[p. 171]

influenced by the Bible. Social reforms of more recent date that owed their inception to Biblical influence, however secularized they may have since become, include the advances in nursing and in the more humane treatment of the insane, the newer methods in penology, the so-called emancipation of women, and the demand for factory and wage legislation.

But beyond all this lies a much larger issue. The modern world has largely put its trust in science, the best of tools and the poorest of masters. For science tells only of what is and of what can be made, disclaiming all interest in what ought to be and in what ought to be made. Unguided by rational ends, science may easily be harmful instead of helpful. And contemporary society has already become adept in using scientific means for evil ends. It has developed the terrible science of modern warfare. It has originated a new science of propaganda or an art of propaganda based on scientific methods--the science or the art of deliberate distortion of the truth. And before our eyes there has grown up in Europe a science or scientific art of miseducation wherein all the resources of psychological conditioning are utilized to prevent individual development and to make the victims

[p. 172]

contented slaves of whatever happens to be the government in power. Meanwhile the progressive groups in society have been fatally weakened by confusion in their own ranks, owing to the same neglect of values. One hears today much talk of "the class struggle" and of "the seizure of power," as if a mere class struggle, unless some moral issue is involved, were of any more significance than a conflict between red and black ants, or as if a seizure of power mattered when none are fit to wield the power. Let men fight for justice, justly, and they will have some inner strength. But instead, the old and hateful fallacy of the end's justifying any means has reappeared, complicated by the new fallacy of a supposedly irreconcilable opposition between "individualism" and "collectivism" so that one or the other must take all. This general breakdown of thought and not any natural bloodthirstiness of the human animal constitutes the peril of the hour.

What says the Bible to all this? It deals with Man the Valuer, and it is unwavering in its assertion of both individual and social values as inextricably one. The society it knows is a society made up of individuals, each with his own separate mind and conscience and incommunicable experiences,

[p. 173]

but each finding his fulfillment, none the less, in joyous association with his fellows and in subordinating the personal to the common good. Or one may put the same message in the now tarnished terms of democratic idealism which need only to be seen in their true essence with the rhetorical rust removed in order to appear as inspiring as ever: liberty--that integrity of the individual mind proclaimed by Job; and equality--the fact that beneath all differences men are fundamentally alike in their ultimate needs and natures with equal claim upon whatever goods they can turn to account--the teaching of Jesus and the Prophets.

The true goods are noncompetitive and self-validating: physical health, creative labor, love and friendship and companionship, intellectual honesty, wisdom, and justice; to know these is in itself to value them. Here one must take his stand, not to be shouted down by the power lusts of all the political parties in the world.

Beyond the present bank and shoal of time where the stream of life seems caught in momentary swirls and eddies, it is reasonable to suppose that there still lie many happy valleys into which its course will flow. After periods of madness come periods of sanity. How much of what now

[p. 174]

exists must quickly perish no one can foresee; but of one thing we may be sure: if only shards and broken pieces of our civilization should remain, among them would still be found the Bible, whole and uninjured. The book that outlived the Roman Empire will outlive any destruction that impends. No nation has so assured a future, as none has had so great a past. And when in the far distant future humanity itself shall perish, it may well be that it will leave behind it no monument any nobler than the Bible.

     
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 175]

  

Index

Abraham, <page 6>, <page 7>, <page 8>, <page 20>, <page 168>

Achilles, <page 6>

Acre, siege of, <page 85>-<page 86>

Acts of the Apostles, <page 55>-<page 56>. <page 143>

"Acts of Solomon, The Book of the," <page 32>

Adam, <page 14>, <page 19>, <page 70>, <page 71>

Aelfric the Grammarian, <page 79>-<page 80>

"Aelfric's Heptateuch," <page 80>

Aeneid, <page 83>

Aeschylus, <page 18>

Agamemnon, <page 6>

Age of Reason, The (Paine), <page 138>-<page 139>

Agur, <page 44>

Ahab, king of Israel, <page 22>, <page 24>

Albertus Magnus, St., <page 91>

Albigenses, <page 88>, <page 89>, <page 93>, <page 167>

Alcuin, <page 77>, <page 78>

Aldhelm of Malmesbury, <page 80>

Alexander the Great, king of Macedon, <page 48>

Alexander VI (Rodrigo Borgia), Pope, <page 99>

Alfred the Great, king of the West <page 79>, <page 108>

Alighieri, Dante, <page 37>

Allen, William, Cardinal, <page 120>

American Bible Society, <page 51>, <page 166>

American Revision, <page 129>-<page 130>

American Revision Committee (for the R. V.), <page 128>-<page 129>, <page 130>

Amos, <page 26>, <page 27>, <page 29>, <page 36>

Andrewes, Lancelot, <page 122>

Antiochus Epiphanes, king of Syria, <page 49>

anti-Semitism, <page 87>-<page 88>, <page 168>

Apocalypse of Peter, <page 63>

Apocrypha, <page 42>, <page 49>-<page 52>, <page 105>, <page 128>

Apostles' Creed, <page 63>

Apostolic Constitutions, <page 63>

"Apostrophe to the Sun," <page 15>

Aquila, <page 62>

Arianism, <page 64>-<page 68>

Arius, <page 64>

Astruc, Jean, <page 140>

Athalie (Racine), <page 95>

Athanasian Creed, <page 73>

Athanasius, <page 65>, <page 67>, <page 68>, <page 70>, <page 72>

Augustine of Hippo, St., <page 68>, <page 70>-<page 71>, <page 72>, <page 77>

Authorized Version, <page 51>, <page 110>, <page 114>, <page 118>, <page 121>-<page 125>, <page 126>, <page 127>, <page 128>, <page 130>, <page 145>, <page 149>

autos, <page 93>

 

Babylon, <page 13>, <page 34>, <page 35>, <page 40>

Balaam, <page 25>

Ballantine, F. S., <page 146>

Ballou, Adin, <page 165>

Baptists, <page 160>, <page 166>, <page 167>

Baruch, Book of, <page 50>, <page 102>

Baur, Ferdinand Christian, <page 142>-<page 143>

Bay Psalm Book, <page 158>, <page 161>, <page 162>

Bede, <page 76>

Benedict of Nursia, St., <page 81>

Benedictines, <page 81>-<page 82>

Benjamin (tribe), <page 36>

Beowulf, <page 75>

Beza, Theodore, <page 115>

Bible: an American Translation, The (ed. Smith), <page 147>

Bible in America, The (Simms), <page 166>

Biblia Americana (Mather), <page 161>

Biblia Pauperum, <page 92>

"Bishops' Bible," <page 117>-<page 118>, <page 120>, <page 123>

Blake, William, <page 10>, <page 37>, <page 155>

Boaz, <page 42>

Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus, <page 79>

Boleyn, Anne (Henry VIII's second wife), <page 112>-<page 113>

Bolingbroke, Henry St. John, Viscount, <page 137>

[p. 176]

Book of Common Prayer, <page 114>

"Breeches Bible," <page 115>; also see "Geneva Bible"

Bristow, Richard, <page 120>

British Bible Society, <page 51>

British Revision Committee (for the R. V.), <page 128>-<page 129>, <page 130>

Brook Farm, <page 165>

Browne, Sir Thomas, <page 154>

Brownson, Orestes, <page 165>-<page 166>

Buddhism, <page 61>

Bultmann, <page 142>

Buonarroti, Michelangelo, <page 96>-<page 97>

Burleigh, William Cecil, Lord, <page 117>

Butler, Joseph, <page 136>

Byzantium, see Constantinople

 

Caedmon, <page 76>-<page 77>

Calchas, <page 25>

Calderon de la Barca, Pedro, <page 94>

Calvin, John, <page 106>, <page 3>.<page 60>

Cambridge University, <page 112>, <page 121>, <page 122>

Campbell, George, <page 127>

Canaanites, <page 12>

Canterbury Tales, The (Chaucer), <page 83>, <page 99>

Caraffa, Cardinal, <page 119>

Carlyle, Thomas, <page 10>, <page 156>, <page 157>

Carthage, Synod of, <page 71>

Catherine of Aragon (Henry VIII's first wife), <page 111>

Century of Dishonor, A (Jackson), <page 164>

Chaldaea, <page 14>

Challoner, Richard, <page 127>

Channing, William Ellery, <page 165>

Charlemagne, Holy Roman Emperor, <page 77>-<page 79>

Charles I, king of England, <page 126>

Charles Martel, dux of the Franks, <page 84>

Chaucer, Geoffrey, <page 83>, <page 99>, <page 103> "Chevy Chase," <page 17>

Cheyne, Thomas Kelly, <page 141>

Children's Crusade, <page 86>

Christmas, <page 93>

Chronicles I, <page 41>

Chronicles II, <page 41>, <page 112>

"Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, The Book of the," <page 32>

"Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, The Book of the," <page 32>

Chrysostom, St. John, <page 4>

Civil War (American), <page 124>

Clarke, James Freeman, <page 165>

Clement VIII (Ippolito Aldobrandini), Pope, <page 119>

Clement of Alexandria, <page 62>

Cochlaeus, John, <page 109>

Code of Hammurabi, <page 30>-<page 31>

Codex Alexandrinus (A), <page 126>

Codex Vaticanus (D), <page 118>

Coelestius, <page 71>

Colossians, <page 54>

Communion, <page 101>, <page 106>

Connecticut, <page 160>

Consolation of Philosophy (Boethius), <page 79>

Constantine the Great, Roman Emperor, <page 64>, <page 65>

Constantinople, <page 64>, <page 72>, <page 73>, <page 84>, <page 86>, <page 96>, <page 103>-<page 104>

Constantinople, Council of (<page 2>nd ecumenical), <page 68>, <page 74>

Corinthians I, <page 53>, <page 55>

Corinthians II, <page 53>

Councils, see under the names of places where held

"Court History of David, The," <page 14>, <page 32>

"Covenant, Book of the," <page 30>

Coverdale, Miles, <page 112>-<page 114>, <page 115>, <page 117>, <page 118>, <page 123>, <page 159>

Cranmer, Thomas, <page 114>

"Cranmer's Bible," <page 114>

Cretans, <page 12>

Cromwell, Oliver, <page 124>, <page 125>

Cromwell, Thomas, earl of Essex, <page 13>.<page 1>

Crusades, <page 84>-<page 88>, <page 90>, <page 91>, <page 167>

Cyrus the Great, king of Persia, <page 40>

[p. 177]

Damasus, Pope, <page 69>

Dandolo, Enrico, doge of Venice, <page 86>

Danes, <page 76>

Daniel, Book of, <page 37>, <page 49>-<page 50>, <page 77>, <page 140>

Dante, see Alighieri, Dante Davenport, John, <page 159>

David, king of the Jews, <page 6>, <page 12>, <page 14>, <page 3>.<page 8>, <page 22>, <page 42>, <page 47>

Deborah, <page 20>

deists, <page 137>

Delphic oracles, <page 25>

De Quincey, Thomas, <page 155>

"Destruction of Bel and the Dragon," <page 49>-<page 50>

Deutero-Isaiah, <page 37>-<page 39>, <page 140>

Deuteronomists, <page 30>, <page 31>-<page 33>, <page 36>, <page 40>

Deuteronomy, <page 25>, <page 29>, <page 30>, <page 33>, <page 36>, <page 79>, <page 87>-<page 88>, <page 140>, <page 141>

Diderot, Denis, <page 137>

Divina Commedia, La (Dante), <page 37>

Dobneck, Johann, <page 109>

"Douai Bible," <page 119>-<page 121>, <page 123>, <page 127>

Driver, Samuel Rolles, <page 141>

Duns Scotus, Johannes, <page 91>

 

E document, <page 23>, <page 24>, <page 36>

Easter, <page 73>, <page 93>

Ecclesiastes, <page 5>, <page 46>-<page 47>, <page 140>

Ecclesiastical History (Bede), <page 76>

Ecclesiasticus, <page 49>

Eckhart, Meister, <page 44>

Edomites, <page 35>

Edward III, king of England, <page 101>

Edward VI, king of England, <page 114>

Egypt, <page 12>, <page 13>, <page 34>

Eichhorn, J. G., <page 140>

Einleitung (Eichhorn), <page 140>

Elijah, <page 25>

Eliot, George, <page 142>

Eliot, John, <page 162>-<page 163>

Eliot, T. S., <page 122>

Elisha, <page 25>

Elizabeth, queen of England, <page 117>

Elohim, <page 23>

Ely, <page 76>

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, <page 90>, <page 165>

England, <page 75>-<page 77>, <page 79>-<page 80>, <page 99>, <page 100>-<page 102>, <page 106>-<page 107>, <page 108>, <page 109>, <page 111>-<page 115>, <page 117>, <page 118>, <page 121>-<page 125>, <page 127>-<page 128>, <page 153>-<page 154>

England, Church of, <page 117>, <page 118>, <page 121>

Enoch, Book of, <page 51>

Epistle of Barnabas, <page 63>

Epistle of Clement of Rome, <page 63>

Epistles (N.T.), <page 52>, <page 53>-<page 54>

Erasmus, Desiderius, <page 105>, <page 107>, <page 109>, <page 112>, <page 126>

Esdras I and II, <page 50>

Esther (Racine), <page 95>

Esther, Book of, <page 49>, <page 80>, <page 106>

Estienne, Robert, <page 116>

Eusebius of Nicomedia, <page 65>

Eve, <page 19>

Exile, <page 33>, <page 35>, <page 37>, <page 42>.

Exodus, <page 15>, <page 30>, <page 77>, <page 79>

Ezekiel, <page 36>-<page 37>, <page 40>

Ezra, <page 40>, <page 41>, <page 42>, <page 50>

 

"Fable of Jotham," <page 15>

Fenton, Ferrar, <page 145>-<page 146>

filioque controversy, <page 73>

Fornarina, La, <page 97>

Four Gospels: a New Translation, The (tr. Torrey), <page 148>

Fourth Gospel, see John, Gospel of Foxe, John, <page 112>

France, Anatole, <page 144>

Francis of Assisi, St., <page 89>-<page 90>

Frazer, Sir J. G., <page 142>

Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, <page 86>, <page 93>

 

Galatians, <page 53>

Genesis, <page 15>, <page 23>, <page 36>, <page 77>

"Geneva Bible," <page 115>-<page 117>, <page 118>, <page 120>, <page 121>, <page 123>, <page 124>

Gibbons, James, Cardinal, <page 146>

Gideon, <page 14>

Gideon Society, <page 129>

Gilby, Anthony, <page 115>

[p. 178]

Giorgione (Giorgio Barbarelli), <page 97>

Golden Bough, The (Frazer), <page 142>

Goodspeed, Edgar J., <page 125>, <page 146>-<page 147>

Gospels, <page 55>-<page 57>, <page 63>, <page 80>, <page 100>, <page 142>, <page 143>, <page 147>-<page 148>

Gothic architecture, <page 95>-<page 96>

"Great Bible," <page 114>, <page 123>

"Great Hee Bible," <page 124>

"Great She Bible," <page 124>

Greek Catholic Church, <page 74>

Gregory I the Great, Pope, St., <page 79>

Gregory XIV (Niccolo Sfondrati), Pope, <page 119>

Grenfell, Bernard Pyne, <page 144>

Gutenberg, Johann, <page 104>

"Gutenberg Bible," <page 104>

Guthrac of Croyland, <page 80>

 

Habakkuk, <page 33>, <page 36>, <page 45>

Haggai, <page 39>

Hagiographa, <page 50>

Hammurabi, king of Babylon, <page 31>

Harvard University, <page 164>

Hebrews, Epistle to the, <page 54>, <page 106>, <page 117>

Heine, Heinrich, <page 150>, <page 152>

Henry V, king of England, <page 102>

Henry VI, king of England, <page 102>

Henry VIII, king of England, <page 111>, <page 112>

Herodotus, <page 20>

Hexapla, <page 62>

Hexateuch, <page 32>

Hezekiah, king of Judah, <page 27>, <page 29>

Higher Criticism, <page 131>, <page 132>-<page 149>

Hilda, St., <page 76>, <page 77>

Hilkiah, <page 30>, <page 141>

Hiram, king of Tyre, <page 12>

Historia Scholastica (Petrus Comestor), <page 92>

Historical New Testament, <page 146>

History of the World (Orosius), <page 79>

Hitler, Adolf, <page 168>

Hobbes, Thomas, <page 132>-<page 133>, <page 135>, <page 140>, <page 141>

Holbach, Paul Henri, Baron d', <page 137>

Holy Sepulcher, <page 83>

Homer, <page 153>; also see Iliad

homoiousion, <page 67>, <page 68>

homoousion, <page 67>, <page 68>

Hopedale, <page 165>

Hort, Fenton John Anthony, <page 129>

Hosea, <page 26>, <page 27>, <page 29>, <page 36>

Hrotswitha of Gandersheim, <page 92>

Hume, David, <page 136>

Hunt, Arthur Surridge, <page 144>

Huss, John, <page 103>

Hutchinson, Anne, <page 160>

 

Iliad, <page 25>

India, <page 25>

Ingersoll, Robert, <page 139>

Innocent III (Lothario Conti), Pope, <page 89>, <page 93>, <page 101>

Isaiah, <page 27>-<page 28>, <page 29>, <page 30>, <page 36>, <page 37>, <page 38>, <page 140>

Isaiah, Book of, <page 37>, <page 140>

Isis worship, <page 60>

Israel (kingdom), <page 12>-<page 13>, <page 23>, <page 26>, <page 27>, <page 31>, <page 36>

 

J document, <page 23>, <page 24>

Jackson, Helen Hunt, <page 164>

Jacob, <page 6>, <page 7>, <page 20>

Jahveh, see Jehovah

James, Jesus' brother, <page 54>

James, Epistle of, <page 54>, <page 106>

James I, king of England, <page 118>, <page 121>, <page 122>

"Jashar, Book of," <page 14>

Jehovah, <page 19>, <page 23>, <page 24>, <page 26>, <page 40>, <page 41>, <page 44>

Jephthah, <page 14>

Jeremiah, <page 34>, <page 36>, <page 38>, <page 45>, <page 50>

Jerome, St., <page 68>, <page 69>, <page 70>, <page 72>, <page 78>, <page 123>

Jerusalem, <page 28>, <page 34>, <page 35>, <page 40>, <page 42>, <page 83>, <page 85>, <page 86>

Jerusalem (Blake), <page 155>

Jesus the Christ, <page 20>, <page 39>, <page 54>-<page 55>, <page 56>, <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 63>, <page 78>, <page 89>, <page 101>, <page 106>, <page 142>, <page 143>, <page 173>

[p. 179]

Jesus ben Sirach, <page 49>

Jews, Chapters I and II, et passim, especially <page 87>-<page 88>

Jezebel, queen of Israel, <page 22>

Joan of Arc, <page 169>

Joan of Arc (De Quincey), <page 155>

Job, <page 46>

Job, Book of, <page 45>, <page 80>, <page 167>, <page 173>

Joel, <page 39>

John, Epistles of, <page 53>, <page 54>

John, Gospel of, <page 53>, <page 54>, <page 56>, <page 57>, <page 90>, <page 131>, <page 143>, <page 148>, <page 168>

Jonah, Book of, <page 42>, <page 106>, <page 110>

Joseph, <page 6>, <page 7>, <page 20>, <page 24>

Joshua, <page 20>

Joshua, Book of, <page 15>, <page 32>

Josiah, king of Judah, <page 30>, <page 33>, <page 141>

Jubilees, Book of, <page 51>

Judah (kingdom), <page 12>-<page 13>, <page 23>, <page 26>, <page 27>, <page 28>, <page 36>

Judah (tribe), <page 36>

Jude, Epistle of, <page 54>, <page 106>

Judea, <page 48>

Judges, <page 15>, <page 32>

Judith, Book of, <page 49>, <page 80>

Julius II (Giuliano della Rovere), Pope, <page 99>

Justin Martyr, St., <page 101>

 

King James version, see Authorized Version

King Philip's War, <page 163>

Kings, Book of the, see Kings I, Kings II

Kings I, <page 22>, <page 32>-<page 33>, <page 36>, <page 41>, <page 68>, <page 80>

Kings II, <page 22>, <page 30>, <page 32>-<page 33>, <page 36>, <page 41>, <page 68>, <page 80>

Knox, John, <page 114>, <page 115>

Koran, <page 84>

 

Lamentations, <page 34>

Langland, William, <page 103>

Lastingham, <page 76>

Law, the, <page 50>

Leben Jesu (Strauss), <page 142>

"Leda Bible," <page 117>; also see "Bishops' Bible"

Leicester, Robert Dudley, earl of, <page 117>

Lemuel, King, <page 44>

Leonardo da Vinci, <page 97>

Leviathan (Hobbes), <page 132>-<page 133>

Leviticus, <page 40>, <page 140>, <page 141>

Lindisfarne, <page 76>

Lindisfarne Gospels, <page 80>

Loisy, Alfred Firmin, <page 142>

Lollards, <page 102>-<page 103>

"Lost Sayings of Jesus," <page 145>

Louis IX, king of France, St., <page 86>

Lowth, Robert, <page 140>

Lucar, Cyril, <page 126>

Lucian of Antioch, <page 64>, <page 65>

ludi, <page 93>

Luke, St., <page 55>-<page 56>

Luke, Gospel of, <page 55>, <page 56>, <page 77>, <page 89>, <page 125>

Luther, Martin, <page 103>, <page 104>, <page 105>-<page 106>, <page 108>, <page 109>-<page 110>, <page 168>

 

Maccabaeus, Simon, <page 49>

Maccabees I and II, <page 49>, <page 80>

Maimonides, <page 133>

Mainz, <page 104>

Malachi, Book of, <page 39>

Manasseh, king of Judah, <page 29>-<page 30>

Manichaeism, <page 88>

Marathon, battle of, <page 18>

Mark, St., <page 55>

Mark, Gospel of, <page 55>, <page 56>

Marsh, Dr., <page 127>

Martin, Gregory, <page 120>

Mary I, queen of England, <page 114>

Masoretes, <page 105>

Massachusetts, <page 115>, <page 159>, <page 160>, <page 161>

Massachusetts Bay colony, <page 159>, <page 168>

Mather, Cotton, <page 161>

Mather, Richard, <page 158>

Mather, Samuel, <page 161>-<page 162>

Matthew, St., <page 55>, <page 124>

[p. 180]

Matthew, Gospel of, <page 55>, <page 56>, <page 57>, <page 62>, <page 72>-<page 73>

Matthew, Thomas, see Rogers, John Matthew's Bible, <page 113>, <page 123>

Megiddo, battle of, <page 33>

Messiah, <page 52>

Metamorphoses (Ovid), <page 117>

Micah, <page 26>, <page 28>, <page 29>, <page 36>

Michelangelo, see Buonarroti, Michelangelo

Milton, John, <page 37>

miracle plays, <page 92>-<page 94>

Mithraism, <page 60>

Moab, land of, <page 31>

"Modern Reader's Bible, The," <page 130>--<page 131>

Moffatt, James, <page 146>

Mohammedanism, <page 74>, <page 84>

Monmouth, Humphrey, <page 108>

More, Sir Thomas, <page 111>

Mormonism, <page 166>

Mosaic law, <page 25>, <page 29>, <page 60>

Moses, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 25>, <page 30>, <page 31>

Moulton, Richard Green, <page 130>-<page 131>

 

Nahum, <page 33>, <page 36>

Nebuchadrezzar (Nebuchadnezzar), king of Babylon, <page 33>

Nehemiah, <page 40>, <page 41>

New England, <page 158>-<page 163>

New Testament, <page 52>-<page 58> et passim, especially <page 110>-<page 111>, <page 116>, <page 117>, <page 119>, <page 126>, <page 127>, <page 141>, <page 144>, <page 145>, <page 146>-<page 148>

New Testament: an American Translation, The (Goodspeed), <page 146>-<page 147>

New Testament in Modern Speech, <page 146>

Nicaea, Council of (1st ecumenical), <page 65>

Nicene Creed, <page 66>-<page 67>, <page 68>, <page 73>

Nicholas I, Pope, St., <page 73>

Nicholas of Hereford, <page 102>

Noah's ark, <page 8>

Northern Kingdom, see Israel Numbers, <page 15>, <page 25>

 

Obadiah, <page 35>

Obedience of a Christen Man (Tyndale), <page 111>

Old Testament, <page 14>-<page 52> et passim, especially <page 119>, <page 140>, <page 141>

Omri, king of Israel, <page 24>

Origen, <page 62>-<page 63>, <page 70>

Orosius, Paulus, <page 79>

Ossian, <page 10>

Oxford University, <page 101>, <page 107>, <page 121>, <page 122>

Oxford University Press, <page 125>

Oxyrhynchus papyri, <page 144>, <page 145>

 

P document, <page 40>-<page 41>

Paine, Thomas, <page 137>, <page 138>-<page 139>

Palestine, <page 12>, <page 13>-<page 14>, <page 39>, <page 91>

Papacy, <page 72>-<page 73>, <page 88>, <page 99>

Papias, <page 55>

Parable of the Wicked Mammon (Tyndale), <page 111>

Paradise Lost (Milton), <page 37>

"Paradiso" (Dante), <page 37>

Paris, Thomas, <page 125>

Parker, Matthew, <page 117>

Parker, Theodore, <page 165>

Passover, <page 41>

Past and Present (Carlyle), <page 157>

Pastoral Care, The (Gregory the Great), <page 79>

Paul, St., <page 53>, <page 54>-<page 55>, <page 70>, <page 100>, <page 106>, <page 142>, <page 143>

Paul, Epistles of, <page 53>-<page 54>, <page 63>

Paul's Epistles in Modern English (tr. Fenton), <page 145>-<page 146>

Pelagius, <page 71>

Pentateuch, <page 25>, <page 32>, <page 110>, <page 112>, <page 140>, <page 141>

Persia, <page 48>, <page 49>

Persians, The (Aeschylus), <page 18>

Peter, St., <page 72>

Peter I and II, <page 54>

Peter the Hermit, <page 85>

Petrie, Sir Flinders, <page 143>

Petrus Comestor, <page 92>

[p. 181]

Philemon, <page 54>

Philip, Landgrave of Hesse, <page 110>

Philip II Augustus, king of France, <page 86>

Philippians, <page 54>

Phillips, Henry, <page 112>

Philo Judaeus, <page 56>

Photius of Constantinople, <page 73>-<page 74>

Plato, <page 19>, <page 61>-<page 62>

Plautus, Titus Maccius, <page 92>

Poitiers, battle of, <page 84>

Practyse of Prelates (Tyndale), <page 111>

Prayer Book, <page 50>

"Prayer of Manassas King of Juda," <page 50>

Preacher, The, see Ecclesiastes Princeton University, <page 164>

"Prophecy of Balaam," <page 15>

Prophetical Books (Blake), <page 37>

Prophets, <page 19>, <page 25>-<page 29>, <page 30>, <page 33>-<page 35>, <page 36>-<page 39>, <page 41>, <page 50>, <page 137>

Prophets, the (division of the O.T.), <page 50>, <page 141>

Protestants, <page 51>, <page 88>, <page 105>, <page 109>, <page 166>, <page 167>

Proverbs, <page 22>, <page 44>-<page 45>, <page 133>

Psalms, <page 22>, <page 47>-<page 48>, <page 80>, <page 114>, <page 117>, <page 133>, <page 141>, <page 161>

Psalterium Americanum (tr. Mather), <page 161>

Puritans, <page 123>, <page 160>

Purvey, John, <page 102>

 

Quakers, <page 160>, <page 166>, <page 167>

 

Racine, Jean, <page 95>

Raphael, see Sanzio, Raffaello

Reformation, <page 94>, <page 98>, <page 100>, <page 106>

Reimarus, Samuel, <page 137>

Renaissance, <page 96>-<page 97>

Renan, Ernest, <page 143>-<page 144>

Revelation, <page 37>, <page 53>, <page 57>-<page 58>, <page 106>

Revised Version, <page 110>, <page 126>, <page 127>-<page 129>, <page 130>, <page 131>

Reynolds, John, <page 121>, <page 122>

"Rheims Bible," see "Douai Bible"

Richard I Coeur-de-Lion, king of England, <page 86>

Ripley, George, <page 165>

Rogers, John, <page 113>

Roman Catholic Church, <page 50>, <page 72>-<page 74>, <page 78>, <page 81>, <page 91>, <page 92>, <page 94>, <page 95>, <page 99>, <page 100>, <page 101>, <page 102>, <page 103>, <page 110>, <page 111>, <page 117>, <page 118>-<page 119>, <page 120>, <page 165>-<page 166>

Roman Empire, <page 59>, <page 61>, <page 64>, <page 83>, <page 174>

Romans, Epistle to the, <page 54>

Rome (city), <page 72>, <page 99>, <page 100>

Roses, Wars of the, <page 103>

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, <page 137>

Roy, William, <page 109>

Rushworth Gospels, <page 80>

Ruskin, John, <page 10>, <page 157>

Ruth, Book of, <page 42>, <page 124>

 

Sabbath, <page 40>, <page 41>, <page 79>

Sampson, Thomas, <page 115>

Samson, <page 14>

Samuel, Book of, see Samuel I, Samuel II

Samuel I, <page 33>

Samuel II, <page 14>, <page 15>, <page 33>

Sanzio, Raffaello, <page 97>

Sarah, <page 8>

Sardica, Council of, <page 67>

Saul, king of the Jews, <page 23>

"Sayings of Jesus," <page 55>

Scarlett, Nicholas, <page 127>

Schaff, Philip, <page 128>

Schoeffer, Peter, <page 109>

Selwyn, Dr., <page 127>

Sennacherib, king of Assyria, <page 27>

Septuagint, <page 4>, <page 33>, <page 34>, <page 50>, <page 59>, <page 62>, <page 69>

Sermon on the Mount, <page 56>-<page 57>

Shakespeare, William, <page 94>

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, <page 29>, <page 137>

Shepherd of Hermas, <page 63>

Simms, P. Marion, <page 166>

Sinai, Mt., <page 26>

Sisera, <page 17>

Sixtus V (Felice Peretti), Pope, <page 119>

[p. 182]

Smith, J. M. Powis, <page 147>

Smith, Miles, <page 123>

Smith, William Robertson, <page 141>

"Soldier's Pocket Bible, The," <page 124>

Solomon, king of the Jews, <page 6>, <page 7>, <page 13>, <page 14>, <page 22>, <page 43>, <page 44>

"Song of the Bow," <page 15>, <page 18>-<page 19>

"Song of Deborah," <page 15>, <page 16>-<page 17>, <page 20>

"Song of Lamech," <page 15>

"Song of Moses," <page 15>-<page 16>, <page 20>

Song of Solomon, see Song of Songs Song of Songs, <page 5>, <page 42>-<page 44>, <page 104>-<page 105>, <page 131>, <page 140>

"Song of the Three Children," <page 50>

"Song of the Well," <page 15>

sortes Vergilianae, <page 83>

Southern Kingdom, see Judah Sparta, <page 48>

Spencer, Francis A., <page 146>

Spinoza, Benedict, <page 133>-<page 135>, <page 140>

"Standard Edition," <page 125>

Stevenson, Robert Louis, <page 152>

Strauss, David Friedrich, <page 142>, <page 143>

Streonshalh, see Whitby

Susanna, <page 49>

Suso, <page 44>

Symmachus, <page 62>

Synods, see under places where held Synoptic Gospels, <page 52>, <page 54>, <page 56>, <page 57>

 

Tauler, Johannes, <page 44>

Taverner, Richard, <page 113>

Temple, Jerusalem, <page 30>, <page 31>, <page 39>, <page 41>, <page 141>

Ten Commandments, <page 30>, <page 79>

Terence (Publius Terentius Afer), <page 92>

Testament of Our Lord, <page 63>

Thebes, <page 48>

Theodotion, <page 62>

Thessalonians I and II, <page 53>

Thomas Aquinas, St., <page 91>

Timothy I and II, <page 54>

Tintoretto (Iacopo Robusti), <page 97>

Titian (Tiziano Vecellio), <page 97>

Titus, Epistle to, <page 54>

Tobit, Book of, <page 8>, <page 42>, <page 49>

Toland, John, <page 137>

Torrey, Charles Cutler, <page 147>-<page 148>

Tours, <page 77>

Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (Spinoza), <page 135>

Traffic (Ruskin), <page 157>

Trent, Council of, <page 51>, <page 119>

Tubingen School, <page 142>-<page 143>

Tunis, <page 86>

Tunstall, Cuthbert, <page 108>, <page 109>

Turner, Nat, <page 168>

Twentieth Century New Testament, <page 146>

Tyndale, William, <page 107>-<page 112>, <page 113>, <page 114>, <page 115>, <page 117>, <page 118>, <page 123>, <page 169>

Tyre, Council of, <page 67>

 

Ulfilas, <page 67>

Unitarianism, <page 165>, <page 166>

United States, <page 128>-<page 130>, <page 146>-<page 147>, <page 153>-<page 154>, <page 164>-<page 169>

Unknown Prophet, see Deutero-Isaiah

Urban II (Eudes de Chatillon), Pope, <page 84>

Urban V (Guillaume Grimoard), Pope, <page 101>

"Uriel," <page 90>

Urn Burial (Browne), <page 154>

Utopia (More), <page 111>

 

Valverde Castle, <page 111>

Veronese, Paolo (Paolo Cagliari), <page 97>

Victor I, Pope, St., <page 73>

Vie de Jesus (Renan), <page 143>

"Vinegar Bible," <page 125>

Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro), <page 153>; also see Aeneid 

Virgin Mary, <page 57>

Virginia, <page 115>

Vision of Piers Plowman, The (Langland), <page 103>

Volney, Constantin Francois de Chasseboeuf, Comte de, <page 137>

[p. 183]

Voltaire, Francois Marie Arouet de, <page 137>

Vulgate, <page 50>, <page 69>-<page 70>, <page 77>, <page 78>, <page 101>, <page 119>, <page 123>

Wakefield, Gilbert, <page 127>

Waldensians, <page 88>-<page 89>

Waldo, Peter, <page 88>-<page 89>

Walsh, Sir John, <page 107>

"Wars of Jehovah, Book of the," <page 14>-<page 15>

Wearmouth, <page 76>

Wellhausen, Julius, <page 141>

Westcott, Brooke Foss, <page 129>

Wette, De, <page 141>-<page 142>

Weymouth, Richard Francis, <page 146>

Whitby, <page 76>

Whitman, Walt, <page 10>, <page 152>

Whittingham, William, <page 115>, <page 116>

"Wicked Bible," <page 124>-<page 125>

Wiclif, John, <page 101>-<page 102>, <page 103>, <page 108>, <page 110>

"Wiclif Bible," <page 101>-<page 102>, <page 106>

Wilberforce, Samuel, <page 128>

William of Malvern, <page 107>

Williams, Roger, <page 44>, <page 160>, <page 167>-<page 168>, <page 169>

Winthrop, John, <page 44>

Wisdom of Solomon, <page 49>

Wolsey, Thomas, Cardinal, <page 109>

Writings, see Hagiographa

 

Yale University, <page 164>

Yarrow, <page 76>

 

Zechariah, <page 39>

Zephaniah, <page 25>, <page 36>

Zoroastrianism, <page 61>

Zwingli, Ulrich, <page 106>, <page 110>

    
The Biography of the Bible, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, [1937], at sacred-texts.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

ERNEST SUTHERLAND BATES comes from a long line of New England deacons and members of the clergy. His father was an Episcopal clergyman, his mother's father a Methodist. Their descendant, however, has devoted himself to the study of philosophy and literature, having taken his Ph.D. from Columbia. Dr. Bates has served as professor of both English literature and philosophy in the Universities of Arizona and of Oregon. He was literary editor of the Dictionary of American Biography. He has written half a dozen books, one of them a narrative prose poem entitled The Friend of Jesus.

Finally, he is the editor of The Bible, Designed to Be Read as Living Literature.

(From Back Cover)

ERNEST SUTHERLAND BATES

ERNEST SUTHERLAND BATES comes from a long line of New England deacons and members of the clergy. His father was an Episcopal clergyman; his mother's father was a Methodist. Their descendant, however, has devoted himself to the study of philosophy and literature, having taken his Ph.D. from Columbia in 1908. He then served as Professor of English literature in the University of Arizona until 1915 when he moved to the University of Oregon to become, first, Professor of English and then Professor of Philosophy.

In 1926 Dr. Bates joined the staff of the Dictionary of American Biography as its literary editor and two years later his narrative poem The Friend of Jesus made its appearance both in the United States and England, bearing in England its original title The Gospel According to Judas. Other books by Dr. Bates include This Land of Liberty and The Story of Congress. He was joint author of a life of Mary Baker Eddy and of Hearst, Lord of San Simeon. In 1930 he joined the reviewing staff of the Saturday Review of Literature and in 1933 became one of the editors of the Modern Monthly. In 1936 he edited The Bible: Designed to be Read as Living Literature.

By ancestry, training, and natural inclination Dr. Bates is ideally equipped to write about the Bible. When he entered college he planned to become a clergyman but preferred to devote himself to the study of philosophy which increased, rather than diminished, his life-long interest in the Bible. He thus brings to his interpretation of the Bible the learning and wisdom of a varied life.

    


===== BOOK: blc.txt =====


    
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

The Babylonian Legends of the Creation

  

and the

  

Fight Between Bel and the Dragon

 

by E. A. Wallis Budge

 

with the assistance of Sidney Smith

  

as Told by Assyrian Tablets From Nineveh

  

London: Harrison and Sons, ltd.

 

[1921]

This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

Discovery of the Tablets.

The baked clay tablets and portions of tablets which describe the views and beliefs of the Babylonians and Assyrians about the Creation were discovered by Mr. (later Sir) A.H. Layard, Mormuzd Rassam and George Smith, Assistant in the Department of Oriental Antiquities in the British Museum. They were found among the ruins of the Palace and Library of Ashur-bani-pal (B.C. 668-626) at Kuyunjik (Nineveh), between the years 1848 and 1876. Between 1866 and 1870, the great "find" of tablets and fragments, some 20,000 in number, which Rassam made in 1852, was worked through by George Smith, who identified many of the historical inscriptions of Shalmaneser II, Tiglath-Pileser III, Sargon II, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and other kings mentioned in the Bible, and several literary compositions of a legendary character, fables, etc. In the course of this work he discovered fragments of various versions of the Babylonian Legend of the Deluge, and portions of several texts belonging to a work which treated of the beginning of things, and of the Creation. In 1870, Rawlinson and Smith noted allusions to the Creation in the important tablet K.63, but the texts of portions of tablets of the Creation Series at that time available for study were so fragmentary that it was impossible for these scholars to find their correct sequence. During the excavations which Smith carried out at Kuyunjik in 1873 and 1874 for the proprietors of the Daily Telegraph and the Trustees of the British Museum, he was, he tells us, fortunate enough to discover "several fragments of the Genesis Legends." In January, 1875, he made an exhaustive search among the tablets in the British Museum, and in the following March he published, in the Daily Telegraph (March 4th), a summary of the contents of about twenty fragments of the series of tablets describing the creation of the heavens and the earth. In November of the same year he communicated to the Society of Biblical Archaeology  copies of:--(1) the texts on fragments of the First and Fifth Tablets of Creation; (2) a text describing the fight between the "Gods and Chaos"; and (3) a fragmentary text which, he believed, described the Fall of Man. In the following year he published translations of all the known fragments of the Babylonian Creation Legends in his "Chaldean Account of Genesis" (London, 1876, 8vo, with photographs). In this volume were included translations of the Exploits of Gizdubar (Gilgamish), and some early Babylonian fables and legends of the gods.


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

Publication of the Creation Tablets.

The publication of the above-mentioned texts and translations proved beyond all doubt the correctness of Rawlinson's assertion made in 1865, that "certain portions of the Babylonian and Assyrian Legends of the Creation resembled passages in the early chapters of the Book of Genesis."  During the next twenty years, the Creation texts were copied and recopied by many Assyriologists, but no publication appeared in which all the material available for reconstructing the Legend was given in a collected form. In 1898, the Trustees of the British Museum ordered the publication of all the Creation texts contained in the Babylonian and Assyrian Collections, and the late Mr. L. W. King, Assistant in the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, was directed to prepare an edition. The exhaustive preparatory search which he made through the collections of tablets in the British Museum resulted in the discovery of many unpublished fragments of the Creation Legends, and in the identification of a fragment which, although used by George Smith, had been lost sight of for about twenty-five years. He ascertained also that, according to the Ninevite scribes, the Tablets of the Creation Series were seven in number, and what several versions of the Legend of the Creation, the works of Babylonian and Assyrian editors of different periods, must have existed in early Mesopotamian Libraries. King's edition of the Creation Texts appeared in "Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets in the British Museum," Part XIII, London, 1901. As the scope of this work did not permit the inclusion of his translations, and commentary and notes, he published these in a private work entitled, "The Seven Tablets of Creation, or the Babylonian and Assyrian Legends concerning the creation of the world and of mankind," London, 1902, 8vo. A supplementary volume contained much new material which had been found by him since the appearance of the official edition of the texts, and in fact doubled the number of Creation Texts known hitherto.


Click to enlarge
Babylonian map of the world, showing the ocean surrounding the world and making the position of Babylon on the Euphrates as its centre. It shows also the mountains as the source of the river, the land of Assyria, Bit-Iakinu, and the swamps at the mouth of the Euphrates.  [No. 92,687.]



     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

The Object of the Babylonian Legend of the Creation.

A perusal of the texts of the Seven Tablets of Creation, which King was enabled, through the information contained in them, to arrange for the first time in their proper sequence, shows that the main object of the Legend was the glorification of the god Marduk, the son of Ea (Enki), as the conqueror of the dragon Tiamat, and not the narration of the story of the creation of the heavens, and earth and man. The Creation properly speaking, is only mentioned as an exploit of Marduk in the Sixth Tablet, and the Seventh Tablet is devoted wholly to the enumeration of the honorific titles of Marduk. It is probable that every great city in Babylonia, whilst accepting the general form of the Creation Legend, made the greatest of its local gods the hero of it. It has long been surmised that the prominence of Marduk in the Legend was due to the political importance of the city of Babylon. And we now know from the fragments of tablets which have been excavated in recent years by German Assyriologists at Kal'at Sharkat (or Shargat, or Shar'at), that in the city of Ashur, the god Ashur, the national god of Assyria, actually occupied in texts  of the Legend in use there the position which Marduk held in four of the Legends current in Babylonia. There is reason for thinking that the original hero of the Legend was Enlil (Bel), the great god of Nippur (the Nafar, or Nufar of the Arab writers), and that when Babylon rose into power under the First Dynasty (about B.C. 2300), his position in the Legend was usurped at Babylon by Marduk.


Click to enlarge
Excavations in Babylonia and Assyria.



     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

Variant Forms of the Babylonian Legend of the Creation.

The views about the Creation which are described in the Seven Tablets mentioned above were not the only ones current in Mesopotamia, and certainly they were not necessarily the most orthodox. Though in the version of the Legend already referred to the great god of creation was Enlil, or Marduk, or Ashur, we know that in the Legend of Gilgamish (Second Tablet) it was the goddess Aruru who created Enkidu (Eabani) from a piece of clay moistened with her own spittle. And in the so-called "bilingual" version  of the Legend, we find that this goddess assisted Marduk as an equal in the work of creating the seed of mankind. This version, although Marduk holds the position of pre-eminence, differs in many particulars from that given by the Seven Tablets, and as it is the most important of all the texts which deal directly with the creation of the heavens and the earth, a rendering of it is here given.


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

The "Bilingual" Version of the Creation Legend.

1. "The holy house, the house of the gods in the holy place had not yet been made.

2. "No reed had sprung up, no tree had been made.

3. "No brick had been laid, no structure of brick had been erected.

4. "No house had been made, no city had been built.


Click to enlarge
The Bilingual Version of the Creation Legend. [No. 93,014.]


5. "No city had been made, no creature had been constituted.

6. "Enlil's city,  (i.e., Nippur) had not been made, E-kur  had not been built,

7. "Erech  had not been made, E-Aena  had not been built,

8. The Deep  (or Abyss) had not been made, Eridu  had not been built.

9. "Of the holy house, the house of the gods, the dwelling-place had not been made.

10. "All the lands were sea

11. "At the time that the mid-most sea was [shaped like] a trough,

12. "At that time Eridu was made, and E-sagil was built,

13. "The E-sagil where in the midst of the Deep the god Lugal-dul-azaga  dwelleth,

14. "Babylon was made, E-sagil was completed.

15. "The gods the Anunnaki he created at one time.

16. "They proclaimed supreme the holy city, the dwelling of their heart's happiness.

17. "Marduk laid a rush mat upon the face of the waters,

18. "He mixed up earth and moulded it upon the rush mat,

19. "To enable the gods to dwell in the place where they fain would be.

20. "He fashioned man.

21. "The goddess Aruru  with him created the seed of mankind.

22. "He created the beasts of the field and [all] the living things in the field.

23. "He created the river Idiglat (Tigris) and the river Purattu (Euphrates), and he set them in their places,

24. "He proclaimed their names rightly.


Click to enlarge
Terra-cotta figure of a god. From a foundation deposit at Babylon. [No. 90,9961]


25. "He created grass, the vegetation of the marsh, seed and shrub;

26. "He created the green plants of the plain,

27. "Lands, marshes, swamps,

28. "The wild cow and the calf she carried, the wild calf, the sheep and the young she carried, the lamb of the fold,

29. "Plantations and shrub land,

30. "The he-goat and the mountain goat ...

31. "The lord Marduk piled up a dam in the region of the sea (i.e., he reclaimed land)

32. "He ... a swamp, he founded a marsh.

33. "... he made to be

34. "Reeds he created, trees he created,

35. "... in place he created

36. "He laid bricks, he built a brick-work,

37. "He constructed houses, he formed cities.

38. "He constructed cities, creatures he set [therein].

39. "Nippur he made, E-Kur he built.

40. "[Erech he made, E-Anna] he built.

[The remainder of the text is fragmentary, and shows that the text formed part of an incantation which was recited in the Temple of E-Zida, possibly the great temple of Nabu at Borsippa.]


Click to enlarge
Bronze figure of a Babylonian god.  [No. 91,147]



     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

The Legend of the Creation According to Berosus and Damascius.

Versions in Greek of the Legends found by George Smith had long been known to classical scholars, owing to the preservation of fragments of them in the works of later Greek writers, e.g., Eusebius, Syncellus, and others. The most important of these is derived from the History of Babylonia, which was written in Greek by BEROSUS, a priest of Bel-Marduk, i.e., the "Lord Marduk," at Babylon, about 250 B.C.  In this work Berosus reproduced all the known historical facts and traditions derived from native sources which were current in his day. It is therefore not surprising to find that his account of the Babylonian beliefs about the origin of things corresponds very closely with that given in the cuneiform texts, and that it is of the greatest use in explaining and partly in expanding these texts. His account of the primeval abyss, out of which everything came, and of its inhabitants reads:--


Click to enlarge
Babylonian Monster. [No. 108,979.]


"There was a time in which there existed nothing but darkness and an abyss of waters, wherein resided most hideous beings, which were produced on a two-fold principle. There appeared men, some of whom were furnished with two wings, others with four, and with two faces. They had one body but two heads; the one that of a man, the other of a woman; and likewise in their several organs both male and female. Other human figures were to be seen with the legs and horns of goats; some had horses' feet; while others united the hind-quarters of a horse with the body of a man, resembling in shape the hippo-centaurs. Bulls likewise were bred there with the heads of men, and dogs with four told bodies, terminated in their extremities with the tails of fishes; horses also with the heads of dogs; men too and other animals, with the heads and bodies of horses and the tails of fishes. In short, there were creatures in which were combined the limbs of every species of animals. In addition to these, fishes, reptiles, serpents, with other monstrous animals, which assumed each other's shape and countenance. Of all which were preserved delineations in the temple of Belus at Babylon."


Click to enlarge
Babylonian Demon. [No. 93,089.]


[THE SLAUGHTER OF THE QUEEN OF THE ABYSS.]

"The person, who presided over them, was a woman named OMUROCA; which in the Chaldean language is THALATTH; in Greek THALASSA, the sea; but which might equally be interpreted the Moon. All things being in this situation, Belus came, and cut the woman asunder: and of one half of her he formed the earth, and of the other half the heavens; and at the same time destroyed the animals within her. All this (he says) was an allegorical description of nature."

[THE CREATION OF MAN.]

"For, the whole universe consisting of moisture, and animals being generated therein, the deity above-mentioned  took off his own head: upon which the other gods mixed the blood, as it gushed out, with the earth; and from whence were formed men. On this account it is that they are rational and partake of divine knowledge."

[BELUS CREATES THE UNIVERSE.]

"This Belus, by whom they signify Jupiter, divided the darkness, and separated the Heavens from the Earth, and reduced the universe to order. But the animals not being able to bear the prevalence of light, died. Belus upon this, seeing a vast space unoccupied, though by nature fruitful, commanded one  of the gods to take off his head, and to mix the blood with the earth; and from thence to form other men and animals, which should be capable of bearing the air. Belus formed also the stars, and the sun, and the moon, and the five planets. Such, according to Polyhistor Alexander, is the account which Berosus gives in his first book." (See Cory, Ancient Fragments, London, 1832, pp. 24-26.)

In the sixth century of our era DAMASCIUS the SYRIAN, the last of the Neo-Platonic philosophers, wrote in Greek in a work on the Doubts and Solutions of the first Principles, in which he says: "But the Babylonians, like the rest of the Barbarians, pass over in silence the One principle of the Universe, and they conceive Two, TAUTHE and APASON; making APASON the husband of TAUTHE, and denominating her the mother of the gods. And from these proceeds an only-begotten son, MOYMIS, which I conceive is no other than the Intelligible World proceeding from the two principles. From these, also, another progeny is derived, DACHE and DACHUS; and again, a third, KISSARE and ASSORUS, from which last three others proceed, ANUS, and ILLINUS, and AUS. And of AUS and DAUCE is born a son called Belus, who, they say, is the fabricator of the world, the Demiurgus." (See Cory, Ancient Fragments, London, 1832, p. 318.)


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

The Seven Tablets of Creation. Description of Their Contents.

In the beginning nothing whatever existed except APSU, which may be described as a boundless, confused and disordered mass of watery matter; how it came into being is unknown. Out of this mass there were evolved two orders of beings, namely, demons and gods. The demons had hideous forms, even as Berosus said, which were part animal, part bird, part reptile and part human. The gods had wholly human forms, and they represented the three layers of the comprehensible world, that is to say, heaven or the sky, the atmosphere, and the underworld. The atmosphere and the underworld together formed the earth as opposed to the sky or heaven. The texts say that the first two gods to be created were LAKHMU  and LAKHAMU . Their attributes cannot at present be described, but they seem to represent two forms of primitive matter. They appear to have had no existence in popular religion, and it has been thought that they may be described as theological conceptions containing the notions of matter and some of its attributes.


Click to enlarge
Terra-cotta figure of a Babylonian Demon. [No. 22,458.]


After countless aeons had passed the gods ANSHAR  and KISHAR  came into being; the former represents the "hosts of heaven," and the latter the "hosts of earth."

After another long and indefinite period the independent gods of the Babylonian pantheon came into being, e.g., ANU , EA , who is here called NUDIMMUD , and others.


Click to enlarge
Bronze figure of a Babylonian Demon. [No. 93,078.]


As soon as the gods appeared in the universe "order" came into being. When APSU, the personification of confusion and disorder of every kind, saw this "order," he took counsel with his female associate TIAMAT  with the object of finding some means of destroying the "way"  (al-ka-at) or "order" of the gods.  Fortunately the Babylonians and Assyrians have supplied us with representations of Tiamat, and these show us what form ancient tradition assigned to her. She is depicted as a ferocious monster with wings and scales and terrible claws, and her body is sometimes that of a huge serpent, and sometimes that of an animal. In the popular imagination she represented all that was physically terrifying, and foul, and abominable; she was nevertheless the mother of everything,   and was the possessor of the DUP SHIMATI or "TABLET OF DESTINIES" . No description of this Tablet or its contents is available, but from its name we may assume that it was a sort of Babylonian Book of Fate.  Theologically, Tiamat represented to the Babylonians the same state in the development of the universe as did tohu wa-bhohu (Genesis i. 2), i.e., formlessness and voidness, of primeval matter, to the Hebrews She is depicted both on bas-reliefs and on cylinder seals in a form which associates her with LABARTU,   a female devil that prowled about the desert at night suckling wild animals but killing men. And it is tolerably certain that she was the type, and symbol, and head of the whole community of fiends, demons and devils.


Click to enlarge
Terra-cotta plaque with a Typhonic animal in relief. [No. 103,381.]


In the consultation which took place between APSU and TIAMAT, their messenger MU-UM-MU  took part; of the history and attributes of this last-named god nothing is known. The result of the consultation was that a long struggle began between the demons and the gods, and it is clear that the object of the powers of darkness was to destroy the light. The whole story of this struggle is the subject of the Seven Tablets of Creation. The gods are deifications of the sun, moon, planets and other stars, and APSU, or CHAOS, and his companions the demons, are personifications of darkness, night and evil. The story of the fight between them is nothing more nor less than a picturesque allegory of natural phenomena. Similar descriptions are found in the literatures of other primitive nations, and the story of the great fight between Her-ur, the great god of heaven, and Set, the great captain of the hosts of darkness, may be quoted as an example. Set regarded the "order" which Her-ur was bringing into the universe with the same dislike as that with which APSU contemplated the beneficent work of Sin, the Moon-god, Shamash, the Sun-god, and their brother gods. And the hostility of Set and his allies to the gods, like that of Tiamat and her allies, was everlasting.


Click to enlarge
Battle between Marduk (Bel) and the Dragon. Drawn from a bas-relief from the Palace of Ashur-nasir-pal, King of Assyria, 885-860 B.C., at Nimrud. [Nimrud Gallery, Nos. 28 and 29.]


At this point a new Text fills a break in the First Tablet, and describes the fight which took place between Nudimmud or Ea, (the representative of the established "order" which the rule of the gods had introduced into the domain of Apsu and Tiamat) and Apsu and his envoy Mummu. Ea went forth to fight the powers of darkness and he conquered Apsu and Mummu. The victory over Apsu, i.e., the confused and boundless mass of primeval water, represents the setting of impassable boundaries to the waters that are on and under the earth, i.e., the formation of the Ocean. The exact details of the conquest cannot be given, but we know that Ea was the possessor of the "pure (or white, or holy) incantation" and  that he overcame Apsu and his envoy by the utterance of a powerful spell. In the Egyptian Legend of Ra and Aapep, the monster is rendered spell-bound by the god Her-Tuati, who plays in it exactly the same part as Ea in the Babylonian Legend.

When Tiamat heard of Ea's victory over Apsu and Mummu she was filled with fury, and determined to avenge the death of Apsu, her husband.

The first act of TIAMAT after the death of Apsu was to increase the number of her allies. We know that a certain creature called "UMMU-KHUBUR"  at once spawned a brood of devilish monsters to help her in her fight against the gods. Nothing is known of the origin or attributes of UMMU-KHUBUR, but some think she was a form of TIAMAT. Her brood probably consisted of personifications of mist, fog, cloud, storm, whirlwinds and the blighting and destroying powers which primitive man associated with the desert. An exact parallel of this brood of devils is found in Egyptian mythology where the allies of Set  and Aapep are called "Mesu betshet"  i.e., "spawn of impotent revolt." They are depicted in the form of serpents, and some of them became the "Nine Worms of A###775###menti" that are mentioned in the Book of the Dead (Chap. Ia).

Not content with Ummu-Khubur's brood of devils, Tiamat called the stars and powers of the air to her aid, for she "set up" (1) the Viper, (2) the Snake, (3) the god Lakhamu, (4) the Whirlwind, (5) the ravening Dog, (6) the Scorpion-man, (7) the mighty Storm-wind, (8) the Fish-man, and (9) the Horned Beast. These bore (10) the "merciless, invincible weapon," and were under the command of (11) Kingu, whom Tiamat calls "her husband." Thus Tiamat had Eleven mighty Helpers besides the devils spawned by Ummu-Khubur.  We may note in passing that some of the above-mentioned Helpers appear among the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac which Marduk "set up" after his conquest of Tiamat, e.g., the Scorpion-man, the Horned Beast, etc. This fact suggests that the first Zodiac was "set up" by Tiamat, who with her Eleven Helpers formed the Twelve Signs; the association of evil with certain stars may date from that period. That the Babylonians regarded the primitive gods as powers of evil is clear from the fact that Lakhamu, one of them, is enumerated among the allies of Tiamat.

The helpers of Tiamat were placed by her under the command of a god called KINGU  who is TAMMUZ.  He was the counterpart, or equivalent, of ANU, the Sky-god, in the kingdom of darkness, for it is said in the text "Kingu was exalted and received the power of Anu," i.e., he possessed the same power and attributes as Anu. When Tiamat appointed Kingu to be her captain, she recited over him a certain spell or incantation, and then she gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES and fastened it to his breast, saying, "Whatsoever goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established." Armed with all the magical powers conferred upon him by this Tablet, and heartened by all the laudatory epithets which his wife Tiamat heaped upon him, Kingu went forth at the head of his devils.

When Ea heard that Tiamat had collected her forces and Was determined to continue the fight against the gods which Apsu and Mummu had begun, and that she had made her husband Kingu her champion, he was "afflicted" and "sat in sorrow." He felt unable to renew the fight against the powers of darkness, and he therefore went and reported the new happenings to Anshar, representative of the "host of heaven," and took counsel with him. When Anshar heard the matter he was greatly disturbed in mind and bit his lips, for he saw that the real difficulty was to find a worthy antagonist for Kingu and Tiamat. A gap in the text here prevents us from knowing exactly what Anshar said and did, but the context suggests that he summoned Anu, the Sky-god, to his assistance. Then, having given him certain instructions, he sent him on an embassy to Tiamat with the view of conciliating her. When Anu reached the place where she was he found her in a very wrathful state, and she was muttering angrily; Anu was so appalled at the sight of her that he turned and fled. It is impossible at present to explain this interlude, or to find any parallel to it in other ancient Oriental literature.


Click to enlarge
Shamash the Sun-god rising on the horizon, flames of fire ascending from his shoulder.  The two portals of the dawn, each surmounted by a lion, are being drawn open by attendant gods. From a Babylonian seal cylinder in the British Museum. [No. 89,110.]


When Anu reported his inability to deal with Tiamat, a council of the gods was called, and Ea induced his son, Marduk to be present. We next find Anshar in converse with the god Marduk, who offers to act as the champion of the gods and to fight Tiamat and her allies. Marduk being a form of the Sun-god, the greatest of all the powers of light, thus becomes naturally the protagonist of the gods, and the adversary of Tiamat and her powers of darkness. Then Anshar summoned a great council of the gods, who forthwith met in a place called "Upshukkinaku" , which may be described as the Babylonian Olympus. It was all-important for Marduk to appear at the council of the gods before he undertook his task, because it was necessary for him to be formally recognised by them as their champion, and he needed to be endowed by them with magical powers.  The primitive gods Lakhmu and Lakhamu, and the Igigi  (or ), who may be regarded as star-gods, were also summoned. A banquet was prepared, and the gods attended, and having met and kissed each other they sat down, and ate bread and drank hot and sweet sesame wine. The fumes of the wine confused their senses, but they continued to drink,  and at length "their spirits were exalted." They appointed Marduk to be their champion officially, and then they proceeded to invest him with the power that would cause every command he spake to be followed immediately by the effect which he intended it to produce. Next Marduk, with the view of testing the new power which had been given him, commanded a garment to disappear and it did so; and when he commanded it to reappear it did so.


Click to enlarge
Shamash the Sun-god setting (?) on the horizon.

 In his right he holds a tree (?), and in his left a ... with a serrated edge. Above the horizon is a goddess who holds in her left hand an ear of corn.  On the right is a god who seems to be setting free a bird from his right hand. Round him is a river with fish in it, and behind him is an attendant god; under his foot is a young bull. To the right of the goddess stand a hunting god, with a bow and lasso, and a lion. From the seal-cylinder of Adda ..., in the British Museum. About 2500 B.C. [No. 89,115.]

Then the gods saluted him as their king, and gave him the insignia of royalty, namely, the sceptre, the throne and the pala, , whatever that may be. And as they handed to him these things they commanded him to go and hack the body of Tiamat in pieces, and to scatter her blood to the winds. Thereupon Marduk began to arm himself for the fight. He took a bow, a spear, and a club; he filled his body full of fire and set the lightning before him. He took in his hands a net wherewith to catch Tiamat, and he placed the four winds near it, to prevent her from escaping from it when he had snared her. He created mighty winds and tempests to assist him, and grasped the thunderbolt in his hand; and then, mounting upon the Storm, which was drawn by four horses, he went out to meet and defeat Tiamat. It seems pretty certain that this description of the equipment of Marduk was taken over from a very ancient account of the Fight with Tiamat in which the hero was Enlil, i.e., the god of the air, or of the region which lies between heaven and hell. Marduk approached and looked upon the "Middle" or "Inside" or "Womb" of Tiamat   , and divined the plan of Kingu who had taken up his place therein. In the Seventh Tablet (l. 108) Marduk is said to have "entered into the middle of Tiamat," and because he did so he is called "Nibiru," i.e., "he who entered in," and the "seizer of the middle." What the words "middle of Tiamat" meant to the Babylonian we are not told, but it is clear that Marduk's entry into it was a signal mark of the triumph of the god. When Kingu from the "middle of Tiamat" saw Marduk arrayed in his terrible panoply of war, he was terrified and trembled, and staggered about and lost all control of his legs; and at the mere sight of the god all the other fiends and devils were smitten with fear and reduced to helplessness. Tiamat saw Marduk and began to revile him, and when he challenged her to battle she flew into a rage and attempted to overthrow him by reciting an incantation, thinking that her words of power would destroy his strength. Her spell had no effect on the god, who at once cast his net over her. At the same moment he made a gale of foul wind to blow on her face, and entering through her mouth it filled her body; whilst her body was distended he drove his spear into her, and Tiamat split asunder, and her womb fell out from it. Marduk leaped upon her body and looked on her followers as they attempted to escape. But the Four Winds which he had stationed round about Tiamat made all their efforts to flee of no effect. Marduk caught all the Eleven allies of Tiamat in his net, and he trampled upon them as they lay in it helpless. Marduk then took the TABLET OF DESTINIES from Kingu's breast, and sealed it with his seal and placed it on his own breast.

Then returning to the dead body of Tiamat he smashed her skull with his club and scattered her blood to the north wind, and as a reward for his destruction of their terrible foe, he received gifts and presents from the gods his fathers.

The text then goes on to say that Marduk "devised a cunning plan," i.e., he determined to carry out a series of works of creation. He split the body of Tiamat into two parts; out of one half he fashioned the dome of heaven, and out of the other he constructed the abode of Nudimmud, or Ea, which he placed over against Apsu, i.e., the deep. He also formulated regulations concerning the maintenance of the same. By this "cunning plan" Marduk deprived the powers of darkness of the opportunity of repeating their revolt with any chance of success. Having established the framework of his new heaven and earth Marduk, acting as the celestial architect, set to work to furnish them. In the first place he founded E-Sharra , or the mansion of heaven, and next he set apart and arranged proper places for the old gods of the three realms--Anu, Bel and Ea.


Click to enlarge
Tablet sculptured with a scene representing the worship of the Sun-god in the Temple of Sippar.

 The Sun-god is seated on a throne within a pavilion holding in one hand a disk and bar which (like  in Egyptian) may symbolize eternity. Above his head are the three symbols of the Moon, the Sun, and the planet Venus. On a stand in front of the pavilion rests the disk of the Sun, which is held in position by ropes grasped in the hands of two divine beings who are supported by the roof of the pavilion. The pavilion of the Sun-god stands on the Celestial Ocean, and the four small disks indicate either the four cardinal points or the tops of the pillars of the heavens. The three figures in front of the disk represent the high priest of Shamash, the king (Nabu-aplu-iddina, about 870 B.C.) and an attendant goddess.  [No. 91,000.]

The text of the Fifth Tablet, which would undoubtedly have supplied details as to Marduk's arrangement and regulations for the sun, the moon, the stars, and the Signs of the Zodiac in the heavens is wanting. The prominence of the celestial bodies in the history of creation is not to be wondered at, for the greater number of the religious beliefs of the Babylonians are grouped round them. Moreover, the science of astronomy had gone hand in hand with the superstition of astrology in Mesopotamia from time immemorial; and at a very early period the oldest gods of Babylonia were associated with the heavenly bodies. Thus the Annunaki and the Igigi, who are bodies of deified spirits, were identified with the stars of the northern and southern heaven, respectively. And all the primitive goddesses coalesced and were grouped to form the goddess Ishtar, who was identified with the Evening and Morning Star, or Venus. The Babylonians believed that the will of the gods was made known to men by the motions of the planets, and that careful observation of them would enable the skilled seer to recognize in the stars favourable and unfavourable portents. Such observations, treated from a magical point of view, formed a huge mass of literature which was being added to continually. From the nature of the case this literature enshrined a very considerable number of facts of pure astronomy, and as early as the period of the First Dynasty (about 2000 B.C.), the Babylonians were able to calculate astronomical events with considerable accuracy, and to reconcile the solar and  lunar years by the use of epagomenal months. They had by that time formulated the existence of the Zodiac, and fixed the "stations" of the moon, and the places of the planets with it; and they had distinguished between the planets and the fixed stars. In the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series (l. 2) the Signs of the Zodiac are called Lumashi  , but unfortunately no list of their names is given in the context. Now these are supplied by the little tablet (No. 77,821) of the Persian Period of which a reproduction is here given. It has been referred to and discussed by various scholars, and its importance is very great. The transcript of the text, which is now published (see p. 68) for the first time, will be acceptable to the students of the history of the Zodiac. Egyptian, Greek, Syriac and Arabic astrological and astronomical texts all associate with the Signs of the Zodiac twelve groups, each containing three stars, which are commonly known as the "Thirty-six Dekans."   The text of line 4 of the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series proves that the Babylonians were acquainted with these groups of stars, for we read that Marduk "set up for the twelve "months of the year three stars apiece." In the List of Signs of the Zodiac here given, it will be seen that each Sign is associated with a particular month.


Click to enlarge
Tablet inscribed with a list of the Signs of the Zodiac. [No. 77,821.]


At a later period, say about 500 B.C., the Babylonians made some of the gods regents of groups of stars, for Enlil ruled 33 stars, Anu 23 stars, and Ea 15 stars. They also possessed lists of the fixed stars, and drew up tables of the times of their heliacal risings. Such lists were probably based upon very ancient documents, and prove that the astral element in Babylonian religion was very considerable.

The accompanying illustration, which is reproduced from the Boundary Stone of Ritti-Marduk (Brit. Mus., No. 90,858), supplies much information about the symbols of the gods, and of the Signs of the Zodiac in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar I, King of Babylon, about 1120 B.C.. Thus in Register 1, we have the Star of Ishtar, the crescent of the Moon-god Sin, and the disk of Shamash the Sun-god. In Reg. 2 are three stands (?) surmounted by tiaras, which represent the gods Anu, Enlil (Bel) and Ea respectively. In Reg. 3 are three altars (?) or shrines (?) with a monster in Nos. 1 and 2. Over the first is the lance of Marduk, over the second the mason's square of Nabu, and over the third is the symbol of the goddess Ninkharsag, the Creatress. In Reg. 4 are a standard with an animal's head, a sign of Ea; a two-headed snake = the Twins; an unknown symbol with a horse's head, and a bird, representative of Shukamuna and Shumalia. In Reg. 5 are a seated figure of the goddess Gula and the Scorpion-man; and in Reg. 6 are forked lightning, symbol of Adad, above a bull, the Tortoise, symbol of Ea (?), the Scorpion of the goddess Ishkhara, and the Lamp of Nusku, the Fire-god. Down the left-hand side is the serpent-god representing the constellation of the Hydra.


Click to enlarge

The mutilated text of the Fifth Tablet makes it impossible to gain further details in connection with Marduk's work in arranging the heavens. We are, however, justified in assuming that the gaps in it contained statements about the grouping of the gods into triads. In royal historical inscriptions the kings often invoke the gods in threes, though they never call any one three a triad or trinity. It seems as if this arrangement of gods in threes was assumed to be of divine origin.  In the Fourth Tablet of Creation, one triad "Anu-Bel-Ea" is actually mentioned, and in the Fifth Tablet, another is indicated, "Sin-Shamash-Ishtar." In these triads Anu represents the sky or heaven, Bel or Enlil the region under the sky and including the earth, Ea the underworld, Sin the Moon, Shamash the Sun, and Ishtar the star Venus. When the universe was finally constituted several other great gods existed, e.g., Nusku, the Fire-god, Enurta,  a solar god, Nergal, the god of war and handicrafts, Nabu, the god of learning, Marduk of Babylon, the great national god of Babylonia, and Ashur, the great national god of Assyria.

When Marduk had arranged heaven and earth, and had established the gods in their places, the gods complained that their existence was barren, because they lacked worshippers at their shrines and offerings. To make a way out of this difficulty Marduk devised another "cunning plan," and announced his intention of creating man out of "blood and bone" DAMI ISSIMTUM . We have already quoted (see p. 11) the statement of Berosus that man was created out of the blood of a god mixed with earth; here, then, is the authority for his words. Marduk made known to Ea his intention of creating man, and Ea suggested that if one of the gods were sacrificed the remainder of them should be set free from service, presumably to Marduk.  Thereupon Marduk summons a council of the gods, and asks them to name the instigator of the fight in which he himself was the victor. In reply the gods named Kingu, Tiamat's second husband, whom they seized forthwith, and bound with fetters and carried to Ea, and then having "inflicted punishment upon him they let his blood." From Kingu's blood Ea fashioned mankind for the service of the gods.

Now among the texts which have been found on the tablets at Kal'at Sharkat is an account of the creation of man which differs from the version given in the Seven Tablets of Creation, but has two features in common with it. These two features are: (1) the council of the gods to discuss the creation of man; (2) the sacrifice which the gods had to make for the creation of man. In the variant version two (or more) gods are sacrificed, , Ilu Nagar Ilu Nagar, i.e., "the workmen gods," about whom nothing is known. The place of sacrifice is specified with some care, and it is said to be "Uzu-mu-a, or the bond of heaven and earth." Uzu-mu-a may be the bolt with which Marduk locked the two halves of Tiamat into place.

The Anunnaki, wishing to give an expression of their admiration for Marduk's heroism, decided to build him a shrine or temple. To this Marduk agreed, and chose Babylon, i.e., the "Gate of God," for its site. The Anunnaki themselves made the bricks, and they built the great temple of E-Sagila at Babylon. When the temple was finished, Marduk re-enacted the scene of creation; for, as he had formerly assigned to each god his place in the heavens, so now he assigned to each god his place in E-Sagila. The tablet ends with a long hymn of praise which the Anunnaki sang to Marduk, and describes the summoning of an assembly of the gods to proclaim ceremonially the great Fifty Names of this god. Thus the gods accepted the absolute supremacy of Marduk.

From the above it is clear that a dispute broke out between Marduk and the gods after he had created them, and the tradition of it has made its way into the religious literatures of the Hebrews, Syrians, Arabs, Copts and Abyssinians. The cuneiform texts tell us nothing about the cause of the dispute, but tradition generally ascribes it to the creation of man by the supreme God; and it is probable that all the apocryphal stories which describe the expulsion from heaven of the angels who contended against God under the leadership of Satan, or Satnael, or Iblis, are derived from a Babylonian original which has not yet been found. The "Fifty Names," or laudatory epithets mentioned above, find parallels in "Seventy-five Praises of Ra," sung by the Egyptians under the XIXth dynasty,  and in the "Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of Allah," which are held in such great esteem by the Muhammadans.  The respect in which the Fifty Names were held by the Babylonians is well shown by the work of the Epilogue on the Seventh Tablet, where it is said, "Let them be held in remembrance, let the first-comer (i.e., any and every man) proclaim them; let the wise and the understanding consider them together. Let the father repeat them and teach them to his son. Let them be in the ears of the herdsman and the shepherd."

The object of the writer of the Fifty Names was to show that Marduk was the "Lord of the gods," that the power, qualities and attributes of every god were enshrined in him, and that they all were merely forms of him. This fact is proved by the tablet (No. 47,406),  which contains a long list of gods who are equated with Marduk in his various forms.  The tendency in the later Babylonian religion to make Marduk the god above all gods has led many to think that monotheistic conceptions were already in existence among the Babylonians as early as the period of the First Dynasty, about 2000 B.C.  It is indisputable that Marduk obtained his pre-eminence in the Babylonian Pantheon at this early period. But some authorities deny the existence of monotheistic conceptions among the Babylonians at that time, and attribute Marduk's kingship of the gods to the influence of the political situation of the time, when Babylon first became the capital of the country, and mistress of the greater part of the known world.  Material for deciding this question is wanting, but it may be safely said that whatever monotheistic conceptions existed at that time, their acceptance was confined entirely to the priests and scribes. They certainly find no expression in the popular religious texts.

Both the source of the original form of the Legend of the Fight between Ea and Apsu, and Marduk and Tiamat, and the period of its composition are unknown, but there is no doubt that in one form or another it persisted in Mesopotamia for thousands of years. The apocryphal book of "Bel and the Dragon" shows that a form of the Legend was in existence among the Babylonian Jews long after the Captivity, and the narrative relating to it associates it with religious observances.  But there is no foundation whatsoever for the assertion which has so often been made that the Two Accounts of the Creation which are given in the early chapters in Genesis are derived from the Seven Tablets of Creation described in the preceding pages. It is true that there are many points of resemblance between the narratives in cuneiform and Hebrew, and these often illustrate each other, but the fundamental conceptions of the Babylonian and Hebrew accounts are essentially different.  In the former the earliest beings that existed were foul demons and devils, and the God of Creation only appears at a later period, but in the latter the conception of God is that of a Being Who existed in and from the beginning, Almighty and Alone, and the devils of chaos and evil are His servants.


Click to enlarge
Marduk destroying Tiamat, who is here represented in the form of a huge serpent.  From a seal-cylinder in the British Museum. [No. 89,589.]


Among the primitive Semitic peoples there were probably many versions of the story of the Creation; and the narrative told by the Seven Tablets is, no doubt, one of them in a comparatively modern form. It is quite clear that the Account of the Creation given in the Seven Tablets is derived from very ancient sources, and a considerable amount of literary evidence is now available for reconstructing the history of the Legend.  Thus in the Sumerian Account the narrative of the exploits of the hero called ZIUSUDU   begins with a description of the Creation and then goes on to describe a Flood, and there is little doubt that certain passages in this text are the originals of the Babylonian version as given in the Seven Tablets. In the Story of ZIUSUDU, however, there is no mention of any Dragon. And there is reason to think that the Legend of the Dragon had originally nothing whatever to do with the Creation, for the texts of fragments of two distinct Accounts  of the Creation describe a fight between a Dragon and some deity other than Marduk. In other Accounts the Dragon bears a strong resemblance to the Leviathan of Psalm civ, 26; Job xli, 1. In the one text he is said to be 50 biru  in length, and 1 biru in thickness; his mouth was 6 cubits (about 9 feet) wide, and the circumference of his ears 12 cubits (18 feet). He was slain by a god whose name is unknown, and the blood continued to flow from his body for three years, three months, one day and one night.  In the second text the Dragon is 60 biru long and his thickness is 30 biru; the diameter of each eye is half a biru, and his paws are 20 biru long. Thus there is every reason for believing that the Legend as it is given in the Seven Tablets is the work of some editor, who added the Legend of the Creation to the Legend of the Dragon in much the same way as the editor of the Gilgamish Legends included an account of the Deluge in his narrative of the exploits of his hero. All forms of the Legend of the Creation and of the Dragon were popular in Babylonia, and one of them achieved so much notoriety that the priest employed recited it as an incantation to charm away the toothache.

The literary form of the text of the Seven Tablets fulfils the requirements of Semitic poetry in general. The lines usually fall into couplets, the second line being the antiphon of the first, e.g.:--

  "When in the height heaven was not named,
 And the earth beneath did not yet bear a name."Each line, or verse, falls into two halves, and a well-marked caesura divides each line, or verse, into two equally accented parts. And the half-lines can be further resolved into two halves, each containing a single accented word or phrase. This is proved by tablet Spartali ii, 265A, where the scribe writes his lines and spaces the words in such a way as to show the subdivision of the lines. Thus we have:--

      	enuma   	| elish   	|| la nabu   	| shamamu 
    	shaplish   	| ammatum   	|| shuma   	| la zakrat 
 Here there is clearly a rhythm which resembles that found in the poems of the Syrians and Arabs, but there are many instances of its inconsistent use in several parts of the text.  Both rhyme and alliteration appear to be used occasionally.




     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

The Seven Tablets of Creation.--Translation.

  

FIRST TABLET. 

1. When the heavens above were yet unnamed, 

2. And the name of the earth beneath had not been recorded,

3. Apsu, the oldest of beings, their progenitor,

4. "Mummu" Tiamat, who bare each and all of them--

5. Their waters were merged into a single mass.

6. A field had not been measured, a marsh had not been searched out,

7. When of the gods none was shining,


Click to enlarge
Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text of the First Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 5419C.]


8. A name had not been recorded, a fate had not been fixed,

9. The gods came into being in the midst of them.

10. The god Lakhmu and the goddess Lakhamu were made to shine, they were named.

11. [Together] they increased in stature, they grew tall.

12. Anshar and Kishar came into being, and others besides them.

13. Long were the days, the years increased.

14. The god Anu, their son, the equal of his fathers, [was created].

15. The god Anshar made his eldest son Anu in his own image.

16. And the god Anu begat Nudimmud (Ea) the image of himself.

17. The god Nudimmud was the first among his fathers,

18. Endowed with understanding, he who thinketh deeply, the orator

19. Exceedingly mighty in strength above his father Anshar who begat him.

20. Unrivalled amongst the gods his brothers ...

21. The confraternity of the gods was established.

22. Tiamat was troubled and she ... their guardian.

23. Her belly was stirred up to its uttermost depths.

24. ...........

25. Apsu (the watery abyss) could not diminish their brawl

26. And Tiamat gathered herself together ...

27. She struck a blow, and their works ...

28. Their way was not good,...

29. At that time Apsu, the progenitor of the great gods,

30. Shouted out and summoned Mummu, the steward of his house, saying

31. "[O] Mummu, my steward, who makest my liver to rejoice,

32. "Come, to Tiamat we will go."

33. They went, they lay down [on a couch] facing Tiamat.

34. They took counsel together about the gods [their children].

35. Apsu took up his word and said,

36. To Tiamat, the holy (?) one, he made mention of a matter, [saying],

37. "... their way ...

38. "By day I find no peace, by night I have no rest.

39. "Verily I will make an end of their way, I will sweep them away,

40. "There shall be a sound of lamentation; lo, then we shall rest."

41. Tiamat on hearing this

42. Was stirred up to wrath and shrieked to her husband, 

43. ... unto sickness. She raged all alone,

44. She uttered a curse, and unto [Apsu, spake, saying,],

45. "Whatsoever we have made we will destroy.

46. "Verily their way shall be filled with disaster; lo, then we shall rest."

47. Mummu answered and gave counsel unto Apsu,

48. The counsel of Mummu was ... and dire [in respect of the gods]:

49. "Come, [do thou destroy] their way which is strong.

50. "Then verily by day thou shalt find peace, [and] by night thou shalt have rest."

51. Apsu heard him, his face grew bright,

52. For that they were planning evil against the gods, his children.

53. Mummu embraced his neck ...

54. He took him on his knee, he kissed him ...

55. They (i.e. Mummu and Apsu) planned the cursing in the assembly,

56. They repeated the curses to the gods their eldest sons.

57. The gods made answer ...

58. They began a lamentation...

59. [Endowed] with understanding, the prudent god, the exalted one,

60. Ea, who pondereth everything that is, searched out their [plan].

61. He brought it to nought (?), he made the form of everything to stand still.

62. He recited a cunning incantation, very powerful and holy.

[In the British Museum tablets lines 63-108 are either wanting entirely, or are too broken to translate, and the last 130 lines of the Berlin fragment are much mutilated. The fragments of text show that Ea waged war against Apsu and Mummu. Ea recited an incantation which caused Apsu to fall asleep. He then "loosed the joints" of Mummu, who in some way suffered, but he was strong enough to attack Ea when he turned to deal with Apsu. Ea overcame both his adversaries and divided Apsu into chambers and laid fetters upon him.  In one of the chambers of Apsu a god was begotten and born.  According to the Ninevite theologians Ea begat by his wife, who is not named, his son Marduk, and according to the theologians of the City of Ashur, Lakhmu begat by his wife Lakhamu a son who is no other than Anshar, or Ashur. A nurse was appointed to rear him, and he grew up a handsome child, to the great delight of his father. He had four ears and four eyes, a statement which suggests that he was two-headed, and resembled the Latin god Janus.]

109. They formed a band, and went forth to battle to help Tiamat.

110. They were exceedingly wroth, they made plots by day and by night without ceasing.

111. They offered battle, fuming and raging.

112. They set the battle in array, they uttered cries  of hostility,

113. Ummu-Khubur,  who fashioned all things,

114. Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents,

115. Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

116. She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood,

117. Grim, monstrous serpents, arrayed in terror,

118. She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted forms,

119. So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon them,

120. So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their attack,

121. She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

122. The Whirlwind, the ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

123. The mighty Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the horned Beast (Capricorn?)

124. They carried the Weapon  which spared not, nor flinched from the battle.

125. Most mighty were Tiamat's decrees, they could not be resisted,

126. Thus she caused eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into being,

127. Among the gods, her first-born son who had collected her company,

128. That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great one amongst them,

129. Leader of the hosts in battle, disposer of the troops,

130. Bearer of the firmly grasped weapon, attacker in the fight,

131. He who in the battle is the master of the weapon,

132. She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel]

133. [Saying], "I have uttered the incantation for thee. I have magnified thee in the assembly of the gods.

134. "I have filled his [sic, read 'thy'] hand with the sovereignty of the whole company of the gods.

135. "Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse,

136. "May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them."

137. She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his breast, [saying],

138. "As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, whatsoever goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established."

139. When Kingu was raised on high and had taken the heavens (literally, the god Anutum)

140. He fixed the destinies for the gods his sons,

141. Open your mouths, let the Fire-god  be quenched,

142. He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty, shall do great deeds.


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



 

SECOND TABLET.

1. Tiamat made solid that which she had moulded.

2. She bound the gods her children with [evil bonds].

3. Tiamat wrought wickedness to avenge Apsu.

4. When ... had harnessed his chariot he went to meet Ea,

5. Ea hearkened to his story,

6. He was sorely afflicted and abode in sorrow,

7. The days were long, his wrath died down.

8. He went his way to the dwelling of Anshar, his father,

9. He went into the presence of Anshar, the father who begat him,


Click to enlarge
Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text of the Second Tablet of the Creation Series. [No. 40,559.]


10. Whatsoever Tiamat had devised he repeated unto him,

11. Mother Tiamat who gave us birth hath sown these things.

12. She hath set in order her assembly, she rageth furiously,

13. All the gods have joined themselves to her.

14. They march by her side together with those whom ye have created.

15. They formed a band and went forth to battle to help Tiamat,

16. They were exceedingly wroth, they made plots by day and by night without ceasing,

17. They offered battle, fuming and raging,

18. They set the battle in array, they uttered cries of defiance.

19. Ummu-Khubur,  who fashioned all things,

20. Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents

21. Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

22. She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood,

23. Grim, monstrous serpents arrayed in terror.

24. She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted forms,

25. So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon them,

26. So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their attack.

27. She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

28. The Whirlwind, the ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

29. The Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the Horned Beast.

30. They carried the Weapon which spared not, nor flinched from the battle.

31. Most mighty were Tiamat's allies, they could not be resisted.

32. Thus she caused eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into being.

33. Among the gods, her first-born son who had collected her company,

34. That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great one amongst them.

35. Leader of the hosts in battle, disposer of the troops,

36. Bearer of the firmly-grasped weapon, attacker in the fight,

37. He who in the battle is the master of the weapon,

38. She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel]

39. [Saying], "I have recited the incantation for thee, I have magnified thee in the assembly of the gods,

40. "I have filled his [sic, read 'thy'] hand with the sovereignty of the whole company of the gods.

41. "Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse,

42. "May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them."

43. She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his breast, [saying]--

44. "As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, what goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established."

45. When Kingu was raised on high and had taken the heavens (literally, "the god Anutum")   46. He fixed the destinies for the gods his sons, [saying],

47. "Open your mouths, let the Fire-god be quenched,

48. "He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty shall do great deeds."

49. When Anshar heard that Tiamat was stirred mightily,

50. ... he bit his lips

51. ... his mind was not at peace

[Lines 52-54 too fragmentary for translation.]

An'shar then addresses Ea and says:--

55. "Thou hast slain Mummu and Apsu

56. "But Tiamat hath exalted Kingu--where is the one who can meet her?

[Lines 57 and 58 imperfect; lines 59-71 wanting.]

72. Anshar spake a word unto his son [Anu]:--

73. "... this is a difficulty, my warrior

74. "Whose power is exalted, whose attack cannot be stayed,

75. "Go and stand thou in the presence of Tiamat,

76. "That her spirit [be quieted], her heart softened.

77. "But should she not hearken unto thy word,

78. "Speak thou our word unto her so that she may be abated."

79. [Anu] heard the order of his father Anshar.

80. He took the straight road to her, and hastened on the way to her.

81. Anu drew nigh, he searched out the plan of Tiamat,

82. He could not prevail against her, he turned back.

Lines 83 and 84 contain Anu's report to Anshar, but they are too fragmentary to translate; line 85 reads:--

83. He (Anu) went to his father Anshar who begat him,

84. He spake unto him a word [concerning Tiamat]

85. [She laid] hands upon me that withered me up."

86. Anshar was distressed, he looked down upon the ground,

87. He turned pale; towards Ea he lifted up his head.

88. All the Anunnaki assembled at their posts.

89. They shut their mouths, they sat in lamentation.

90. [They said], "Nowhere is there a god who can attack Tiamat.

91. "He would not escape from Tiamat's presence with his life."

92. The Lord Anshar, the Father of the gods, [spake] majestically,

93. He lifted up his heart, he addressed the Anunnaki, [saying]

94. "He whose [strength] is mighty [shall be] an avenger for [us]

95. "The ... in the strife, Marduk the Hero."

96. Ea called Marduk to the place where he gave oracles,

97. Marduk came and according to his heart he addressed him,

98. [Saying], "O Marduk, hear the counsel and advice of thy father,

99. "Thou art the son who refresheth his heart,

100. "Draw nigh and enter the presence of An-shar,

101. "Stand there [with joy], when he looketh upon thee he will be at rest." 

113. The Lord [Marduk] rejoiced at the word of his father,

114. He approached and took up his place before Anshar.

115. Anshar looked upon him and his heart was filled with gladness.

116. He (i.e., Anshar) kissed his (Marduk's) lips, and his (Anshar's) fear was removed. [Then Marduk said]

117. "My father, let not the opening of thy mouth be closed, 

118. "I will go, I will make to take place all that is in thy heart.

119. "Anshar, let not the opening of thy mouth be closed,

120. "I will go, I will make to take place all that is in thy heart." [Anshar says to Marduk]

121. "What man is the cause of the battle which made thee go forth

122. "... Tiamat, who is a woman, pursueth thee with weapons.

123. "Rejoice our [hearts] and make us glad.

124. "Thou thyself shalt soon trample upon the neck of Tiamat,

125. "Rejoice our [hearts] and make us glad.

126. "Thou thyself shalt soon trample upon the neck of Tiamat.

127. "My son, who dost comprehend everything,

128. "Cast deep sleep upon Tiamat with thy holy spell.

129. "Betake thyself to thy march with all speed.

130. "..."

131. The Lord [Marduk] rejoiced at the word of his father,

132. His heart leaped with joy, to his father he spake, [saying],

133. "O Lord of the gods, Overlord of the Great Gods,

134. "Should I as your avenger

135. "Slay Tiamat and bestow life upon you,

136. "Summon a meeting, proclaim and magnify my position,

137. "Sit ye down together in friendly fashion in Upshukkinaku.

138. "Let me issue decrees by the opening of my mouth even as ye do.

139. "Whatsoever I bring to pass let it remain unaltered,

140. "That which my mouth uttereth shall never fail or be brought to nought."


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

THIRD TABLET.

1. Anshar opened his mouth, and

2. Unto the god Gaga (), his envoy, spake a word [saying],

3. "O Gaga, my envoy, who makest glad my liver.

4. "I will despatch thee unto the gods Lakhmu and Lakhamu.


Click to enlarge
Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text of the Third Tablet of the Creation Series. [No. 93,017.]


5. "Thou must know and understand the [intention of my heart]

6. "... are brought before thee

7. "... all the gods.

8. "Let them make a council, let them sit down to a feast

9. "Let them eat bread, let them heat sesame wine.

10. "Let them issue decrees to Marduk as their avenger.

11. "Get thee gone, Gaga, take up thy stand before them.

12. "All that I am now going to tell thee do thou repeat to them [saying],

13. "'[O ye gods], Anshar your son hath charged me,

14. "'The intention of his heart he hath made me to know in this wise:--

15. "'Mother Tiamat who gave us birth hath sown these things,

16. "'She hath set in order her assembly, she rageth furiously,

17. "'All the gods have joined themselves to her.

18. "'They march by her side together with those whom ye have created.

19. "'They formed a band and went forth to battle to help Tiamat.

20. "'They were exceedingly wroth, they made plots by day and by night without ceasing.

21. "'They offered battle, foaming and raging.

22. "'They set the battle in array, they uttered cries of defiance.

23. "'Ummu-Khubur, who formed all things,

24. "'Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents,

25. "'Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

26. "'She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood.

27. "'Grim, monstrous serpents arrayed in terror.

28. "'She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted forms,

29. "'So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon  them,

30. "'So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their attack.

31. "'She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

32. "'The Whirlwind, the Ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

33. "'The Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the Horned Beast.

34. "'They carried the Weapon which spared not, nor flinched from the battle,

35. "'Most mighty were Tiamat's allies, they could not be resisted.

36. "'Thus she caused Eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into being.

37. "'Among the gods, her first-born son who had collected her company,

38. "'That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great one among them,

39. "'Leader of the hosts in the battle, disposer of the troops,

40. "'Bearer of the firmly-grasped weapon, attacker in the fight.

41. "'He who in the battle is the master of the weapon,

42. "'She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel]

43. "'[Saying]: I have recited the incantation for thee, I have magnified thee in the assembly of the gods.

44. "''I have filled his (i.e., thy) hand with the sovereignty of the whole company of the gods.

45. "''Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse,

46. "''May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them."'

47. "She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his head [saying]:

48. "'As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, what goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established.'

49. "When Kingu was raised on high and had taken the heavens (literally, the god Anutum),

50. "He fixed the destinies for the gods, his sons, [saying]:

51. "'Open your mouths, let the Fire-god be quenched.

52. "'He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty shall do great deeds.'

53. "'I sent the god Anu, but he could not prevail against her.

54. "'Nudimmud (i.e., Ea) was afraid and turned back,

55. "'Marduk, your son, the envoy of the gods, hath set out.

56. "'His heart is stirred up to oppose Tiamat.

57. "'He opened his mouth, he spoke unto me [saying]:

58. "'Should I as your avenger

59. "'Slay Tiamat, and bestow life upon you,

60. "'Summon a meeting, proclaim and magnify my position,

61. "'Sit ye down together in friendly fashion in Up-shukkinaku.

62. "'Let me issue decrees by the opening of my mouth even as ye do,

63. "'Whatsoever I bring to pass let it remain unaltered.

64. "'That which my mouth uttereth shall neither fail nor be brought to nought.'

65. "Hasten ye therefore, issue your decrees speedily

66. "That he may go to meet your mighty enemy."

67. Gaga departed and hastened upon his way

68. To the god Lakhmu and the goddess Lakhamu, the gods his fathers, reverently

69. He did homage, and he kissed the ground at their feet.

70. He bowed down, stood up, and spake unto them [saying]:

71. "[O ye gods], Anshar your son hath charged me,

72. "The intention of his heart he hath made me to know in this wise:--

73. "Mother Tiamat who gave us birth hath sown these things,

74. "She hath set in order her assembly, she rageth furiously.

75. "All the gods have joined themselves to her.

76. "They march by her side together with those whom ye have created,

77. "They formed a band and went forth to battle to help Tiamat.

78. "They were exceedingly wroth, they made plans by day and by night without ceasing.

79. "They offered battle, foaming and raging.

80. "They set the battle in array, they uttered cries of defiance.

81. "Ummu-Khubur, who formed all things,

82. "Set up the unrivalled weapon, she spawned huge serpents,

83. "Sharp of tooth, pitiless in attack (?)

84. "She filled their bodies with venom instead of blood,

85. "Grim, monstrous serpents, arrayed in terror,

86. "She decked them with brightness, she fashioned them in exalted forms,

87. "So that fright and horror might overcome him that looked upon them,

88. "So that their bodies might rear up, and no man resist their attack.

89. "She set up the Viper, and the Snake, and the god Lakhamu,

90. "The Whirlwind, the Ravening Dog, the Scorpion-man,

91. "The Storm-wind, the Fish-man, the Horned Beast,

92. "They carried the Weapon which spared not, nor flinched from the battle.

93. "Most mighty were Tiamat's allies, they could not be resisted.

94. "Thus she caused Eleven [monsters] of this kind to come into being.

95. "Amongst the gods, her first-born son who had collected her company,

96. "That is to say, Kingu, she set on high, she made him the great one among them.

97. "Leader of the hosts in the battle, disposer of the troops,

98. "Bearer of the firmly-grasped weapon, attacker in the fight,

99. "He who in the battle is the master of the weapon

100. "She appointed, she made him to sit down in [goodly apparel],

101. "[Saying]: 'I have recited the incantation for thee, I have magnified thee in the assembly of the gods.

102. "'I have filled his (i.e., thy) hand with the sovereignty of the whole company of the gods.

103. "'Mayest thou be magnified, thou who art my only spouse.

104. "'May the Anunnaki make great thy renown over all of them.'

105. "She gave him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, she fastened it on his head [saying]:

106. "'As for thee, thy command shall not fall empty, what goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established.'

107. "When Kingu was raised on high, and had taken the heavens (Anutum)

108. "He fixed the destinies for the gods, his sons, [saying]:

109. "'Open your mouths, let the Fire-god be quenched,

110. "'He who is glorious in battle and is most mighty shall do great deeds.

111. "'I sent the god Anu, but he could not prevail against her.

112. "'Nudimmud (i.e., Ea) was afraid and turned back.

113. "'Marduk, your son, the envoy of the gods, hath set out.

114. "'His heart is stirred up to oppose Tiamat.

115. "'He opened his mouth, he spoke unto me, [saying]:

116. "'Should I as your avenger

117. "'Slay Tiamat, and bestow life upon you,

118. "'Summon a meeting (i.e., council), proclaim and magnify my position,

119. "'Sit down together in friendly fashion in Upshukkinaku,

120. "'Let me issue decrees by the opening of my mouth, even as ye do,

121. "'Whatsoever I bring to pass let it remain unaltered.

122. "'That which my mouth uttereth shall neither fail nor be brought to nought."'

123. "Hasten ye therefore, issue your decrees speedily

124. "That he may go to meet your mighty enemy."

125. The gods Lakhmu and Lakhamu heard, they wailed loudly,

126. All the Igigi gods wept bitterly [saying]:

127. "Who were [our] enemies until [the gods] were posted [in heaven]?

128. "We cannot comprehend the work of Tiamat."

129. They gathered themselves together, they went,

130. All the great gods, who issue decrees.

131. They entered in, they filled [the court] before Anshar.

132. Brother [god] kissed brother [god] in the [divine] assembly,

133. They held a meeting, they sat down to a feast,

134. They ate bread, they heated the [sesame wine],

135. The taste of the sweet drink confused their ...

136. They drank themselves drunk, their bodies were filled to overflowing,

137. They were overcome by heaviness [of drink], their livers (i.e., spirits) were exalted,

138. They issued the decree for Marduk as their avenger.


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



 

FOURTH TABLET.

1. They founded for him a majestic canopy,

2. He (i.e., Marduk) seated himself in the seat of kingship in the presence of his fathers [who said unto him]:

3. "Thou art honourable by reason of thy greatness among the gods.

4. "Thy position is unrivalled, the words thou utterest become Anum (i.e., as fixed as the sky).

5. "Thou art honourable by reason of thy greatness among the gods.

6. "Thy position is unrivalled, the words thou utterest become Anum (i.e., as fixed as the sky).

7. "From this day onward thy command shall not be abrogated.

8. "The power to exalt to heaven and to cast down to the earth both shall be in thy hand,

9. "That which goeth forth from thy mouth shall be established, against thy utterance shall be no appeal.

10. "No one among the gods shall overstep thy boundary,

11. "Worship, which is the object of the sanctuary of the gods,

12. "Whensoever they lack [it] shall be forthcoming in thy sanctuary,

13. "O god Marduk, thou art our avenger.

14. "We have given unto thee sovereignty over the whole creation,

15. "Thou shalt sit down, in the council thy word shall be exalted,

16. "Thy weapon shall never fall [from thy hands], it shall break the head of thy foe.

17. "Lord, whosoever putteth his trust in thee, spare thou his life,

18. "And the god who deviseth evil, pour thou out his soul."

19. Then a cloak (literally, one cloak) was set in their midst,

20. They addressed the god Marduk their first-born [saying]:

21. "Thou, Lord, shalt hold the foremost position among the gods.

22. "Decree thou the throwing down  and the building up,  and it shall come to pass.

23. "Speak but the word, and the cloak shall disappear,

24. "Speak a second time and the cloak shall return uninjured."

25. Marduk spoke the word, the cloak disappeared,

26. He spoke a second time, the cloak reappeared.

27. When the gods his fathers saw the issue of the utterance of his mouth

28. They rejoiced and adored [him, saying], "Marduk is King."

29. They conferred upon him the sceptre, the throne, and the symbol of royalty (?) 

30. They gave him the unrivalled weapon, the destroyer of the enemy [saying]:

31. "Go, cut off the life of Tiamat.

32. "Let the wind carry her blood into the depth [under the earth]."

33. The gods, his fathers, issued the decree for the god Bel.

34. They set him on the road which leadeth to peace and adoration.

35. He strung [his] bow, he set ready his weapon [in the stand],

36. He slung his spear, he attached it to [his belly],

37. He raised the club, he grasped it in his right hand.

38. The bow and the quiver he hung at his side. 

39. He set the lightning in front of him.

40. His body was filled with a glancing flame of fire.

41. He made a net wherewith to enclose Tiamat.

42. He made the four winds to take up their position so that no part of her might escape,


Click to enlarge
Portion of a tablet inscribed in Babylonian with a text of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series. [No. 93,016.]


43. The South wind, the North wind, the East wind, the West wind.

44. He held the net close to his side, the gift of his father Anu,

45. He created the "foul" wind, the storm, the parching blast,

46. The wind of "four," the wind of "seven," the typhoon, the wind incomparable


Click to enlarge
Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 3437.]


47. He despatched the seven winds which he had made,

48. To make turbid the inward parts of Tiamat; they followed in his train.

49. The Lord raised up the wind storm, his mighty weapon.

50. He went up into his chariot, the unequalled and terrible tempest. 

51. He equipped it, he yoked thereto a team of four horses,

52. Pawing the ground, champing, foaming [eager to] fly,

53. ... [the odour] of their teeth bore foetidness,

54. They were skilled [in biting], they were trained to trample under foot.

[Lines 55-57 too fragmentary to translate; they continue the description of Marduk's equipment.]

58. His brightness streamed forth, his head was crowned [thereby].

59. He took a direct path, he hastened on his journey.

60. He set his face towards the place of Tiamat, who was ...

61. On his lips ... he restrained

62. ... his hand grasped.

63. At that moment the gods were gazing upon him with fixed intensity,

64. The gods, his fathers, gazed upon him, they gazed upon him.

65. The Lord approached, he looked upon the middle of Tiamat,

66. He searched out the plan of Kingu, her husband.

67. Marduk looked, Kingu staggered in his gait,

68. His will was destroyed, his motion was paralysed.

69. And the gods his helpers who were marching by his side

70. Saw the [collapse of] their chief and their sight was troubled.

71. Tiamat [shrieked but] did not turn her head.

72. With lips full of [rebellious words] she maintained her stubbornness

73. [Saying], "... that thou hast come as the Lord of the gods, [forsooth],

74. "They have appointed thee in the place which should be theirs."

75. The Lord raised up the wind-storm, his mighty weapon,

76. [Against] Tiamat, who was furious (?), he sent it, [saying]:

77. "[Thou hast made thyself] mighty, thou art puffed upon high,

78. "Thy heart [hath stirred thee up] to invoke battle

79. "... their fathers ...

80. "...

81. "[Thou hast exalted Kingu to be [thy] husband,

82. "[Thou hast made him to usurp] the attributes of Anu

83. "... thou hast planned evil.

84. "[Against] the gods, my fathers, thou hast wrought evil.

85. "Let now thy troops gird themselves up, let them bind on their weapons.

86. "Stand up! Thou and I, let us to the fight!"

87. On hearing these words Tiamat

88. Became like a mad thing, her senses became distraught,

89. Tiamat uttered shrill cries again and again.

90. That on which she stood split in twain at the words,

91. She recited an incantation, she pronounced her spell.

92. The gods of battle demanded their weapons. 

93. Tiamat and Marduk, the envoy of the gods, roused themselves,

94. They advanced to fight each other, they drew nigh in battle.

95. The Lord cast his net and made it to enclose her,

96. The evil wind that had its place behind him he let out in her face.

97. Tiamat opened her mouth to its greatest extent,

98. Marduk made the evil wind to enter [it] whilst her lips were unclosed.

99. The raging winds filled out her belly,

100. Her heart was gripped, she opened wide her mouth [panting].

101. Marduk grasped the spear, he split up her belly,

102. He clave open her bowels, he pierced [her] heart,

103. He brought her to nought, he destroyed her life.

104. He cast down her carcase, he took up his stand upon it,

105. After Marduk had slain Tiamat the chief,

106. Her host was scattered, her levies became fugitive,

107. And the gods, her allies, who had marched at her side,

108. Quaked with terror, and broke and ran

109. And betook themselves to flight to save their lives.

110. But they found themselves hemmed in, they could not escape,

111. Marduk tied them up, he smashed their weapons.

112. They were cast into the net, and they were caught in the snare,

113. The ... of the world they filled with [their] cries of grief.

114. They received [Marduk's] chastisement, they were confined in restraint,

115. And [on] the Eleven Creatures which Tiamat had filled with awfulness,

116. The company of the devils that marched at her ...

117. He threw fetters, he ... their sides.

118. They and their resistance he trod under his feet.

119. The god Kingu who had been magnified over them

120. He crushed, he esteemed him [as little worth] as the god Dugga, (as a dead god?).

121. Marduk took from him the TABLET OF DESTINIES, which should never have been his,

122. He sealed it with a seal  and fastened it on his breast

123. After he had crushed and overthrown his enemies,

124. He made the haughty enemy to be like the dust underfoot.

125. He established completely Anshar's victory over the enemy,

126. The valiant Marduk achieved the object of Nudimmud (Ea), 

127. He imposed strict restraint on the gods whom he had made captive.

128. He turned back to Tiamat whom he had defeated,

129. The Lord [Marduk] trampled on the rump of Tiamat,

130. With his unsparing club he clave her skull.

131. He slit open the channels (i.e., arteries) of her blood.

132. He caused the North Wind to carry it away to a place underground.

133. His fathers (i.e., the gods) looked on, they rejoiced, they were glad.

134. They brought unto him offerings of triumph and peace,

135. The Lord [Marduk] paused, he examined Tiamat's carcase.

136. He separated flesh [from] hair,  he worked cunningly.

137. He slit Tiamat open like a flat (?) fish [cut into] two pieces,

138. The one half he raised up and shaded the heavens therewith,

139. He pulled the bolt, he posted a guard,

140. He ordered them not to let her water escape.

141. He crossed heaven, he contemplated the regions thereof.

142. He betook himself to the abode of Nudimmud (Ea) that is opposite to the Deep (Apsu),

143. The Lord Marduk measured the dimensions of the Deep,

144. He founded E-Sharra, a place like unto it,

145. The abode E-Sharra, which he made to be heaven.

146. He made the-gods Anu, Bel and Ea to inhabit their [own] cities.


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



 

FIFTH TABLET.

1. He appointed the Stations for the great gods,

2. He set in heaven the Stars of the Zodiac which are their likenesses.

3. He fixed the year, he appointed the limits thereof.

4. He set up for the twelve months three stars apiece.

5. According to the day of the year he ... figures.

6. He founded the Station of Nibir (Jupiter) to settle their boundaries,

7. That none might exceed or fall short.

8. He set the Station of Bel and Ea thereby.

9. He opened great gates under shelter on both sides.

10. He made a strong corridor on the left and on the right.

11. He fixed the zenith in the heavenly vault (?)

12. He gave the god Nannar (i.e., the Moon-god) his brightness and committed the night to his care.


Click to enlarge
Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text of the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 3567.]


13. He set him for the government of the night, to determine the day

14. Monthly, without fail, he set him in a crown (i.e., disk) [saying]:

15. "At the beginning of the month when thou risest over the land,

16. "Make [thy] horns to project to limit six days [of the month]

17. "On the seventh day make thyself like a crown.

18. "On the fourteenth day ...

[Lines 19-26 dealt further with Marduk's instructions to the Moon-god, but are too fragmentary to translate. After line 26 comes a break in the text of 40 lines; lines 66-74 are too fragmentary to translate, but they seem to have described further acts of Creation.]

75. The gods, his (Marduk's) fathers, looked on the net which he had made,

76. They observed how craftily the bow had been constructed,

77. They extolled the work which he had done.

78. [Then] the god Anu lifted up [the bow] in the company of the gods,   79. He kissed the bow [saying]: "That ..."

80. He proclaimed [the names] of the bow to be as follows:--

81. "Verily, the first is 'Long Wood,' the second is ...

82. "Its third name is 'Bow Star in heaven' ..."

83. He fixed a station for it ...

[Of the remaining 57 lines of this tablet only fragments of 17 lines are preserved, and these yield no connected sense.]


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



 

SIXTH TABLET.

1. On hearing the words of the gods, the heart of Marduk moved him to carry out the works of a craftsman.

2. He opened his mouth, he spake to Ea that which he had planned in his heart, he gave counsel [saying]:

3. "I will solidify blood, I will form bone.

4. "I will set up man, 'Man' [shall be] his name.

5. "I will create the man 'Man.'

6. "The service of the gods shall be established, and I will set them (i.e., the gods) free.

7. "I will make twofold the ways of the gods, and I will beautify [them].

8. "They are [now] grouped together in one place, but they shall be partitioned in two." 

9. Ea answered and spake a word unto him

10. For the consolation of the gods  he repeated unto him a word of counsel [saying]:

11. "Let one brother [god of their number] be given, let him suffer destruction that men may be fashioned.

12. "Let the great gods be assembled, let this [chosen] one be given in order that they (i.e., the other gods) may be established."

13. Marduk assembled the great gods, [he came near] graciously, he issued a decree,

14. He opened his mouth, he addressed the gods; the King spake a word unto the Anunnaki [saying]:

15. "Verily, that which I spake unto you aforetime was true.

16. "[This time also] I speak truth. [Some there were who] opposed me. 

17. "Who was it that created the strife,

18. "Who caused Tiamat to revolt, to join battle with me?

19. "Let him who created the strife be given [as sacrifice],

20. "I will cause the axe in the act of sinking to do away his sin."

21. The great gods, the Igigi, answered him,

22. Unto the King of the gods of heaven and of earth, the Prince of the gods, their lord [they said]:

23. "[It was] Kingu who created the strife,

24. "Who made Tiamat to revolt, to join battle [with thee]."

25. They bound him in fetters [they brought] him before Ea, they inflicted punishment on him, they let his blood,

26. From his blood he (i.e., Ea) fashioned mankind for the service of the gods, and he set the gods free.

27. After Ea had fashioned man he ... laid service upon him.

28. [For] that work, which pleased him not, man was chosen: Marduk ...

29. Marduk, the King of the gods, divided ... he set the Anunnaki up on high.

30. He laid down for Anu a decree that protected [his] heart ... as a guard.

31. He made twofold the ways on the earth [and in the heavens?]   32. By decrees ...

33. The Anunnaki who ...

34. The Anunnaki ...

35. They spake unto Marduk, their lord, [saying]:

36. "O thou Moon-god  (Nannaru), who hast established our splendour,

37. "What benefit have we conferred upon thee?

38. "Come, let us make a shrine, whose name shall be renowned;

39. "Come [at] night, our time of festival, let us take our ease therein,

40. "Come, the staff shall rule ...

41. "On the day that we reach [thereto] we will take our ease therein."

42. On hearing this Marduk ...

43. The features of his face [shone like] the day exceedingly.

44. [He said),  "Like unto ... Babylon, the construction whereof ye desire

45. "I will make ... a city, I will fashion a splendid shrine."

46. The Anunnaki worked the mould [for making bricks], their bricks were ...

47. In the second year [the shrine was as high as] a hill, and the summit of E-Sagila reached the [celestial] Ocean.

48. They made the ziggurat  [to reach] the celestial Ocean; unto Marduk, Enlil, Ea [shrines] they appointed,

49. It (i.e., the ziggurat) stood before them majestically: at the bottom and [at the top] they observed its two horns. 

50. After the Anunnaki had finished the construction of E-Sagila, and had completed the making of their shrines,

51. They gathered together from the ... of the Ocean (Apsu). In BAR-MAH, the abode which they had made,

52. He (i.e., Marduk) made the gods his fathers to take their seats ... [saying]: "This Babylon shall be your abode.

53. "No mighty one [shall destroy] his house, the great gods shall dwell therein.

[After line 53 the middle portions of several lines of text are obliterated, but from what remains of it it is clear that the gods partook of a meal of consecration of the shrine of E-Sagila, and then proceeded to issue decrees. Next Marduk assigns seats to the Seven Gods of Fate and to Enlil and Anu, and then he lays up in E-Sagila the famous bow which he bore during his fight against Tiamat. When the text again becomes connected we find the gods singing a hymn of praise to Marduk.]

94. "Whatever is ... those gods and goddesses shall bear(?)

95. "They shall never forget, they shall cleave to the god (?)

96. "... they shall make bright, they shall make shrines.

97. "Verily, the decision (concerning) the Black-headed [belongeth to] the gods

98. "... all our names have they called, he (Marduk) is most holy (elli)

99. "... they proclaimed and venerated (?) his names.

100. "His ... is exceedingly bright, his work is ...

101. "Marduk, whose father Anu proclaimed [his name] from his birth,

102. "Who hath set the day at his door ... his going,

103. "By whose help the storm wind was bound ...

104. "Delivered the gods his fathers in the time of trouble.

105. "Verily, the gods have proclaimed his sonship.

106. "In his bright light let them walk for ever.

107. "[On] men whom he hath formed, the created things fashioned by his fingers

108. "He hath imposed the service of the gods, and them he hath set free

109. "...

110. "... they looked at him,

111. "[He is] the far-seeing (maruku) god, verily ...

112. "Who hath made glad the hearts of the Anunnaki, who hath made them to ...

113. "The god Marudukku ()-- verily, he is the object of trust of his country ...

114. "Let men praise him ...

115. "The 'King of the Protecting Heart,' (?) , hath arisen and hath [bound] the Serpent ...

116. "Broad is his heart, mighty [his] belly.

117. "King of the gods of heaven and of earth, whose name our company hath proclaimed,

118. "We will fulfil (?) the utterance of his mouth. Over his fathers the gods,

119. "Yea, [over] the gods of heaven and earth, all of them,

120. "His kingship [we will exalt].

121. "[We] will look unto the King of all the heaven and the earth at night when the place of all the gods is darkness (literally sadness).

122. "He hath assigned our dwelling in heaven and in earth in the time of trouble,

123. "He hath allotted stations to the Igigi and the Anunnaki.

124. "The gods themselves are magnified by his name; may he direct their sanctuaries.

125. "ASAR-LU-DUG, , is his name by which his father Anu hath named him.

126. "Verily, he is the light of the gods, the mighty ...

127. "Who ... all the parts of heaven and of the land

128. "By a mighty combat he saved our dwelling in the time of trouble.

129. "ASAR-LU-DUG, the god who made him (i.e. man) to live, did the god ... call him in the second place

130. "[And] the gods who had been formed, whom he fashioned as though [they were] his offspring.

131. "He is the Lord who hath made all the gods to live by his holy mouth."

[Lines 132-139 are too fragmentary to translate, but it is clear from the text that remains that Lakhmu, and Lakhamu, and Anshar all proclaimed the names of Marduk. When the text again becomes connected Marduk has just been addressing the gods.]

140. In Up-shukkinaku  he appointed their council for them.

141. [They said]:--"Of [our] son, the Hero, our Avenger,

142. "We will exalt the name by our speech."

143. They sat down and in their assembly they proclaimed his rank.

144. Every one of them pronounced his name in the sanctuary.


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



 

SEVENTH TABLET.

1. O ASARI,--giver of plantations, appointer of sowing time,

2. Who dost make grain and fibrous plants, who makest garden herbs to spring up.

3. O ASARU-ALIM--who art weighty in the council-chamber, who art fertile in counsel,

4. To whom the gods pay worship (?) reverent ...

5. O ASARU-ALIM-NUNA--the adored light of the Father who begat him,

6. Who makest straight the direction of Anu, Bel, [and Ea]. 

7. He is their patron who fixed [their] ...

8. Whose drink is abundance, who goeth forth ...

9. O TUTU--creator of their new life,

10. Supplier of their wants, that they may be satisfied [or, glad],

11. Let but [Tutu] recite an incantation, the gods shall be at rest;

12. Let but [the gods] attack him (i.e., Tutu) in wrath, he shall resist them successfully;

13. Let him be raised up on a high throne in the assembly of the gods....

14. None among the gods is like unto him.

15. O god TUTU, who art the god ZI-UKKINA, life of the host of the gods,

16. Who stablished the shining heavens for the gods,

17. He founded their paths, he fixed [their courses].

18. Never shall his deeds be forgotten among men.

19. O god TUTU, who art ZI-AZAG, was the third name they gave him--holder (i.e., possessor) of holiness,

20. God of the favourable wind, lord of adoration and grace,

21. Creator of fulness and abundance, stablisher of plenty,

22. Who turneth that which is little into that which is much.

23. In sore straits we have felt his favouring breeze.

24. Let them (the gods) declare, let them magnify, let them sing his praises.

25. O TUTU, who art the god AGA-AZAG in the fourth place--let men exult.

26. Lord of the holy incantation, who maketh the dead to live,

27. He felt compassion for the gods who were in captivity.

28. He riveted on the gods his enemies the yoke which had been resting on them.

29. In mercy towards them he created mankind,

30. The Merciful One in whose power it is to give life.

31. His words shall endure for ever, they shall never be forgotten,

32. In the mouth of the Black-headed  whom his hands have made.

33. O God TUTU, who art the god MU-AZAG in the fifth place--let their mouth recite a holy incantation [to him],

34. Who by his own holy incantation hath destroyed all the evil ones.


Click to enlarge
Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 8522.]


35. O god SHAZU, the wise heart of the gods, who searchest the inward parts of the belly,

36. Who dost not permit the worker of evil to go forth by his side,

37. Establisher of the company of the gods ... their hearts.

38. Reducer of the disobedient ...

[Lines 39-106 are wanting. The positions of the fragmentary lines supplied by duplicate fragments are uncertain; in any case they give no connected sense.]

107. Verily, he holdeth the beginning and the end of them,  verily ...

108. Saying, "He who entered into the middle of Tiamat resteth not;

109. "His name shall be 'Nibiru' the seizer of the middle.

110. "He shall set the courses of the stars of the heavens,

111. "He shall herd together the whole company of the gods like sheep.

112. "He shall [ever] take Tiamat captive, he shall slit up her treasure (variant, life), he shall disembowel her." 

113. Among the men who are to come after a lapse of time,

114. Let [these words] be heard without ceasing, may they reign to all eternity,

115. Because he made the [heavenly] places and moulded the stable [earth].

116. Father Bel proclaimed his name, "Lord of the Lands."

117. All the Igigi repeated the title.

118. Ea heard and his liver rejoiced,

119. Saying, "He whose title hath rejoiced his fathers

120. "Shall be even as I am; his name shall be Ea.

121. "He shall dispose of all the magical benefits of my rites,

122. "He shall make to have effect my instructions."

123. By the title of "Fifty times" the great gods

124. Proclaimed his names fifty times, they magnified his going.


     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

EPILOGUE.

125. Let the first comer take them and repeat them;

126. Let the wise man and the learned man meditate upon all of them;

127. The father shall repeat them to his son that he may lay hold upon them.

128. Let them (i.e., the names) open the ears of the shepherd and the herdsman. 

129. Let [man] rejoice in Marduk, the Lord of the Gods,

130. That his land may be fertile and he himself abide in security.

131. His word is true, his command altereth not.

132. No god hath ever brought to the ground that which issueth from his mouth.

133. They (i.e., the gods) treated him with contempt, he turned not his back [in flight],

134. No god could resist his wrath at its height.

135. His heart is large, his bowels of mercy are great.

136. Of sin and wickedness before him ...

137. The first comer utters his complaint of humiliation before him.

[Lines 138-142 are too fragmentary to translate.]




     
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

Notes.

1. There are in the British Museum several fragments of Neo-Babylonian copies of the Seven Tablets of Creation, the exact position of which is at present uncertain. One of these (S. 2013) is of some importance because it speaks of one object which was in the "upper Tiamat" , and of another which was in the "lower Tiamat" . This shows that the Babylonians thought that one half of the body of Tiamat, which was split up by Marduk, was made into the celestial ocean, and the other half into the terrestrial ocean, in other words, into "the waters that were above" and "the waters that were beneath" the firmament respectively.

2. When George Smith published his Chaldean Account of Genesis in 1876, he was of opinion that the Creation Tablets in the British Museum contained descriptions of the Temptation of Eve by the serpent and of the building and overthrow of the Tower of Babel.  The description of Paradise in Genesis ii seems to show traces of Babylonian influence, and the cylinder seal, Brit. Mus. No. 89,326, was thought to be proof that a Babylonian legend of the Temptation existed. In fact, George Smith printed a copy of the seal in his book (p. 91). But it is now known that the tablet which was believed to refer to man's eating of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge (K. 3, 473 + 79-7-8, 296 + R. 615) describes the banquet of the gods to which they invited Marduk. In like manner the text on K. 3657, which Smith thought referred to the Tower of Babel, is now known to contain no mention of a tower or building of any sort. It was also thought by him that K. 3364 contained a set of instructions which God gave to Adam and Eve after their creation, but it is now known and admitted by all Assyriologists that the text on this tablet contains moral precepts and has nothing to do with the Creation Series. Enquiries are from time to time made at the Museum for tablets which deal with the Temptation of Eve, and the destruction of the Tower of Babel, and the Divine commands to Adam and Eve; it is perhaps not superfluous to say that nothing of the kind exists.

List of the name of the Stars or Signs of the Zodiac, with a List Showing the Month that was Associated with Each Star in the Persian Period.

BY SIDNEY SMITH, M.A., and C.J. GADD, M.A., Assistants in the Department.


No. 77,821 (85-4-30, 15).

      	   	TRANSLITERATION.   	TRANSLATION. 
    	1   	Nisannu   	(kakkab) (amel) Agru....   	The Labourer. 
    	2   	Airu   	"    Kakkab u (kakkab) Alap shame   	The Star and the Bull of heaven. 
    	3   	Simanu   	"    Re'u kinu shame u (kakkab) tu'ame rabuti   	The faithful shepherd of heaven and the Great Twins. 
    	4   	Duuzu   	"    AL.LUL. (shittu) ...   	The Tortoise. 
    	5   	Abu   	"    Kalbu rabu ....   	Great Dog (Lion). 
    	6   	Ululu   	"    Shiru ....   	Virgin with ear of corn. 
    	7   	Tashritum   	"    Zibanitum ....   	.... 
    	8   	Arah###804### shamna   	"    Akrabu ....   	The Scorpion. 
    	9   	Kislimu   	"    PA.BIL.SAG ....   	Enurta (the god). 
    	10   	Tebetum   	"    SUH###804###UR.MASH ....   	The Goat-fish. 
    	11   	Shabatu   	"    Gula ....   	The Great Star 
    	12   	Addaru   	"    DIL.GAN.u rikis nuni   	The star ... and the Band of Fishes. 
 I have been assisted in the preparation of this monograph by Mr. Sidney Smith, M.A., Assistant in the Department.

E.A. WALLIS BUDGE.

DEPARTMENT OF EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANTIQUITIES, BRITISH MUSEUM. June 1, 1921.


    
The Babylonian Legends of Creation, by E. A. Wallis Budge, [1921], at sacred-texts.com



  

Footnotes.













































































































Footnotes

^1 See the Transactions, Vol. IV, Plates I-VI, London, 1876.

^2 See the duplicate fragments described in the Index to Ebeling, Keilschrifttexte aus Assur, Leipzig, 1919 fol.

^3 The text is found on a tablet from Abu Habbah, Brit. Mus., No. 93,014 (82-5-22, 1048).

^4 APSU. It is doubtful if APSU here really means the great abyss of waters from out of which the world was called. It was, more probably, a ceremonial object used in the cult of the god, something like the great basin, or "sea," in the court of the temple of King Solomon, mentioned in I Kings, vii, 23; 2 Kings, xxv, 13, etc.

^5 This is a name under which Marduk was worshipped at Eridu.

^6 The god whose head was taken off was not Belus, as is commonly thought, but the god who the cuneiform texts tell us was called "Kingu."

^7   The god whose head was taken off was not Belus, as is commonly thought, but the god who the cuneiform texts tell us was called "Kingu."

^8 Muallidat gimrishun .

^9 It is probable that the idea of this Tablet is perpetuated in the "Preserved Tablet" of the Kur'an (Surah x, 62), on which the destiny of every man was written at or before the creation of the world. Nothing that is written (maktub) there can be erased, or altered, or fail to take effect.

^10  (Cun. Texts, Part XXIV, Plate 44, l. 142).

^11	
 	
  Or perhaps the "belly of Tiamat." The Egyptians distinguished a portion of the heavens by the name of "Khat Nut," "the belly of Nut,"  and two drawings of it are extant.  The first shows an oval object rimmed with stars and the other a pear-shaped object, with a god inside it. (See Brugsch, Inschriften (Astronomische) Leipzig, 1883, p, 146.)

^12 This is the original of the Syriac word for the Signs of the Zodiac malwashe (plural of malwasha). The Syrians added to it an m, thus giving it a participial form.

^13 D###789######787######789### also called ###800######801######802######809######800###, ###5473######801######789######802######800######789######793###, ###806######789######802### and ###5392######800######789######800######789######793###.  They were well known to the Egyptians, who, as early as the fourteenth century B.C., possessed a full list of them.  See Lepsius, Chronologie, Berlin, 1848, and Brugsch, Thesaurus (Astronomische und Astrologische Inschriften), Leipzig, 1883.

^14 Formerly known as Ninip.

^15 See Naville, La Litanie du Soleil, Paris, 1875, Plate ii ff.

^16 See Kur'an, Surah vii, v. 179. That there were ninety-nine Beautiful Names of God rests on the authority of Abu Hurairah, who repeats the statement as made by Muhammad the Prophet.

^17 Published by King, Cuneiform Texts, Part XXV, Plate 50.

^18 Thus he is equated with En-Urta, Nergal, En-lil, Nabu, Sin, Shamash, Adad, etc.

^19   See Poebel, Historical Texts, No. 1.

^20 See King, Cuneiform Texts, Part XIII, Plate 33; and Ebellog, Assurtexte, I, No. 6.

^21 The biru was the distance which a man would travel in two hours.

^22 This translation is made from transcripts of the British Museum fragments (Cuneiform Texts, Part XIII), and transcripts of the Berlin fragments (Ebeling, Keilschrifttexte aus Assur, Nos. 117, 118).

^23 The name of an object was the object itself, and it was believed that nothing could exist apart from its name.

^24 Tiamat's wrath was roused by Apsu, who had proposed to slay the gods, her children. She took no part in the first struggle of Apsu and Mummu against the gods, and only engaged in active hostilities to avenge Apsu.

^25 Literally, "they excited themselves to hostility."

^26 A title of Tiamat.

^27 These nine monsters with the Weapon (Thunderbolt?) and Kingu form the Eleven Allies of Tiamat, and it is clear that she and her Allies represent the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac. When Marduk destroyed Tiamat and her associates, he found it necessary to fix the stars, the images of the great gods, in their places, as the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac. (See the Fifth Tablet of Creation, p. 55.)

^28 The god here alluded to is Mardak, who, in one aspect, is a fire-god; see Tablet IV, II. 39, 40.

^29 See above.

^30 Lines 83, 84, 88-101 are translated from the British Museum fragments and the Berlin fragments; lines 88-101 contain the equivalent to the whole gap in the British Museum tablet.

^31 i.e., "let what thou sayest prevail."

^32 I.e., the destruction of Tiamat.

^33 I.e., the establishing of a new creation to take the place of the old.

^34 The meaning of  pal-a is unknown.

^35 This equipment of the charioteer is shown on the bas-reliefs.

^36 Compare Psalms xviii, 7-15; civ, i ff.

^37 I.e., the gods were impatient to begin the fight.

^38 By impressing his seal on the Tablet Marduk proved his ownership of the Tablet, and made his claim to it legal.

^39 This is an oblique way of saying that Marduk succeeded where Ea failed.

^40 The word is kupu, i.e., "reed" or "sedge." It is possible that Marduk skinned Tiamat.

^41 Reading, ishtenish lu kuppudu-ma ana shina lu uzizu.

^42 I.e., "to cause the gods to be content,"

^43 Literally "they (indefinite) opposed me."

^44 See Cuneiform Texts, Part XXIV, Plate 50, where it is said that the god Sin is "Marduk, who maketh bright the night."

^45 Lines 44 and 45 announce Marduk's determination to build Babylon.

^46 This is the word commonly used for "temple-tower." The famous ziggurat of E-Sagila here mentioned was built in Seven Stages or Steps, each probably having its own distinctive colour. It was destroyed probably soon after the capture of Babylon by Cyrus (539 B.C.) and when Alexander the Great reached Babylon he found it ruins.

^47 This is the first known mention of the "horns" of a ziggurat, and the exact meaning of the word is doubtful.

^48 From this text it seems clear that Up-shukkinaku was the name of a chamber in the temple of E-Sagila. This name probably means the "chamber of the shakkanaku," i.e., the chamber in which the governor of the city (shakkanaku) went annually to embrace the hands of the god Bel-Marduk, from whom he thereby received the right of sovereignty over the country.

^49 This line seems to imply that Marduk was regarded as the instructor of the "old" gods; the allusion is, probably, to the "ways" of Anu, Bel and Ea, which are treated as technical terms in astrology.

^50 Here the title "Black-headed" refers to all mankind, but it is sometimes used by the scribes to distinguish the population of the Euphrates Valley from foreign peoples of light complexions.

^51 Compare the language of the Kur'an (Surah II, v. 256), "He (Allah) knoweth what is before them and what is behind them."

^52 These lines suggest that the fight between Marduk and Tiamat was recurrent; it is incorrect to translate the verbal forms as preterites.

^53 "To open the ears" -- to give understanding.

^54 The Egyptian Sheta 



     


===== BOOK: blfb.txt =====


The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

THE BLUE FAIRY BOOK

by Andrew Lang

London, New York: Longmans, Green

[1889]

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*THE BRONZE RING]

[*PRINCE HYACINTH AND THE DEAR LITTLE PRINCESS]

[*EAST OF THE SUN AND WEST OF THE MOON]

[*THE YELLOW DWARF]

[*LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD]

[*THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD]

[*CINDERELLA; OR, THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER]

[*ALADDIN AND THE WONDERFUL LAMP]

[*THE TALE OF A YOUTH WHO SET OUT TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS]

[*RUMPELSTILTZKIN]

[*BEAUTY AND THE BEAST]

[*THE MASTER-MAID]

[*WHY THE SEA IS SALT]

[*THE MASTER CAT; OR, PUSS IN BOOTS]

[*FELICIA AND THE POT OF PINKS]

[*THE WHITE CAT]

[*THE WATER-LILY. THE GOLD-SPINNERS]

[*THE TERRIBLE HEAD]

[*THE STORY OF PRETTY GOLDILOCKS]

[*THE HISTORY OF WHITTINGTON]

[*THE WONDERFUL SHEEP]

[*LITTLE THUMB]

[*THE FORTY THIEVES]

[*HANSEL AND GRETTEL]

[*SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED]

[*THE GOOSE-GIRL]

[*TOADS AND DIAMONDS]

[*PRINCE DARLING]

[*BLUE BEARD]

[*TRUSTY JOHN]

[*THE BRAVE LITTLE TAILOR]

[*A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT]

[*THE PRINCESS ON THE GLASS HILL]

[*THE STORY OF PRINCE AHMED AND THE FAIRY PARIBANOU]

[*THE HISTORY OF JACK THE GIANT-KILLER]

[*THE BLACK BULL OF NORROWAY]

[*THE RED ETIN]

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

THE BRONZE RING

Once upon a time in a certain country there lived a king whose palace was surrounded by a spacious garden. But, though the gardeners were many and the soil was good, this garden yielded neither flowers nor fruits, not even grass or shady trees.

The King was in despair about it, when a wise old man said to him:

"Your gardeners do not understand their business: but what can you expect of men whose fathers were cobblers and carpenters? How should they have learned to cultivate your garden?"

"You are quite right," cried the King.

"Therefore," continued the old man, "you should send for a gardener whose father and grandfather have been gardeners before him, and very soon your garden will be full of green grass and gay flowers, and you will enjoy its delicious fruit."

So the King sent messengers to every town, village, and hamlet in his dominions, to look for a gardener whose forefathers had been gardeners also, and after forty days one was found.

"Come with us and be gardener to the King," they said to him.

"How can I go to the King," said the gardener, "a poor wretch like me?"

"That is of no consequence," they answered. "Here are new clothes for you and your family."

"But I owe money to several people."

"We will pay your debts," they said.

So the gardener allowed himself to be persuaded, and went away with the messengers, taking his wife and his son with him; and the King, delighted to have found a real gardener, entrusted him with the care of his garden. The man found no difficulty in making the royal garden produce flowers and fruit, and at the end of a year the park was not like the same place, and the King showered gifts upon his new servant.

The gardener, as you have heard already, had a son, who was a very handsome young man, with most agreeable manners, and every day he carried the best fruit of the garden to the King, and all the prettiest flowers to his daughter. Now this princess was wonderfully pretty and was just sixteen years old, and the King was beginning to think it was time that she should be married.

"My dear child," said he, "you are of an age to take a husband, therefore I am thinking of marrying you to the son of my prime minister.

"Father," replied the Princess, "I will never marry the son of the minister."

"Why not?" asked the King.

"Because I love the gardener's son," answered the Princess.

On hearing this the King was at first very angry, and then he wept and sighed, and declared that such a husband was not worthy of his daughter; but the young Princess was not to be turned from her resolution to marry the gardener's son.

Then the King consulted his ministers. "This is what you must do," they said. "To get rid of the gardener you must send both suitors to a very distant country, and the one who returns first shall marry your daughter."

The King followed this advice, and the minister's son was presented with a splendid horse and a purse full of gold pieces, while the gardener's son had only an old lame horse and a purse full of copper money, and every one thought he would never come back from his journey.

The day before they started the Princess met her lover and said to him:

"Be brave, and remember always that I love you. Take this purse full of jewels and make the best use you can of them for love of me, and come back quickly and demand my hand."

The two suitors left the town together, but the minister's son went off at a gallop on his good horse, and very soon was lost to sight behind the most distant hills. He traveled on for some days, and presently reached a fountain beside which an old woman all in rags sat upon a stone.

"Good-day to you, young traveler," said she.

But the minister's son made no reply.

"Have pity upon me, traveler," she said again. "I am dying of hunger, as you see, and three days have I been here and no one has given me anything."

"Let me alone, old witch," cried the young man; "I can do nothing for you," and so saying he went on his way.

That same evening the gardener's son rode up to the fountain upon his lame gray horse.

"Good-day to you, young traveler," said the beggar-woman.

"Good-day, good woman," answered he.

"Young traveler, have pity upon me."

"Take my purse, good woman," said he, "and mount behind me, for your legs can't be very strong."

The old woman didn't wait to be asked twice, but mounted behind him, and in this style they reached the chief city of a powerful kingdom. The minister's son was lodged in a grand inn, the gardener's son and the old woman dismounted at the inn for beggars.

The next day the gardener's son heard a great noise in the street, and the King's heralds passed, blowing all kinds of instruments, and crying:

"The King, our master, is old and infirm. He will give a great reward to whoever will cure him and give him back the strength of his youth."

Then the old beggar-woman said to her benefactor:

"This is what you must do to obtain the reward which the King promises. Go out of the town by the south gate, and there you will find three little dogs of different colors; the first will be white, the second black, the third red. You must kill them and then burn them separately, and gather up the ashes. Put the ashes of each dog into a bag of its own color, then go before the door of the palace and cry out, 'A celebrated physician has come from Janina in Albania. He alone can cure the King and give him back the strength of his youth.' The King's physicians will say, This is an impostor, and not a learned man,' and they will make all sorts of difficulties, but you will overcome them all at last, and will present yourself before the sick King. You must then demand as much wood as three mules can carry, and a great cauldron, and must shut yourself up in a room with the Sultan, and when the cauldron boils you must throw him into it, and there leave him until his flesh is completely separated from his bones. Then arrange the bones in their proper places, and throw over them the ashes out of the three bags. The King will come back to life, and will be just as he was when he was twenty years old. For your reward you must demand the bronze ring which has the power to grant you everything you desire. Go, my son, and do not forget any of my instructions."

The young man followed the old beggar-woman's directions. On going out of the town he found the white, red, and black dogs, and killed and burnt them, gathering the ashes in three bags. Then he ran to the palace and cried:

"A celebrated physician has just come from Janina in Albania. He alone can cure the King and give him back the strength of his youth."

The King's physicians at first laughed at the unknown wayfarer, but the Sultan ordered that the stranger should be admitted. They brought the cauldron and the loads of wood, and very soon the King was boiling away. Toward mid-day the gardener's son arranged the bones in their places, and he had hardly scattered the ashes over them before the old King revived, to find himself once more young and hearty.

"How can I reward you, my benefactor?" he cried. "Will you take half my treasures?"

"No," said the gardener's son.

"My daughter's hand?"

"_No_."

"Take half my kingdom."

"No. Give me only the bronze ring which can instantly grant me anything I wish for."

"Alas!" said the King, "I set great store by that marvelous ring; nevertheless, you shall have it." And he gave it to him.

The gardener's son went back to say good-by to the old beggar-woman; then he said to the bronze ring:

"Prepare a splendid ship in which I may continue my journey. Let the hull be of fine gold, the masts of silver, the sails of brocade; let the crew consist of twelve young men of noble appearance, dressed like kings. St. Nicholas will be at the helm. As to the cargo, let it be diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and carbuncles."

And immediately a ship appeared upon the sea which resembled in every particular _the description given by the gardener's son_, and, stepping on board, he continued his journey. Presently he arrived at a great town and established himself in a wonderful palace. After several days he met his rival, the minister's son, who had spent all his money and was reduced to the disagreeable employment of a carrier of dust and rubbish. The gardener's son said to him:

"What is your name, what is your family, and from what country do you come?"

"I am the son of the prime minister of a great nation, and yet see what a degrading occupation I am reduced to."

"Listen to me; though I don't know anything more about you, I am willing to help you. I will give you a ship to take you back to your own country upon one condition."

"Whatever it may be, I accept it willingly."  "Follow me to my palace."

The minister's son followed the rich stranger, whom he had not recognized. When they reached the palace the gardener's son made a sign to his slaves, who completely undressed the new-comer.

"Make this ring red-hot," commanded the master, "and mark the man with it upon his back."

The slaves obeyed him.

"Now, young man," said the rich stranger, "I am going to give you a vessel which will take you back to your own country."

And, going out, he took the bronze ring and said:

"Bronze ring, obey thy master. Prepare me a ship of which the half-rotten timbers shall be painted black, let the sails be in rags, and the sailors infirm and sickly. One shall have lost a leg, another an arm, the third shall be a hunchback, another lame or club-footed or blind, and most of them shall be ugly and covered with scars. Go, and let my orders be executed."

The minister's son embarked in this old vessel, and thanks to favorable winds, at length reached his own country. In spite of the pitiable condition in which he returned they received him joyfully.

"I am the first to come back," said he to the King; now fulfil your promise, and give me the princess in marriage.

So they at once began to prepare for the wedding festivities. As to the poor princess, she was sorrowful and angry enough about it.

The next morning, at daybreak, a wonderful ship with every sail set came to anchor before the town. The King happened at that moment to be at the palace window.

"What strange ship is this," he cried, "that has a golden hull, silver masts, and silken sails, and who are the young men like princes who man it? And do I not see St. Nicholas at the helm? Go at once and invite the captain of the ship to come to the palace."

His servants obeyed him, and very soon in came an enchantingly handsome young prince, dressed in rich silk, ornamented with pearls and diamonds.

"Young man," said the King, "you are welcome, whoever you may be. Do me the favor to be my guest as long as you remain in my capital."

"Many thanks, sire," replied the captain, "I accept your offer."

"My daughter is about to be married," said the King; "will you give her away?"

"I shall be charmed, sire."

Soon after came the Princess and her betrothed.

"Why, how is this?" cried the young captain; "would you marry this charming princess to such a man as that?"

"But he is my prime minister's son!"

"What does that matter? I cannot give your daughter away. The man she is betrothed to is one of my servants."

"Your servant?"

"Without doubt. I met him in a distant town reduced to carrying away dust and rubbish from the houses. I had pity on him and engaged him as one of my servants."

"It is impossible!" cried the King.

"Do you wish me to prove what I say? This young man returned in a vessel which I fitted out for him, an unseaworthy ship with a black battered hull, and the sailors were infirm and crippled."

"It is quite true," said the King.

"It is false," cried the minister's son. "I do not know this man!"

"Sire," said the young captain, "order your daughter's betrothed to be stripped, and see if the mark of my ring is not branded upon his back."

The King was about to give this order, when the minister's son, to save himself from such an indignity, admitted that the story was true.

"And now, sire," said the young captain, "do you not recognize me?"

"I recognize you," said the Princess; "you are the gardener's son whom I have always loved, and it is you I wish to marry."

"Young man, you shall be my son-in-law," cried the King. "The marriage festivities are already begun, so you shall marry my daughter this very day."

And so that very day the gardener's son married the beautiful Princess.

Several months passed. The young couple were as happy as the day was long, and the King was more and more pleased with himself for having secured such a son-in-law.

But, presently, the captain of the golden ship found it necessary to take a long voyage, and after embracing his wife tenderly he embarked.

Now in the outskirts of the capital there lived an old man, who had spent his life in studying black arts--alchemy, astrology, magic, and enchantment. This man found out that the gardener's son had only succeeded in marrying the Princess by the help of the genii who obeyed the bronze ring.

"I will have that ring," said he to himself. So he went down to the sea-shore and caught some little red fishes. Really, they were quite wonderfully pretty. Then he came back, and, passing before the Princess's window, he began to cry out:

"Who wants some pretty little red fishes?"

The Princess heard him, and sent out one of her slaves, who said to the old peddler:

"What will you take for your fish?"

"A bronze ring."

"A bronze ring, old simpleton! And where shall I find one?"

"Under the cushion in the Princess's room."

The slave went back to her mistress.

"The old madman will take neither gold nor silver," said she.

"What does he want then?"

"A bronze ring that is hidden under a cushion."

"Find the ring and give it to him," said the Princess.

And at last the slave found the bronze ring, which the captain of the golden ship had accidentally left behind and carried it to the man, who made off with it instantly.

Hardly had he reached his own house when, taking the ring, he said, "Bronze ring, obey thy master. I desire that the golden ship shall turn to black wood, and the crew to hideous negroes; that St. Nicholas shall leave the helm and that the only cargo shall be black cats."

And the genii of the bronze ring obeyed him.

Finding himself upon the sea in this miserable condition, the young captain understood that some one must have stolen the bronze ring from him, and he lamented his misfortune loudly; but that did him no good.

"Alas!" he said to himself, "whoever has taken my ring has probably taken my dear wife also. What good will it do me to go back to my own country?" And he sailed about from island to island, and from shore to shore, believing that wherever he went everybody was laughing at him, and very soon his poverty was so great that he and his crew and the poor black cats had nothing to eat but herbs and roots. After wandering about a long time he reached an island inhabited by mice. The captain landed upon the shore and began to explore the country. There were mice everywhere, and nothing but mice. Some of the black cats had followed him, and, not having been fed for several days, they were fearfully hungry, and made terrible havoc among the mice.

Then the queen of the mice held a council.

"These cats will eat every one of us," she said, "if the captain of the ship does not shut the ferocious animals up. Let us send a deputation to him of the bravest among us."

Several mice offered themselves for this mission and set out to find the young captain.

"Captain," said they, "go away quickly from our island, or we shall perish, every mouse of us."

"Willingly," replied the young captain, "upon one condition. That is that you shall first bring me back a bronze ring which some clever magician has stolen from me. If you do not do this I will land all my cats upon your island, and you shall be exterminated."

The mice withdrew in great dismay. "What is to be done?" said the Queen. "How can we find this bronze ring?" She held a new council, calling in mice from every quarter of the globe, but nobody knew where the bronze ring was. Suddenly three mice arrived from a very distant country. One was blind, the second lame, and the third had her ears cropped.

"Ho, ho, ho!" said the new-comers. "We come from a far distant country."

"Do you know where the bronze ring is which the genii obey?"

"Ho, ho, ho! we know; an old sorcerer has taken possession of it, and now he keeps it in his pocket by day and in his mouth by night."

"Go and take it from him, and come back as soon as possible."

So the three mice made themselves a boat and set sail for the magician's country. When they reached the capital they landed and ran to the palace, leaving only the blind mouse on the shore to take care of the boat. Then they waited till it was night. The wicked old man lay down in bed and put the bronze ring into his mouth, and very soon he was asleep.

"Now, what shall we do?" said the two little animals to each other.

The mouse with the cropped ears found a lamp full of oil and a bottle full of pepper. So she dipped her tail first in the oil and then in the pepper, and held it to the sorcerer's nose.

"Atisha! atisha!" sneezed the old man, but he did not wake, and the shock made the bronze ring jump out of his mouth. Quick as thought the lame mouse snatched up the precious talisman and carried it off to the boat.

Imagine the despair of the magician when he awoke and the bronze ring was nowhere to be found!

But by that time our three mice had set sail with their prize. A favoring breeze was carrying them toward the island where the queen of the mice was awaiting them. Naturally they began to talk about the bronze ring.

"Which of us deserves the most credit?" they cried all at once.

"I do," said the blind mouse, "for without my watchfulness our boat would have drifted away to the open sea."

"No, indeed," cried the mouse with the cropped ears; "the credit is mine. Did I not cause the ring to jump out of the man's mouth?"

"No, it is mine," cried the lame one, "for I ran off with the ring."

And from high words they soon came to blows, and, alas! when the quarrel was fiercest the bronze ring fell into the sea.

"How are we to face our queen," said the three mice "when by our folly we have lost the talisman and condemned our people to be utterly exterminated? We cannot go back to our country; let us land on this desert island and there end our miserable lives." No sooner said than done. The boat reached the island, and the mice landed.

The blind mouse was speedily deserted by her two sisters, who went off to hunt flies, but as she wandered sadly along the shore she found a dead fish, and was eating it, when she felt something very hard. At her cries the other two mice ran up.

"It is the bronze ring! It is the talisman!" they cried joyfully, and, getting into their boat again, they soon reached the mouse island. It was time they did, for the captain was just going to land his cargo of cats, when a deputation of mice brought him the precious bronze ring.

"Bronze ring," commanded the young man, "obey thy master. Let my ship appear as it was before."

Immediately the genii of the ring set to work, and the old black vessel became once more the wonderful golden ship with sails of brocade; the handsome sailors ran to the silver masts and the silken ropes, and very soon they set sail for the capital.

Ah! how merrily the sailors sang as they flew over the glassy sea!

At last the port was reached.

The captain landed and ran to the palace, where he found the wicked old man asleep. The Princess clasped her husband in a long embrace. The magician tried to escape, but he was seized and bound with strong cords.

The next day the sorcerer, tied to the tail of a savage mule loaded with nuts, was broken into as many pieces as there were nuts upon the mule's back.[1]

[1] Traditions Populaires de l'Asie Mineure. Carnoy et Nicolaides. Paris: Maisonneuve, 1889.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

PRINCE HYACINTH AND THE DEAR LITTLE PRINCESS

Once upon a time there lived a king who was deeply in love with a princess, but she could not marry anyone, because she was under an enchantment. So the King set out to seek a fairy, and asked what he could do to win the Princess's love. The Fairy said to him:

"You know that the Princess has a great cat which she is very fond of. Whoever is clever enough to tread on that cat's tail is the man she is destined to marry."

The King said to himself that this would not be very difficult, and he left the Fairy, determined to grind the cat's tail to powder rather than not tread on it at all.

You may imagine that it was not long before he went to see the Princess, and puss, as usual, marched in before him, arching his back. The King took a long step, and quite thought he had the tail under his foot, but the cat turned round so sharply that he only trod on air. And so it went on for eight days, till the King began to think that this fatal tail must be full of quicksilver--it was never still for a moment.

At last, however, he was lucky enough to come upon puss fast asleep and with his tail conveniently spread out. So the King, without losing a moment, set his foot upon it heavily.

With one terrific yell the cat sprang up and instantly changed into a tall man, who, fixing his angry eyes upon the King, said:

"You shall marry the Princess because you have been able to break the enchantment, but I will have my revenge. You shall have a son, who will never be happy until he finds out that his nose is too long, and if you ever tell anyone what I have just said to you, you shall vanish away instantly, and no one shall ever see you or hear of you again."

Though the King was horribly afraid of the enchanter, he could not help laughing at this threat.

"If my son has such a long nose as that," he said to himself, "he must always see it or feel it; at least, if he is not blind or without hands."

But, as the enchanter had vanished, he did not waste any more time in thinking, but went to seek the Princess, who very soon consented to marry him. But after all, they had not been married very long when the King died, and the Queen had nothing left to care for but her little son, who was called Hyacinth. The little Prince had large blue eyes, the prettiest eyes in the world, and a sweet little mouth, but, alas! his nose was so enormous that it covered half his face. The Queen was inconsolable when she saw this great nose, but her ladies assured her that it was not really as large as it looked; that it was a Roman nose, and you had only to open any history to see that every hero has a large nose. The Queen, who was devoted to her baby, was pleased with what they told her, and when she looked at Hyacinth again, his nose certainly did not seem to her _quite_ so large.

The Prince was brought up with great care; and, as soon as he could speak, they told him all sorts of dreadful stories about people who had short noses. No one was allowed to come near him whose nose did not more or less resemble his own, and the courtiers, to get into favor with the Queen, took to pulling their babies' noses several times every day to make them grow long. But, do what they would, they were nothing by comparison with the Prince's.

When he grew sensible he learned history; and whenever any great prince or beautiful princess was spoken of, his teachers took care to tell him that they had long noses.

His room was hung with pictures, all of people with very large noses; and the Prince grew up so convinced that a long nose was a great beauty, that he would not on any account have had his own a single inch shorter!

When his twentieth birthday was passed the Queen thought it was time that he should be married, so she commanded that the portraits of several princesses should be brought for him to see, and among the others was a picture of the Dear Little Princess!

Now, she was the daughter of a great king, and would some day possess several kingdoms herself; but Prince Hyacinth had not a thought to spare for anything of that sort, he was so much struck with her beauty. The Princess, whom he thought quite charming, had, however, a little saucy nose, which, in her face, was the prettiest thing possible, but it was a cause of great embarrassment to the courtiers, who had got into such a habit of laughing at little noses that they sometimes found themselves laughing at hers before they had time to think; but this did not do at all before the Prince, who quite failed to see the joke, and actually banished two of his courtiers who had dared to mention disrespectfully the Dear Little Princess's tiny nose!

The others, taking warning from this, learned to think twice before they spoke, and one even went so far as to tell the Prince that, though it was quite true that no man could be worth anything unless he had a long nose, still, a woman's beauty was a different thing; and he knew a learned man who understood Greek and had read in some old manuscripts that the beautiful Cleopatra herself had a "tip-tilted" nose!

The Prince made him a splendid present as a reward for this good news, and at once sent ambassadors to ask the Dear Little Princess in marriage. The King, her father, gave his consent; and Prince Hyacinth, who, in his anxiety to see the Princess, had gone three leagues to meet her was just advancing to kiss her hand when, to the horror of all who stood by, the enchanter appeared as suddenly as a flash of lightning, and, snatching up the Dear Little Princess, whirled her away out of their sight!

The Prince was left quite unconsolable, and declared that nothing should induce him to go back to his kingdom until he had found her again, and refusing to allow any of his courtiers to follow him, he mounted his horse and rode sadly away, letting the animal choose his own path.

So it happened that he came presently to a great plain, across which he rode all day long without seeing a single house, and horse and rider were terribly hungry, when, as the night fell, the Prince caught sight of a light, which seemed to shine from a cavern.

He rode up to it, and saw a little old woman, who appeared to be at least a hundred years old.

She put on her spectacles to look at Prince Hyacinth, but it was quite a long time before she could fix them securely because her nose was so very short.

The Prince and the Fairy (for that was who she was) had no sooner looked at one another than they went into fits of laughter, and cried at the same moment, "Oh, what a funny nose!"

"Not so funny as your own," said Prince Hyacinth to the Fairy; "but, madam, I beg you to leave the consideration of our noses--such as they are--and to be good enough to give me something to eat, for I am starving, and so is my poor horse."

"With all my heart," said the Fairy. "Though your nose is so ridiculous you are, nevertheless, the son of my best friend. I loved your father as if he had been my brother. Now _he_ had a very handsome nose!"

"And pray what does mine lack?" said the Prince.

"Oh! it doesn't _lack_ anything," replied the Fairy. "On the contrary quite, there is only too much of it. But never mind, one may be a very worthy man though his nose is too long. I was telling you that I was your father's friend; he often came to see me in the old times, and you must know that I was very pretty in those days; at least, he used to say so. I should like to tell you of a conversation we had the last time I ever saw him."

"Indeed," said the Prince, "when I have supped it will give me the greatest pleasure to hear it; but consider, madam, I beg of you, that I have had nothing to eat to-day."

"The poor boy is right," said the Fairy; "I was forgetting. Come in, then, and I will give you some supper, and while you are eating I can tell you my story in a very few words--for I don't like endless tales myself. Too long a tongue is worse than too long a nose, and I remember when I was young that I was so much admired for not being a great chatterer. They used to tell the Queen, my mother, that it was so. For though you see what I am now, I was the daughter of a great king. My father----"

"Your father, I dare say, got something to eat when he was hungry!" interrupted the Prince.

"Oh! certainly," answered the Fairy, "and you also shall have supper directly. I only just wanted to tell you----"

"But I really cannot listen to anything until I have had something to eat," cried the Prince, who was getting quite angry; but then, remembering that he had better be polite as he much needed the Fairy's help, he added:

"I know that in the pleasure of listening to you I should quite forget my own hunger; but my horse, who cannot hear you, must really be fed!"

The Fairy was very much flattered by this compliment, and said, calling to her servants:

"You shall not wait another minute, you are so polite, and in spite of the enormous size of your nose you are really very agreeable."

"Plague take the old lady! How she does go on about my nose!" said the Prince to himself. "One would almost think that mine had taken all the extra length that hers lacks! If I were not so hungry I would soon have done with this chatterpie who thinks she talks very little! How stupid people are not to see their own faults! That comes of being a princess: she has been spoiled by flatterers, who have made her believe that she is quite a moderate talker!"

Meanwhile the servants were putting the supper on the table, and the prince was much amused to hear the Fairy who asked them a thousand questions simply for the pleasure of hearing herself speak; especially he noticed one maid who, no matter what was being said, always contrived to praise her mistress's wisdom.

"Well!" he thought, as he ate his supper, "I'm very glad I came here. This just shows me how sensible I have been in never listening to flatterers. People of that sort praise us to our faces without shame, and hide our faults or change them into virtues. For my part I never will be taken in by them. I know my own defects, I hope."

Poor Prince Hyacinth! He really believed what he said, and hadn't an idea that the people who had praised his nose were laughing at him, just as the Fairy's maid was laughing at her; for the Prince had seen her laugh slyly when she could do so without the Fairy's noticing her.

However, he said nothing, and presently, when his hunger began to be appeased, the Fairy said:

"My dear Prince, might I beg you to move a little more that way, for your nose casts such a shadow that I really cannot see what I have on my plate. Ah! thanks. Now let us speak of your father. When I went to his Court he was only a little boy, but that is forty years ago, and I have been in this desolate place ever since. Tell me what goes on nowadays; are the ladies as fond of amusement as ever? In my time one saw them at parties, theatres, balls, and promenades every day. Dear me! _what_ a long nose you have! I cannot get used to it!"

"Really, madam," said the Prince, "I wish you would leave off mentioning my nose. It cannot matter to you what it is like. I am quite satisfied with it, and have no wish to have it shorter. One must take what is given one."

"Now you are angry with me, my poor Hyacinth," said the Fairy, "and I assure you that I didn't mean to vex you; on the contrary, I wished to do you a service. However, though I really cannot help your nose being a shock to me, I will try not to say anything about it. I will even try to think that you have an ordinary nose. To tell the truth, it would make three reasonable ones."

The Prince, who was no longer hungry, grew so impatient at the Fairy's continual remarks about his nose that at last he threw himself upon his horse and rode hastily away. But wherever he came in his journeyings he thought the people were mad, for they all talked of his nose, and yet he could not bring himself to admit that it was too long, he had been so used all his life to hear it called handsome.

The old Fairy, who wished to make him happy, at last hit upon a plan. She shut the Dear Little Princess up in a palace of crystal, and put this palace down where the Prince would not fail to find it. His joy at seeing the Princess again was extreme, and he set to work with all his might to try to break her prison; but in spite of all his efforts he failed utterly. In despair he thought at least that he would try to get near enough to speak to the Dear Little Princess, who, on her part, stretched out her hand that he might kiss it; but turn which way he might, he never could raise it to his lips, for his long nose always prevented it. For the first time he realized how long it really was, and exclaimed:

"Well, it must be admitted that my nose _is_ too long!"

In an instant the crystal prison flew into a thousand splinters, and the old Fairy, taking the Dear Little Princess by the hand, said to the Prince:

"Now, say if you are not very much obliged to me. Much good it was for me to talk to you about your nose! You would never have found out how extraordinary it was if it hadn't hindered you from doing what you wanted to. You see how self-love keeps us from knowing our own defects of mind and body. Our reason tries in vain to show them to us; we refuse to see them till we find them in the way of our interests."

Prince Hyacinth, whose nose was now just like anyone's else, did not fail to profit by the lesson he had received. He married the Dear Little Princess, and they lived happily ever after.[1]

[1] Le Prince Desir et la Princesse Mignonne. Par Madame Leprince de Beaumont.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

EAST OF THE SUN AND WEST OF THE MOON

Once upon a time there was a poor husbandman who had many children and little to give them in the way either of food or clothing. They were all pretty, but the prettiest of all was the youngest daughter, who was so beautiful that there were no bounds to her beauty.

So once--it was late on a Thursday evening in autumn, and wild weather outside, terribly dark, and raining so heavily and blowing so hard that the walls of the cottage shook again--they were all sitting together by the fireside, each of them busy with something or other, when suddenly some one rapped three times against the window-pane. The man went out to see what could be the matter, and when he got out there stood a great big white bear.

"Good-evening to you," said the White Bear.

"Good-evening," said the man.

"Will you give me your youngest daughter?" said the White Bear; "if you will, you shall be as rich as you are now poor."

Truly the man would have had no objection to be rich, but he thought to himself: "I must first ask my daughter about this," so he went in and told them that there was a great white bear outside who had faithfully promised to make them all rich if he might but have the youngest daughter.

She said no, and would not hear of it; so the man went out again, and settled with the White Bear that he should come again next Thursday evening, and get her answer. Then the man persuaded her, and talked so much to her about the wealth that they would have, and what a good thing it would be for herself, that at last she made up her mind to go, and washed and mended all her rags, made herself as smart as she could, and held herself in readiness to set out. Little enough had she to take away with her.

Next Thursday evening the White Bear came to fetch her. She seated herself on his back with her bundle, and thus they departed. When they had gone a great part of the way, the White Bear said: "Are you afraid?"

"No, that I am not," said she.

"Keep tight hold of my fur, and then there is no danger," said he.

And thus she rode far, far away, until they came to a great mountain. Then the White Bear knocked on it, and a door opened, and they went into a castle where there were many brilliantly lighted rooms which shone with gold and silver, likewise a large hall in which there was a well-spread table, and it was so magnificent that it would be hard to make anyone understand how splendid it was. The White Bear gave her a silver bell, and told her that when she needed anything she had but to ring this bell, and what she wanted would appear. So after she had eaten, and night was drawing near, she grew sleepy after her journey, and thought she would like to go to bed. She rang the bell, and scarcely had she touched it before she found herself in a chamber where a bed stood ready made for her, which was as pretty as anyone could wish to sleep in. It had pillows of silk, and curtains of silk fringed with gold, and everything that was in the room was of gold or silver, but when she had lain down and put out the light a man came and lay down beside her, and behold it was the White Bear, who cast off the form of a beast during the night. She never saw him, however, for he always came after she had put out her light, and went away before daylight appeared.

So all went well and happily for a time, but then she began to be very sad and sorrowful, for all day long she had to go about alone; and she did so wish to go home to her father and mother and brothers and sisters. Then the White Bear asked what it was that she wanted, and she told him that it was so dull there in the mountain, and that she had to go about all alone, and that in her parents' house at home there were all her brothers and sisters, and it was because she could not go to them that she was so sorrowful.

"There might be a cure for that," said the White Bear, "if you would but promise me never to talk with your mother alone, but only when the others are there too; for she will take hold of your hand," he said, "and will want to lead you into a room to talk with you alone; but that you must by no means do, or you will bring great misery on both of us."

So one Sunday the White Bear came and said that they could now set out to see her father and mother, and they journeyed thither, she sitting on his back, and they went a long, long way, and it took a long, long time; but at last they came to a large white farmhouse, and her brothers and sisters were running about outside it, playing, and it was so pretty that it was a pleasure to look at it.

"Your parents dwell here now," said the White Bear; "but do not forget what I said to you, or you will do much harm both to yourself and me."

"No, indeed," said she, "I shall never forget;" and as soon as she was at home the White Bear turned round and went back again.

There were such rejoicings when she went in to her parents that it seemed as if they would never come to an end. Everyone thought that he could never be sufficiently grateful to her for all she had done for them all. Now they had everything that they wanted, and everything was as good as it could be. They all asked her how she was getting on where she was. All was well with her too, she said; and she had everything that she could want. What other answers she gave I cannot say, but I am pretty sure that they did not learn much from her. But in the afternoon, after they had dined at midday, all happened just as the White Bear had said. Her mother wanted to talk with her alone in her own chamber. But she remembered what the White Bear had said, and would on no account go. "What we have to say can be said at any time," she answered. But somehow or other her mother at last persuaded her, and she was forced to tell the whole story. So she told how every night a man came and lay down beside her when the lights were all put out, and how she never saw him, because he always went away before it grew light in the morning, and how she continually went about in sadness, thinking how happy she would be if she could but see him, and how all day long she had to go about alone, and it was so dull and solitary. "Oh!" cried the mother, in horror, "you are very likely sleeping with a troll! But I will teach you a way to see him. You shall have a bit of one of my candles, which you can take away with you hidden in your breast. Look at him with that when he is asleep, but take care not to let any tallow drop upon him."

So she took the candle, and hid it in her breast, and when evening drew near the White Bear came to fetch her away. When they had gone some distance on their way, the White Bear asked her if everything had not happened just as he had foretold, and she could not but own that it had. "Then, if you have done what your mother wished," said he, "you have brought great misery on both of us." "No," she said, "I have not done anything at all." So when she had reached home and had gone to bed it was just the same as it had been before, and a man came and lay down beside her, and late at night, when she could hear that he was sleeping, she got up and kindled a light, lit her candle, let her light shine on him, and saw him, and he was the handsomest prince that eyes had ever beheld, and she loved him so much that it seemed to her that she must die if she did not kiss him that very moment. So she did kiss him; but while she was doing it she let three drops of hot tallow fall upon his shirt, and he awoke. "What have you done now?" said he; "you have brought misery on both of us. If you had but held out for the space of one year I should have been free. I have a step-mother who has bewitched me so that I am a white bear by day and a man by night; but now all is at an end between you and me, and I must leave you, and go to her. She lives in a castle which lies east of the sun and west of the moon, and there too is a princess with a nose which is three ells long, and she now is the one whom I must marry."

She wept and lamented, but all in vain, for go he must. Then she asked him if she could not go with him. But no, that could not be. "Can you tell me the way then, and I will seek you--that I may surely be allowed to do!"

"Yes, you may do that," said he; "but there is no way thither. It lies east of the sun and west of the moon, and never would you find your way there."

When she awoke in the morning both the Prince and the castle were gone, and she was lying on a small green patch in the midst of a dark, thick wood. By her side lay the self-same bundle of rags which she had brought with her from her own home. So when she had rubbed the sleep out of her eyes, and wept till she was weary, she set out on her way, and thus she walked for many and many a long day, until at last she came to a great mountain. Outside it an aged woman was sitting, playing with a golden apple. The girl asked her if she knew the way to the Prince who lived with his stepmother in the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and who was to marry a princess with a nose which was three ells long. "How do you happen to know about him?" inquired the old woman; "maybe you are she who ought to have had him." "Yes, indeed, I am," she said. "So it is you, then?" said the old woman; "I know nothing about him but that he dwells in a castle which is east of the sun and west of the moon. You will be a long time in getting to it, if ever you get to it at all; but you shall have the loan of my horse, and then you can ride on it to an old woman who is a neighbor of mine: perhaps she can tell you about him. When you have got there you must just strike the horse beneath the left ear and bid it go home again; but you may take the golden apple with you."

So the girl seated herself on the horse, and rode for a long, long way, and at last she came to the mountain, where an aged woman was sitting outside with a gold carding-comb. The girl asked her if she knew the way to the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon; but she said what the first old woman had said: "I know nothing about it, but that it is east of the sun and west of the moon, and that you will be a long time in getting to it, if ever you get there at all; but you shall have the loan of my horse to an old woman who lives the nearest to me: perhaps she may know where the castle is, and when you have got to her you may just strike the horse beneath the left ear and bid it go home again." Then she gave her the gold carding-comb, for it might, perhaps, be of use to her, she said.

So the girl seated herself on the horse, and rode a wearisome long way onward again, and after a very long time she came to a great mountain, where an aged woman was sitting, spinning at a golden spinning-wheel. Of this woman, too, she inquired if she knew the way to the Prince, and where to find the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon. But it was only the same thing once again. "Maybe it was you who should have had the Prince," said the old woman. "Yes, indeed, I should have been the one," said the girl. But this old crone knew the way no better than the others--it was east of the sun and west of the moon, she knew that, "and you will be a long time in getting to it, if ever you get to it at all," she said; "but you may have the loan of my horse, and I think you had better ride to the East Wind, and ask him: perhaps he may know where the castle is, and will blow you thither. But when you have got to him you must just strike the horse beneath the left ear, and he will come home again." And then she gave her the golden spinning-wheel, saying: "Perhaps you may find that you have a use for it."

The girl had to ride for a great many days, and for a long and wearisome time, before she got there; but at last she did arrive, and then she asked the East Wind if he could tell her the way to the Prince who dwelt east of the sun and west of the moon. "Well," said the East Wind, "I have heard tell of the Prince, and of his castle, but I do not know the way to it, for I have never blown so far; but, if you like, I will go with you to my brother the West Wind: he may know that, for he is much stronger than I am. You may sit on my back, and then I can carry you there." So she seated herself on his back, and they did go so swiftly! When they got there, the East Wind went in and said that the girl whom he had brought was the one who ought to have had the Prince up at the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and that now she was traveling about to find him again, so he had come there with her, and would like to hear if the West Wind knew whereabout the castle was. "No," said the West Wind; "so far as that have I never blown; but if you like I will go with you to the South Wind, for he is much stronger than either of us, and he has roamed far and wide, and perhaps he can tell you what you want to know. You may seat yourself on my back, and then I will carry you to him.".

So she did this, and journeyed to the South Wind, neither was she very long on the way. When they had got there, the West Wind asked him if he could tell her the way to the castle that lay east of the sun and west of the moon, for she was the girl who ought to marry the Prince who lived there. "Oh, indeed!" said the South Wind, "is that she? Well," said he, "I have wandered about a great deal in my time, and in all kinds of places, but I have never blown so far as that. If you like, however, I will go with you to my brother, the North Wind; he is the oldest and strongest of all of us, and if he does not know where it is no one in the whole world will be able to tell you. You may sit upon my back, and then I will carry you there." So she seated herself on his back, and off he went from his house in great haste, and they were not long on the way. When they came near the North Wind's dwelling, he was so wild and frantic that they felt cold gusts a long while before they got there. "What do you want?" he roared out from afar, and they froze as they heard. Said the South Wind: "It is I, and this is she who should have had the Prince who lives in the castle which lies east of the sun and west of the moon. And now she wishes to ask you if you have ever been there, and can tell her the way, for she would gladly find him again."

"Yes," said the North Wind, "I know where it is. I once blew an aspen leaf there, but I was so tired that for many days afterward I was not able to blow at all. However, if you really are anxious to go there, and are not afraid to go with me, I will take you on my back, and try if I can blow you there."

"Get there I must," said she; "and if there is any way of going I will; and I have no fear, no matter how fast you go."

"Very well then," said the North Wind; "but you must sleep here to-night, for if we are ever to get there we must have the day before us."

The North Wind woke her betimes next morning, and puffed himself up, and made himself so big and so strong that it was frightful to see him, and away they went, high up through the air, as if they would not stop until they had reached the very end of the world. Down below there was such a storm! It blew down woods and houses, and when they were above the sea the ships were wrecked by hundreds. And thus they tore on and on, and a long time went by, and then yet more time passed, and still they were above the sea, and the North Wind grew tired, and more tired, and at last so utterly weary that he was scarcely able to blow any longer, and he sank and sank, lower and lower, until at last he went so low that the waves dashed against the heels of the poor girl he was carrying. "Art thou afraid?" said the North Wind. "I have no fear," said she; and it was true. But they were not very, very far from land, and there was just enough strength left in the North Wind to enable him to throw her on to the shore, immediately under the windows of a castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon; but then he was so weary and worn out that he was forced to rest for several days before he could go to his own home again.

Next morning she sat down beneath the walls of the castle to play with the golden apple, and the first person she saw was the maiden with the long nose, who was to have the Prince. "How much do you want for that gold apple of yours, girl?" said she, opening the window. "It can't be bought either for gold or money," answered the girl. "If it cannot be bought either for gold or money, what will buy it? You may say what you please," said the Princess.

"Well, if I may go to the Prince who is here, and be with him to-night, you shall have it," said the girl who had come with the North Wind. "You may do that," said the Princess, for she had made up her mind what she would do. So the Princess got the golden apple, but when the girl went up to the Prince's apartment that night he was asleep, for the Princess had so contrived it. The poor girl called to him, and shook him, and between whiles she wept; but she could not wake him. In the morning, as soon as day dawned, in came the Princess with the long nose, and drove her out again. In the daytime she sat down once more beneath the windows of the castle, and began to card with her golden carding-comb; and then all happened as it had happened before. The Princess asked her what she wanted for it, and she replied that it was not for sale, either for gold or money, but that if she could get leave to go to the Prince, and be with him during the night, she should have it. But when she went up to the Prince's room he was again asleep, and, let her call him, or shake him, or weep as she would, he still slept on, and she could not put any life in him. When daylight came in the morning, the Princess with the long nose came too, and once more drove her away. When day had quite come, the girl seated herself under the castle windows, to spin with her golden spinning-wheel, and the Princess with the long nose wanted to have that also. So she opened the window, and asked what she would take for it. The girl said what she had said on each of the former occasions--that it was not for sale either for gold or for money, but if she could get leave to go to the Prince who lived there, and be with him during the night, she should have it.

"Yes," said the Princess, "I will gladly consent to that."

But in that place there were some Christian folk who had been carried off, and they had been sitting in the chamber which was next to that of the Prince, and had heard how a woman had been in there who had wept and called on him two nights running, and they told the Prince of this. So that evening, when the Princess came once more with her sleeping-drink, he pretended to drink, but threw it away behind him, for he suspected that it was a sleeping-drink. So, when the girl went into the Prince's room this time he was awake, and she had to tell him how she had come there. "You have come just in time," said the Prince, "for I should have been married to-morrow; but I will not have the long-nosed Princess, and you alone can save me. I will say that I want to see what my bride can do, and bid her wash the shirt which has the three drops of tallow on it. This she will consent to do, for she does not know that it is you who let them fall on it; but no one can wash them out but one born of Christian folk: it cannot be done by one of a pack of trolls; and then I will say that no one shall ever be my bride but the woman who can do this, and I know that you can." There was great joy and gladness between them all that night, but the next day, when the wedding was to take place, the Prince said, "I must see what my bride can do." "That you may do," said the stepmother.

"I have a fine shirt which I want to wear as my wedding shirt, but three drops of tallow have got upon it which I want to have washed off, and I have vowed to marry no one but the woman who is able to do it. If she cannot do that, she is not worth having."

Well, that was a very small matter, they thought, and agreed to do it. The Princess with the long nose began to wash as well as she could, but, the more she washed and rubbed, the larger the spots grew. "Ah! you can't wash at all," said the old troll-hag, who was her mother. "Give it to me." But she too had not had the shirt very long in her hands before it looked worse still, and, the more she washed it and rubbed it, the larger and blacker grew the spots.

So the other trolls had to come and wash, but, the more they did, the blacker and uglier grew the shirt, until at length it was as black as if it had been up the chimney. "Oh," cried the Prince, "not one of you is good for anything at all! There is a beggar-girl sitting outside the window, and I'll be bound that she can wash better than any of you! Come in, you girl there!" he cried. So she came in. "Can you wash this shirt clean?" he cried. "Oh! I don't know," she said; "but I will try." And no sooner had she taken the shirt and dipped it in the water than it was white as driven snow, and even whiter than that. "I will marry you," said the Prince.

Then the old troll-hag flew into such a rage that she burst, and the Princess with the long nose and all the little trolls must have burst too, for they have never been heard of since. The Prince and his bride set free all the Christian folk who were imprisoned there, and took away with them all the gold and silver that they could carry, and moved far away from the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon.[1]

[1] Asbjornsen and Moe.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

THE YELLOW DWARF

Once upon a time there lived a queen who had been the mother of a great many children, and of them all only one daughter was left. But then _she_ was worth at least a thousand.

Her mother, who, since the death of the King, her father, had nothing in the world she cared for so much as this little Princess, was so terribly afraid of losing her that she quite spoiled her, and never tried to correct any of her faults. The consequence was that this little person, who was as pretty as possible, and was one day to wear a crown, grew up so proud and so much in love with her own beauty that she despised everyone else in the world.

The Queen, her mother, by her caresses and flatteries, helped to make her believe that there was nothing too good for her. She was dressed almost always in the prettiest frocks, as a fairy, or as a queen going out to hunt, and the ladies of the Court followed her dressed as forest fairies.

And to make her more vain than ever the Queen caused her portrait to be taken by the cleverest painters and sent it to several neighboring kings with whom she was very friendly.

When they saw this portrait they fell in love with the Princess--every one of them, but upon each it had a different effect. One fell ill, one went quite crazy, and a few of the luckiest set off to see her as soon as possible, but these poor princes became her slaves the moment they set eyes on her.

Never has there been a gayer Court. Twenty delightful kings did everything they could think of to make themselves agreeable, and after having spent ever so much money in giving a single entertainment thought themselves very lucky if the Princess said "That's pretty."

All this admiration vastly pleased the Queen. Not a day passed but she received seven or eight thousand sonnets, and as many elegies, madrigals, and songs, which were sent her by all the poets in the world. All the prose and the poetry that was written just then was about Bellissima--for that was the Princess's name--and all the bonfires that they had were made of these verses, which crackled and sparkled better than any other sort of wood.

Bellissima was already fifteen years old, and every one of the Princes wished to marry her, but not one dared to say so. How could they when they knew that any of them might have cut off his head five or six times a day just to please her, and she would have thought it a mere trifle, so little did she care? You may imagine how hard-hearted her lovers thought her; and the Queen, who wished to see her married, did not know how to persuade her to think of it seriously.

"Bellissima," she said, "I do wish you would not be so proud. What makes you despise all these nice kings? I wish you to marry one of them, and you do not try to please me."

"I am so happy," Bellissima answered: "do leave me in peace, madam. I don't want to care for anyone."

"But you would be very happy with any of these Princes," said the Queen, "and I shall be very angry if you fall in love with anyone who is not worthy of you."

But the Princess thought so much of herself that she did not consider any one of her lovers clever or handsome enough for her; and her mother, who was getting really angry at her determination not to be married, began to wish that she had not allowed her to have her own way so much.

At last, not knowing what else to do, she resolved to consult a certain witch who was called "The Fairy of the Desert." Now this was very difficult to do, as she was guarded by some terrible lions; but happily the Queen had heard a long time before that whoever wanted to pass these lions safely must throw to them a cake made of millet flour, sugar-candy, and crocodile's eggs. This cake she prepared with her own hands, and putting it in a little basket, she set out to seek the Fairy. But as she was not used to walking far, she soon felt very tired and sat down at the foot of a tree to rest, and presently fell fast asleep. When she awoke she was dismayed to find her basket empty. The cake was all gone! and, to make matters worse, at that moment she heard the roaring of the great lions, who had found out that she was near and were coming to look for her.

"What shall I do?" she cried; "I shall be eaten up," and being too frightened to run a single step, she began to cry, and leaned against the tree under which she had been asleep.

Just then she heard some one say: "H'm, h'm!"

She looked all round her, and then up the tree, and there she saw a little tiny man, who was eating oranges.

"Oh! Queen," said he, "I know you very well, and I know how much afraid you are of the lions; and you are quite right too, for they have eaten many other people: and what can you expect, as you have not any cake to give them?"

"I must make up my mind to die," said the poor Queen. "Alas! I should not care so much if only my dear daughter were married."

"Oh! you have a daughter," cried the Yellow Dwarf (who was so called because he _was_ a dwarf and had such a yellow face, and lived in the orange tree). "I'm really glad to hear that, for I've been looking for a wife all over the world. Now, if you will promise that she shall marry me, not one of the lions, tigers, or bears shall touch you."

The Queen looked at him and was almost as much afraid of his ugly little face as she had been of the lions before, so that she could not speak a word.

"What! you hesitate, madam," cried the Dwarf. "You must be very fond of being eaten up alive."

And, as he spoke, the Queen saw the lions, which were running down a hill toward them.

Each one had two heads, eight feet, and four rows of teeth, and their skins were as hard as turtle shells, and were bright red.

At this dreadful sight, the poor Queen, who was trembling like a dove when it sees a hawk, cried out as loud as she could, "Oh! dear Mr. Dwarf, Bellissima shall marry you."

"Oh, indeed!" said he disdainfully. "Bellissima is pretty enough, but I don't particularly want to marry her--you can keep her."

"Oh! noble sir," said the Queen in great distress, ado not refuse her. She is the most charming Princess in the world."

"Oh! well," he replied, "out of charity I will take her; but be sure and don't forget that she is mine."

As he spoke a little door opened in the trunk of the orange tree, in rushed the Queen, only just in time, and the door shut with a bang in the faces of the lions.

The Queen was so confused that at first she did not notice another little door in the orange tree, but presently it opened and she found herself in a field of thistles and nettles. It was encircled by a muddy ditch, and a little further on was a tiny thatched cottage, out of which came the Yellow Dwarf with a very jaunty air. He wore wooden shoes and a little yellow coat, and as he had no hair and very long ears he looked altogether a shocking little object.

"I am delighted," said he to the Queen, "that, as you are to be my mother-in-law, you should see the little house in which your Bellissima will live with me. With these thistles and nettles she can feed a donkey which she can ride whenever she likes; under this humble roof no weather can hurt her; she will drink the water of this brook and eat frogs--which grow very fat about here; and then she will have me always with her, handsome, agreeable, and gay as you see me now. For if her shadow stays by her more closely than I do I shall be surprised."

The unhappy Queen. seeing all at once what a miserable life her daughter would have with this Dwarf could not bear the idea, and fell down insensible without saying a word.

When she revived she found to her great surprise that she was lying in her own bed at home, and, what was more, that she had on the loveliest lace night cap that she had ever seen in her life. At first she thought that all her adventures, the terrible lions, and her promise to the Yellow Dwarf that he should marry Bellissima, must have been a dream, but there was the new cap with its beautiful ribbon and lace to remind her that it was all true, which made her so unhappy that she could neither eat, drink, nor sleep for thinking of it.

The Princess, who, in spite of her wilfulness, really loved her mother with all her heart, was much grieved when she saw her looking so sad, and often asked her what was the matter; but the Queen, who didn't want her to find out the truth, only said that she was ill, or that one of her neighbors was threatening to make war against her. Bellissima knew quite well that something was being hidden from her--and that neither of these was the real reason of the Queen's uneasiness. So she made up her mind that she would go and consult the Fairy of the Desert about it, especially as she had often heard how wise she was, and she thought that at the same time she might ask her advice as to whether it would be as well to be married, or not.

So, with great care, she made some of the proper cake to pacify the lions, and one night went up to her room very early, pretending that she was going to bed; but instead of that, she wrapped herself in a long white veil, and went down a secret staircase, and set off all by herself to find the Witch.

But when she got as far as the same fatal orange tree, and saw it covered with flowers and fruit, she stopped and began to gather some of the oranges--and then, putting down her basket, she sat down to eat them. But when it was time to go on again the basket had disappeared and, though she looked everywhere, not a trace of it could she find. The more she hunted for it, the more frightened she got, and at last she began to cry. Then all at once she saw before her the Yellow Dwarf.

"What's the matter with you, my pretty one?" said he. "What are you crying about?"

"Alas!" she answered; "no wonder that I am crying, seeing that I have lost the basket of cake that was to help me to get safely to the cave of the Fairy of the Desert."

"And what do you want with her, pretty one?" said the little monster, "for I am a friend of hers, and, for the matter of that, I am quite as clever as she is."

"The Queen, my mother," replied the Princess, "has lately fallen into such deep sadness that I fear that she will die; and I am afraid that perhaps I am the cause of it, for she very much wishes me to be married, and I must tell you truly that as yet I have not found anyone I consider worthy to be my husband. So for all these reasons I wished to talk to the Fairy."

"Do not give yourself any further trouble, Princess," answered the Dwarf. "I can tell you all you want to know better than she could. The Queen, your mother, has promised you in marriage----"

"Has promised _me!_" interrupted the Princess. "Oh! no. I'm sure she has not. She would have told me if she had. I am too much interested in the matter for her to promise anything without my consent--you must be mistaken."

"Beautiful Princess," cried the Dwarf suddenly, throwing himself on his knees before her, "I flatter myself that you will not be displeased at her choice when I tell you that it is to _me_ she has promised the happiness of marrying you."

"You!" cried Bellissima, starting back. "My mother wishes me to marry you! How can you be so silly as to think of such a thing?"

"Oh! it isn't that I care much to have that honor," cried the Dwarf angrily; "but here are the lions coming; they'll eat you up in three mouthfuls, and there will be an end of you and your pride."

And, indeed, at that moment the poor Princess heard their dreadful howls coming nearer and nearer.

"What shall I do?" she cried. "Must all my happy days come to an end like this?"

The malicious Dwarf looked at her and began to laugh spitefully. "At least," said he, "you have the satisfaction of dying unmarried. A lovely Princess like you must surely prefer to die rather than be the wife of a poor little dwarf like myself."

"Oh, don't be angry with me," cried the Princess, clasping her hands. "I'd rather marry all the dwarfs in the world than die in this horrible way."

"Look at me well, Princess, before you give me your word," said he. "I don't want you to promise me in a hurry."

"Oh!" cried she, "the lions are coming. I have looked at you enough. I am so frightened. Save me this minute, or I shall die of terror."

Indeed, as she spoke she fell down insensible, and when she recovered she found herself in her own little bed at home; how she got there she could not tell, but she was dressed in the most beautiful lace and ribbons, and on her finger was a little ring, made of a single red hair, which fitted so tightly that, try as she might, she could not get it off.

When the Princess saw all these things, and remembered what had happened, she, too, fell into the deepest sadness, which surprised and alarmed the whole Court, and the Queen more than anyone else. A hundred times she asked Bellissima if anything was the matter with her; but she always said that there was nothing.

At last the chief men of the kingdom, anxious to see their Princess married, sent to the Queen to beg her to choose a husband for her as soon as possible. She replied that nothing would please her better, but that her daughter seemed so unwilling to marry, and she recommended them to go and talk to the Princess about it themselves so this they at once did. Now Bellissima was much less proud since her adventure with the Yellow Dwarf, and she could not think of a better way of getting rid of the little monster than to marry some powerful king, therefore she replied to their request much more favorably than they had hoped, saying that, though she was very happy as she was, still, to please them, she would consent to marry the King of the Gold Mines. Now he was a very handsome and powerful Prince, who had been in love with the Princess for years, but had not thought that she would ever care about him at all. You can easily imagine how delighted he was when he heard the news, and how angry it made all the other kings to lose for ever the hope of marrying the Princess; but, after all, Bellissima could not have married twenty kings--indeed, she had found it quite difficult enough to choose one, for her vanity made her believe that there was nobody in the world who was worthy of her.

Preparations were begun at once for the grandest wedding that had ever been held at the palace. The King of the Gold Mines sent such immense sums of money that the whole sea was covered with the ships that brought it. Messengers were sent to all the gayest and most refined Courts, particularly to the Court of France, to seek out everything rare and precious to adorn the Princess, although her beauty was so perfect that nothing she wore could make her look prettier. At least that is what the King of the Gold Mines thought, and he was never happy unless he was with her.

As for the Princess, the more she saw of the King the more she liked him; he was so generous, so handsome and clever, that at last she was almost as much in love with him as he was with her. How happy they were as they wandered about in the beautiful gardens together, sometimes listening to sweet music! And the King used to write songs for Bellissima. This is one that she liked very much:

In the forest all is gay
 When my Princess walks that way.
 All the blossoms then are found
 Downward fluttering to the ground,
 Hoping she may tread on them.
 And bright flowers on slender stem
 Gaze up at her as she passes
 Brushing lightly through the grasses.
 Oh! my Princess, birds above
 Echo back our songs of love,
 As through this enchanted land
 Blithe we wander, hand in hand.

They really were as happy as the day was long. All the King's unsuccessful rivals had gone home in despair. They said good-by to the Princess so sadly that she could not help being sorry for them.

"Ah! madam," the King of the Gold Mines said to her "how is this? Why do you waste your pity on these princes, who love you so much that all their trouble would be well repaid by a single smile from you?"

"I should be sorry," answered Bellissima, "if you had not noticed how much I pitied these princes who were leaving me for ever; but for you, sire, it is very different: you have every reason to be pleased with me, but they are going sorrowfully away, so you must not grudge them my compassion."

The King of the Gold Mines was quite overcome by the Princess's good-natured way of taking his interference, and, throwing himself at her feet, he kissed her hand a thousand times and begged her to forgive him.

At last the happy day came. Everything was ready for Bellissima's wedding. The trumpets sounded, all the streets of the town were hung with flags and strewn with flowers, and the people ran in crowds to the great square before the palace. The Queen was so overjoyed that she had hardly been able to sleep at all, and she got up before it was light to give the necessary orders and to choose the jewels that the Princess was to wear. These were nothing less than diamonds, even to her shoes, which were covered with them, and her dress of silver brocade was embroidered with a dozen of the sun's rays. You may imagine how much these had cost; but then nothing could have been more brilliant, except the beauty of the Princess! Upon her head she wore a splendid crown, her lovely hair waved nearly to her feet, and her stately figure could easily be distinguished among all the ladies who attended her.

The King of the Gold Mines was not less noble and splendid; it was easy to see by his face how happy he was, and everyone who went near him returned loaded with presents, for all round the great banqueting hall had been arranged a thousand barrels full of gold, and numberless bags made of velvet embroidered with pearls and filled with money, each one containing at least a hundred thousand gold pieces, which were given away to everyone who liked to hold out his hand, which numbers of people hastened to do, you may be sure--indeed, some found this by far the most amusing part of the wedding festivities.

The Queen and the Princess were just ready to set out with the King when they saw, advancing toward them from the end of the long gallery, two great basilisks, dragging after them a very badly made box; behind them came a tall old woman, whose ugliness was even more surprising than her extreme old age. She wore a ruff of black taffeta, a red velvet hood, and a farthingale all in rags, and she leaned heavily upon a crutch. This strange old woman, without saying a single word, hobbled three times round the gallery, followed by the basilisks, then stopping in the middle, and brandishing her crutch threateningly, she cried:

"Ho, ho, Queen! Ho, ho, Princess! Do you think you are going to break with impunity the promise that you made to my friend the Yellow Dwarf? I am the Fairy of the Desert; without the Yellow Dwarf and his orange tree my great lions would soon have eaten you up, I can tell you, and in Fairyland we do not suffer ourselves to be insulted like this. Make up your minds at once what you will do, for I vow that you shall marry the Yellow Dwarf. If you don't, may I burn my crutch!"

"Ah! Princess," said the Queen, weeping, "what is this that I hear? What have you promised?"

"Ah! my mother," replied Bellissima sadly, "what did _you_ promise, yourself?"

The King of the Gold Mines, indignant at being kept from his happiness by this wicked old woman, went up to her, and threatening her with his sword, said:

"Get away out of my country at once, and for ever, miserable creature, lest I take your life, and so rid myself of your malice."

He had hardly spoken these words when the lid of the box fell back on the floor with a terrible noise, and to their horror out sprang the Yellow Dwarf, mounted upon a great Spanish cat. "Rash youth!" he cried, rushing between the Fairy of the Desert and the King. "Dare to lay a finger upon this illustrious Fairy! Your quarrel is with me only. I am your enemy and your rival. That faithless Princess who would have married you is promised to me. See if she has not upon her finger a ring made of one of my hairs. Just try to take it off, and you will soon find out that I am more powerful than you are!"

"Wretched little monster!" said the King; "do you dare to call yourself the Princess's lover, and to lay claim to such a treasure? Do you know that you are a dwarf--that you are so ugly that one cannot bear to look at you--and that I should have killed you myself long before this if you had been worthy of such a glorious death?"

The Yellow Dwarf, deeply enraged at these words, set spurs to his cat, which yelled horribly, and leaped hither and thither--terrifying everybody except the brave King, who pursued the Dwarf closely, till he, drawing a great knife with which he was armed, challenged the King to meet him in single combat, and rushed down into the courtyard of the palace with a terrible clatter. The King, quite provoked, followed him hastily, but they had hardly taken their places facing one another, and the whole Court had only just had time to rush out upon the balconies to watch what was going on, when suddenly the sun became as red as blood, and it was so dark that they could scarcely see at all. The thunder crashed, and the lightning seemed as if it must burn up everything; the two basilisks appeared, one on each side of the bad Dwarf, like giants, mountains high, and fire flew from their mouths and ears, until they looked like flaming furnaces. None of these things could terrify the noble young King, and the boldness of his looks and actions reassured those who were looking on, and perhaps even embarrassed the Yellow Dwarf himself; but even _his_ courage gave way when he saw what was happening to his beloved Princess. For the Fairy of the Desert, looking more terrible than before, mounted upon a winged griffin, and with long snakes coiled round her neck, had given her such a blow with the lance she carried that Bellissima fell into the Queen's arms bleeding and senseless. Her fond mother, feeling as much hurt by the blow as the Princess herself, uttered such piercing cries and lamentations that the King, hearing them, entirely lost his courage and presence of mind. Giving up the combat, he flew toward the Princess, to rescue or to die with her; but the Yellow Dwarf was too quick for him. Leaping with his Spanish cat upon the balcony, he snatched Bellissima from the Queen's arms, and before any of the ladies of the Court could stop him he had sprung upon the roof of the palace and disappeared with his prize.

The King, motionless with horror, looked on despairingly at this dreadful occurrence, which he was quite powerless to prevent, and to make matters worse his sight failed him, everything became dark, and he felt himself carried along through the air by a strong hand.

This new misfortune was the work of the wicked Fairy of the Desert, who had come with the Yellow Dwarf to help him carry off the Princess, and had fallen in love with the handsome young King of the Gold Mines directly she saw him. She thought that if she carried him off to some frightful cavern and chained him to a rock, then the fear of death would make him forget Bellissima and become her slave. So, as soon as they reached the place, she gave him back his sight, but without releasing him from his chains, and by her magic power she appeared before him as a young and beautiful fairy, and pretended to have come there quite by chance.

"What do I see?" she cried. "Is it _you_, dear Prince? What misfortune has brought you to this dismal place?"

The King, who was quite deceived by her altered appearance, replied:

"Alas! beautiful Fairy, the fairy who brought me here first took away my sight, but by her voice I recognized her as the Fairy of the Desert, though what she should have carried me off for I cannot tell you."

"Ah!" cried the pretended Fairy, "if you have fallen into _her_ hands, you won't get away until you have married her. She has carried off more than one Prince like this, and she will certainly have anything she takes a fancy to." While she was thus pretending to be sorry for the King, he suddenly noticed her feet, which were like those of a griffin, and knew in a moment that this must be the Fairy of the Desert, for her feet were the one thing she could not change, however pretty she might make her face.

Without seeming to have noticed anything, he said, in a confidential way:

"Not that I have any dislike to the Fairy of the Desert, but I really cannot endure the way in which she protects the Yellow Dwarf and keeps me chained here like a criminal. It is true that I love a charming princess, but if the Fairy should set me free my gratitude would oblige me to love her only."

"Do you really mean what you say, Prince?" said the Fairy, quite deceived.

"Surely," replied the Prince; "how could I deceive you? You see it is so much more flattering to my vanity to be loved by a fairy than by a simple princess. But, even if I am dying of love for her, I shall pretend to hate her until I am set free."

The Fairy of the Desert, quite taken in by these words, resolved at once to transport the Prince to a pleasanter place. So, making him mount her chariot, to which she had harnessed swans instead of the bats which generally drew it, away she flew with him. But imagine the distress of the Prince when, from the giddy height at which they were rushing through the air, he saw his beloved Princess in a castle built of polished steel, the walls of which reflected the sun's rays so hotly that no one could approach it without being burnt to a cinder! Bellissima was sitting in a little thicket by a brook, leaning her head upon her hand and weeping bitterly, but just as they passed she looked up and saw the King and the Fairy of the Desert. Now, the Fairy was so clever that she could not only seem beautiful to the King, but even the poor Princess thought her the most lovely being she had ever seen.

"What!" she cried; "was I not unhappy enough in this lonely castle to which that frightful Yellow Dwarf brought me? Must I also be made to know that the King of the Gold Mines ceased to love me as soon as he lost sight of me? But who can my rival be, whose fatal beauty is greater than mine?"

While she was saying this, the King, who really loved her as much as ever, was feeling terribly sad at being so rapidly torn away from his beloved Princess, but he knew too well how powerful the Fairy was to have any hope of escaping from her except by great patience and cunning.

The Fairy of the Desert had also seen Bellissima, and she tried to read in the King's eyes the effect that this unexpected sight had had upon him.

"No one can tell you what you wish to know better than I can," said he. "This chance meeting with an unhappy princess for whom I once had a passing fancy, before I was lucky enough to meet you, has affected me a little, I admit, but you are so much more to me than she is that I would rather die than leave you."

"Ah, Prince," she said, "can I believe that you really love me so much?"

"Time will show, madam," replied the King; "but if you wish to convince me that you have some regard for me, do not, I beg of you, refuse to aid Bellissima."

"Do you know what you are asking?" said the Fairy of the Desert, frowning, and looking at him suspiciously. "Do you want me to employ my art against the Yellow Dwarf, who is my best friend, and take away from him a proud princess whom I can but look upon as my rival?"

The King sighed, but made no answer--indeed, what was there to be said to such a clear-sighted person? At last they reached a vast meadow, gay with all sorts of flowers; a deep river surrounded it, and many little brooks murmured softly under the shady trees, where it was always cool and fresh. A little way off stood a splendid palace, the walls of which were of transparent emeralds. As soon as the swans which drew the Fairy's chariot had alighted under a porch, which was paved with diamonds and had arches of rubies, they were greeted on all sides by thousands of beautiful beings, who came to meet them joyfully, singing these words:

"When Love within a heart would reign,
 Useless to strive against him 'tis.
 The proud but feel a sharper pain,
 And make a greater triumph his."

The Fairy of the Desert was delighted to hear them sing of her triumphs; she led the King into the most splendid room that can be imagined, and left him alone for a little while, just that he might not feel that he was a prisoner; but he felt sure that she had not really gone quite away, but was watching him from some hiding-place. So walking up to a great mirror, he said to it, "Trusty counsellor, let me see what I can do to make myself agreeable to the charming Fairy of the Desert; for I can think of nothing but how to please her."

And he at once set to work to curl his hair, and, seeing upon a table a grander coat than his own, he put it on carefully. The Fairy came back so delighted that she could not conceal her joy.

"I am quite aware of the trouble you have taken to please me," said she, "and I must tell you that you have succeeded perfectly already. You see it is not difficult to do if you really care for me."

The King, who had his own reasons for wishing to keep the old Fairy in a good humor, did not spare pretty speeches, and after a time he was allowed to walk by himself upon the sea-shore. The Fairy of the Desert had by her enchantments raised such a terrible storm that the boldest pilot would not venture out in it, so she was not afraid of her prisoner's being able to escape; and he found it some relief to think sadly over his terrible situation without being interrupted by his cruel captor.

Presently, after walking wildly up and down, he wrote these verses upon the sand with his stick:

"At last may I upon this shore
 Lighten my sorrow with soft tears.
 Alas! alas! I see no more
 My Love, who yet my sadness cheers.

"And thou, O raging, stormy Sea,
 Stirred by wild winds, from depth to height,
 Thou hold'st my loved one far from me,
 And I am captive to thy might.

"My heart is still more wild than thine,
 For Fate is cruel unto me. Why must I thus in exile pine?
 Why is my Princess snatched from me?

"O! lovely Nymphs, from ocean caves,
 Who know how sweet true love may be,
 Come up and calm the furious waves
 And set a desperate lover free!"

While he was still writing he heard a voice which attracted his attention in spite of himself. Seeing that the waves were rolling in higher than ever, he looked all round, and presently saw a lovely lady floating gently toward him upon the crest of a huge billow, her long hair spread all about her; in one hand she held a mirror, and in the other a comb, and instead of feet she had a beautiful tail like a fish, with which she swam.

The King was struck dumb with astonishment at this unexpected sight; but as soon as she came within speaking distance, she said to him, "I know how sad you are at losing your Princess and being kept a prisoner by the Fairy of the Desert; if you like I will help you to escape from this fatal place, where you may otherwise have to drag on a weary existence for thirty years or more."

The King of the Gold Mines hardly knew what answer to make to this proposal. Not because he did not wish very much to escape, but he was afraid that this might be only another device by which the Fairy of the Desert was trying to deceive him. As he hesitated the Mermaid, who guessed his thoughts, said to him:

"You may trust me: I am not trying to entrap you. I am so angry with the Yellow Dwarf and the Fairy of the Desert that I am not likely to wish to help them, especially since I constantly see your poor Princess, whose beauty and goodness make me pity her so much; and I tell you that if you will have confidence in me I will help you to escape."

"I trust you absolutely," cried the King, "and I will do whatever you tell me; but if you have seen my Princess I beg of you to tell me how she is and what is happening to her.

"We must not waste time in talking," said she. "Come with me and I will carry you to the Castle of Steel, and we will leave upon this shore a figure so like you that even the Fairy herself will be deceived by it."

So saying, she quickly collected a bundle of sea-weed, and, blowing it three times, she said:

"My friendly sea-weeds, I order you to stay here stretched upon the sand until the Fairy of the Desert comes to take you away." And at once the sea-weeds became like the King, who stood looking at them in great astonishment, for they were even dressed in a coat like his, but they lay there pale and still as the King himself might have lain if one of the great waves had overtaken him and thrown him senseless upon the shore. And then the Mermaid caught up the King, and away they swam joyfully together.

"Now," said she, "I have time to tell you about the Princess. In spite of the blow which the Fairy of the Desert gave her, the Yellow Dwarf compelled her to mount behind him upon his terrible Spanish cat; but she soon fainted away with pain and terror, and did not recover till they were within the walls of his frightful Castle of Steel. Here she was received by the prettiest girls it was possible to find, who had been carried there by the Yellow Dwarf, who hastened to wait upon her and showed her every possible attention. She was laid upon a couch covered with cloth of gold, embroidered with pearls as big as nuts."

"Ah!" interrupted the King of the Gold Mines, "if Bellissima forgets me, and consents to marry him, I shall break my heart."

"You need not be afraid of that," answered the Mermaid, "the Princess thinks of no one but you, and the frightful Dwarf cannot persuade her to look at him."

"Pray go on with your story," said the King.

"What more is there to tell you?" replied the Mermaid. "Bellissima was sitting in the wood when you passed, and saw you with the Fairy of the Desert, who was so cleverly disguised that the Princess took her to be prettier than herself; you may imagine her despair, for she thought that you had fallen in love with her."

"She believes that I love her!" cried the King. "What a fatal mistake! What is to be done to undeceive her?"

"You know best," answered the Mermaid, smiling kindly at him. "When people are as much in love with one another as you two are, they don't need advice from anyone else."

As she spoke they reached the Castle of Steel, the side next the sea being the only one which the Yellow Dwarf had left unprotected by the dreadful burning walls.

"I know quite well," said the Mermaid, "that the Princess is sitting by the brook-side, just where you saw her as you passed, but as you will have many enemies to fight with before you can reach her, take this sword; armed with it you may dare any danger, and overcome the greatest difficulties, only beware of one thing--that is, never to let it fall from your hand. Farewell; now I will wait by that rock, and if you need my help in carrying off your beloved Princess I will not fail you, for the Queen, her mother, is my best friend, and it was for her sake that I went to rescue you."

So saying, she gave to the King a sword made from a single diamond, which was more brilliant than the sun. He could not find words to express his gratitude, but he begged her to believe that he fully appreciated the importance of her gift, and would never forget her help and kindness.

We must now go back to the Fairy of the Desert. When she found that the King did not return, she hastened out to look for him, and reached the shore, with a hundred of the ladies of her train, loaded with splendid presents for him. Some carried baskets full of diamonds, others golden cups of wonderful workmanship, and amber, coral, and pearls, others, again, balanced upon their heads bales of the richest and most beautiful stuffs, while the rest brought fruit and flowers, and even birds. But what was the horror of the Fairy, who followed this gay troop, when she saw, stretched upon the sands, the image of the King which the Mermaid had made with the sea-weeds. Struck with astonishment and sorrow, she uttered a terrible cry, and threw herself down beside the pretended King, weeping, and howling, and calling upon her eleven sisters, who were also fairies, and who came to her assistance. But they were all taken in by the image of the King, for, clever as they were, the Mermaid was still cleverer, and all they could do was to help the Fairy of the Desert to make a wonderful monument over what they thought was the grave of the King of the Gold Mines. But while they were collecting jasper and porphyry, agate and marble, gold and bronze, statues and devices, to immortalize the King's memory, he was thanking the good Mermaid and begging her still to help him, which she graciously promised to do as she disappeared; and then he set out for the Castle of Steel. He walked fast, looking anxiously round him, and longing once more to see his darling Bellissima, but he had not gone far before he was surrounded by four terrible sphinxes who would very soon have torn him to pieces with their sharp talons if it had not been for the Mermaid's diamond sword. For, no sooner had he flashed it before their eyes than down they fell at his feet quite helpless, and he killed them with one blow. But he had hardly turned to continue his search when he met six dragons covered with scales that were harder than iron. Frightful as this encounter was the King's courage was unshaken, and by the aid of his wonderful sword he cut them in pieces one after the other. Now he hoped his difficulties were over, but at the next turning he was met by one which he did not know how to overcome. Four-and-twenty pretty and graceful nymphs advanced toward him, holding garlands of flowers, with which they barred the way.

"Where are you going, Prince?" they said; "it is our duty to guard this place, and if we let you pass great misfortunes will happen to you and to us. We beg you not to insist upon going on. Do you want to kill four-and-twenty girls who have never displeased you in any way?"

The King did not know what to do or to say. It went against all his ideas as a knight to do anything a lady begged him not to do; but, as he hesitated, a voice in his ear said:

"Strike! strike! and do not spare, or your Princess is lost for ever!"

So, without reply to the nymphs, he rushed forward instantly, breaking their garlands, and scattering them in all directions; and then went on without further hindrance to the little wood where he had seen Bellissima. She was seated by the brook looking pale and weary when he reached her, and he would have thrown himself down at her feet, but she drew herself away from him with as much indignation as if he had been the Yellow Dwarf.

"Ah! Princess," he cried, "do not be angry with me. Let me explain everything. I am not faithless or to blame for what has happened. I am a miserable wretch who has displeased you without being able to help himself."

"Ah!" cried Bellissima, "did I not see you flying through the air with the loveliest being imaginable? Was that against your will?"

"Indeed it was, Princess," he answered; "the wicked Fairy of the Desert, not content with chaining me to a rock, carried me off in her chariot to the other end of the earth, where I should even now be a captive but for the unexpected help of a friendly mermaid, who brought me here to rescue you, my Princess, from the unworthy hands that hold you. Do not refuse the aid of your most faithful lover." So saying, he threw himself at her feet and held her by her robe. But, alas! in so doing he let fall the magic sword, and the Yellow Dwarf, who was crouching behind a lettuce, no sooner saw it than he sprang out and seized it, well knowing its wonderful power.

The Princess gave a cry of terror on seeing the Dwarf, but this only irritated the little monster; muttering a few magical words he summoned two giants, who bound the King with great chains of iron.

"Now," said the Dwarf, "I am master of my rival's fate, but I will give him his life and permission to depart unharmed if you, Princess, will consent to marry me."

"Let me die a thousand times rather," cried the unhappy King.

"Alas!" cried the Princess, "must you die? Could anything be more terrible?"

"That you should marry that little wretch would be far more terrible," answered the King.

"At least," continued she, "let us die together."

"Let me have the satisfaction of dying for you, my Princess," said he.

"Oh, no, no!" she cried, turning to the Dwarf; "rather than that I will do as you wish."

"Cruel Princess!" said the King, "would you make my life horrible to me by marrying another before my eyes?"

"Not so," replied the Yellow Dwarf; "you are a rival of whom I am too much afraid; you shall not see our marriage." So saying, in spite of Bellissima's tears and cries, he stabbed the King to the heart with the diamond sword.

The poor Princess, seeing her lover lying dead at her feet, could no longer live without him; she sank down by him and died of a broken heart.

So ended these unfortunate lovers, whom not even the Mermaid could help, because all the magic power had been lost with the diamond sword.

As to the wicked Dwarf, he preferred to see the Princess dead rather than married to the King of the Gold Mines; and the Fairy of the Desert, when she heard of the King's adventures, pulled down the grand monument which she had built, and was so angry at the trick that had been played her that she hated him as much as she had loved him before.

The kind Mermaid, grieved at the sad fate of the lovers, caused them to be changed into two tall palm trees, which stand always side by side, whispering together of their faithful love and caressing one another with their interlacing branches.[1]

[1] Madame d'Aulnoy.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD

Once upon a time there lived in a certain village a little country girl, the prettiest creature was ever seen. Her mother was excessively fond of her; and her grandmother doted on her still more. This good woman had made for her a little red riding-hood; which became the girl so extremely well that everybody called her Little Red Riding-Hood.

One day her mother, having made some custards, said to her:

"Go, my dear, and see how thy grandmamma does, for I hear she has been very ill; carry her a custard, and this little pot of butter."

Little Red Riding-Hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother, who lived in another village.

As she was going through the wood, she met with Gaffer Wolf, who had a very great mind to eat her up, but he dared not, because of some faggot-makers hard by in the forest. He asked her whither she was going. The poor child, who did not know that it was dangerous to stay and hear a wolf talk, said to him:

"I am going to see my grandmamma and carry her a custard and a little pot of butter from my mamma."

"Does she live far off?" said the Wolf.

"Oh! ay," answered Little Red Riding-Hood; "it is beyond that mill you see there, at the first house in the village."

"Well," said the Wolf, "and I'll go and see her too. I'll go this way and you go that, and we shall see who will be there soonest."

The Wolf began to run as fast as he could, taking the nearest way, and the little girl went by that farthest about, diverting herself in gathering nuts, running after butterflies, and making nosegays of such little flowers as she met with. The Wolf was not long before he got to the old woman's house. He knocked at the door--tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

"Your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood," replied the Wolf, counterfeiting her voice; "who has brought you a custard and a little pot of butter sent you by mamma."

The good grandmother, who was in bed, because she was somewhat ill, cried out:

"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."

The Wolf pulled the bobbin, and the door opened, and then presently he fell upon the good woman and ate her up in a moment, for it was above three days that he had not touched a bit. He then shut the door and went into the grandmother's bed, expecting Little Red Riding-Hood, who came some time afterward and knocked at the door--tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

Little Red Riding-Hood, hearing the big voice of the Wolf, was at first afraid; but believing her grandmother had got a cold and was hoarse, answered:

"'Tis your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood, who has brought you a custard and a little pot of butter mamma sends you."

The Wolf cried out to her, softening his voice as much as he could:

"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."

Little Red Riding-Hood pulled the bobbin, and the door opened.

The Wolf, seeing her come in, said to her, hiding himself under the bed-clothes:

"Put the custard and the little pot of butter upon the stool, and come and lie down with me."

Little Red Riding-Hood undressed herself and went into bed, where, being greatly amazed to see how her grandmother looked in her night-clothes, she said to her:

"Grandmamma, what great arms you have got!"

"That is the better to hug thee, my dear."

"Grandmamma, what great legs you have got!"

"That is to run the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great ears you have got!"

"That is to hear the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great eyes you have got!"

"It is to see the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great teeth you have got!"

"That is to eat thee up."

And, saying these words, this wicked wolf fell upon Little Red Riding-Hood, and ate her all up.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD

There were formerly a king and a queen, who were so sorry that they had no children; so sorry that it cannot be expressed. They went to all the waters in the world; vows, pilgrimages, all ways were tried, and all to no purpose.

At last, however, the Queen had a daughter. There was a very fine christening; and the Princess had for her god-mothers all the fairies they could find in the whole kingdom (they found seven), that every one of them might give her a gift, as was the custom of fairies in those days. By this means the Princess had all the perfections imaginable.

After the ceremonies of the christening were over, all the company returned to the King's palace, where was prepared a great feast for the fairies. There was placed before every one of them a magnificent cover with a case of massive gold, wherein were a spoon, knife, and fork, all of pure gold set with diamonds and rubies. But as they were all sitting down at table they saw come into the hall a very old fairy, whom they had not invited, because it was above fifty years since she had been out of a certain tower, and she was believed to be either dead or enchanted.

The King ordered her a cover, but could not furnish her with a case of gold as the others, because they had only seven made for the seven fairies. The old Fairy fancied she was slighted, and muttered some threats between her teeth. One of the young fairies who sat by her overheard how she grumbled; and, judging that she might give the little Princess some unlucky gift, went, as soon as they rose from table, and hid herself behind the hangings, that she might speak last, and repair, as much as she could, the evil which the old Fairy might intend.

In the meanwhile all the fairies began to give their gifts to the Princess. The youngest gave her for gift that she should be the most beautiful person in the world; the next, that she should have the wit of an angel; the third, that she should have a wonderful grace in everything she did; the fourth, that she should dance perfectly well; the fifth, that she should sing like a nightingale; and the sixth, that she should play all kinds of music to the utmost perfection.

The old Fairy's turn coming next, with a head shaking more with spite than age, she said that the Princess should have her hand pierced with a spindle and die of the wound. This terrible gift made the whole company tremble, and everybody fell a-crying.

At this very instant the young Fairy came out from behind the hangings, and spake these words aloud:

"Assure yourselves, O King and Queen, that your daughter shall not die of this disaster. It is true, I have no power to undo entirely what my elder has done. The Princess shall indeed pierce her hand with a spindle; but, instead of dying, she shall only fall into a profound sleep, which shall last a hundred years, at the expiration of which a king's son shall come and awake her."

The King, to avoid the misfortune foretold by the old Fairy, caused immediately proclamation to be made, whereby everybody was forbidden, on pain of death, to spin with a distaff and spindle, or to have so much as any spindle in their houses. About fifteen or sixteen years after, the King and Queen being gone to one of their houses of pleasure, the young Princess happened one day to divert herself in running up and down the palace; when going up from one apartment to another, she came into a little room on the top of the tower, where a good old woman, alone, was spinning with her spindle. This good woman had never heard of the King's proclamation against spindles.

"What are you doing there, goody?" said the Princess.

"I am spinning, my pretty child," said the old woman, who did not know who she was.

"Ha!" said the Princess, "this is very pretty; how do you do it? Give it to me, that I may see if I can do so."

She had no sooner taken it into her hand than, whether being very hasty at it, somewhat unhandy, or that the decree of the Fairy had so ordained it, it ran into her hand, and she fell down in a swoon.

The good old woman, not knowing very well what to do in this affair, cried out for help. People came in from every quarter in great numbers; they threw water upon the Princess's face, unlaced her, struck her on the palms of her hands, and rubbed her temples with Hungary-water; but nothing would bring her to herself.

And now the King, who came up at the noise, bethought himself of the prediction of the fairies, and, judging very well that this must necessarily come to pass, since the fairies had said it, caused the Princess to be carried into the finest apartment in his palace, and to be laid upon a bed all embroidered with gold and silver.

One would have taken her for a little angel, she was so very beautiful; for her swooning away had not diminished one bit of her complexion; her cheeks were carnation, and her lips were coral; indeed, her eyes were shut, but she was heard to breathe softly, which satisfied those about her that she was not dead. The King commanded that they should not disturb her, but let her sleep quietly till her hour of awaking was come.

The good Fairy who had saved her life by condemning her to sleep a hundred years was in the kingdom of Matakin, twelve thousand leagues off, when this accident befell the Princess; but she was instantly informed of it by a little dwarf, who had boots of seven leagues, that is, boots with which he could tread over seven leagues of ground in one stride. The Fairy came away immediately, and she arrived, about an hour after, in a fiery chariot drawn by dragons.

The King handed her out of the chariot, and she approved everything he had done, but as she had very great foresight, she thought when the Princess should awake she might not know what to do with herself, being all alone in this old palace; and this was what she did: she touched with her wand everything in the palace (except the King and Queen)--governesses, maids of honor, ladies of the bedchamber, gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, undercooks, scullions, guards, with their beefeaters, pages, footmen; she likewise touched all the horses which were in the stables, pads as well as others, the great dogs in the outward court and pretty little Mopsey too, the Princess's little spaniel, which lay by her on the bed.

Immediately upon her touching them they all fell asleep, that they might not awake before their mistress and that they might be ready to wait upon her when she wanted them. The very spits at the fire, as full as they could hold of partridges and pheasants, did fall asleep also. All this was done in a moment. Fairies are not long in doing their business.

And now the King and the Queen, having kissed their dear child without waking her, went out of the palace and put forth a proclamation that nobody should dare to come near it.

This, however, was not necessary, for in a quarter of an hour's time there grew up all round about the park such a vast number of trees, great and small, bushes and brambles, twining one within another, that neither man nor beast could pass through; so that nothing could be seen but the very top of the towers of the palace; and that, too, not unless it was a good way off. Nobody; doubted but the Fairy gave herein a very extraordinary sample of her art, that the Princess, while she continued sleeping, might have nothing to fear from any curious people.

When a hundred years were gone and passed the son of the King then reigning, and who was of another family from that of the sleeping Princess, being gone a-hunting on that side of the country, asked:

What those towers were which he saw in the middle of a great thick wood?

Everyone answered according as they had heard. Some said:

That it was a ruinous old castle, haunted by spirits.

Others, That all the sorcerers and witches of the country kept there their sabbath or night's meeting.

The common opinion was: That an ogre lived there, and that he carried thither all the little children he could catch, that he might eat them up at his leisure, without anybody being able to follow him, as having himself only the power to pass through the wood.

The Prince was at a stand, not knowing what to believe, when a very good countryman spake to him thus:

"May it please your royal highness, it is now about fifty years since I heard from my father, who heard my grandfather say, that there was then in this castle a princess, the most beautiful was ever seen; that she must sleep there a hundred years, and should be waked by a king's son, for whom she was reserved."

The young Prince was all on fire at these words, believing, without weighing the matter, that he could put an end to this rare adventure; and, pushed on by love and honor, resolved that moment to look into it.

Scarce had he advanced toward the wood when all the great trees, the bushes, and brambles gave way of themselves to let him pass through; he walked up to the castle which he saw at the end of a large avenue which he went into; and what a little surprised him was that he saw none of his people could follow him, because the trees closed again as soon as he had passed through them. However, he did not cease from continuing his way; a young and amorous prince is always valiant.

He came into a spacious outward court, where everything he saw might have frozen the most fearless person with horror. There reigned all over a most frightful silence; the image of death everywhere showed itself, and there was nothing to be seen but stretched-out bodies of men and animals, all seeming to be dead. He, however, very well knew, by the ruby faces and pimpled noses of the beefeaters, that they were only asleep; and their goblets, wherein still remained some drops of wine, showed plainly that they fell asleep in their cups.

He then crossed a court paved with marble, went up the stairs and came into the guard chamber, where guards were standing in their ranks, with their muskets upon their shoulders, and snoring as loud as they could. After that he went through several rooms full of gentlemen and ladies, all asleep, some standing, others sitting. At last he came into a chamber all gilded with gold, where he saw upon a bed, the curtains of which were all open, the finest sight was ever beheld--a princess, who appeared to be about fifteen or sixteen years of age, and whose bright and, in a manner, resplendent beauty, had somewhat in it divine. He approached with trembling and admiration, and fell down before her upon his knees.

And now, as the enchantment was at an end, the Princess awaked, and looking on him with eyes more tender than the first view might seem to admit of:

"Is it you, my Prince?" said she to him. "You have waited a long while."

The Prince, charmed with these words, and much more with the manner in which they were spoken, knew not how to show his joy and gratitude; he assured her that he loved her better than he did himself; their discourse was not well connected, they did weep more than talk--little eloquence, a great deal of love. He was more at a loss than she, and we need not wonder at it; she had time to think on what to say to him; for it is very probable (though history mentions nothing of it) that the good Fairy, during so long a sleep, had given her very agreeable dreams. In short, they talked four hours together, and yet they said not half what they had to say.

In the meanwhile all the palace awaked; everyone thought upon their particular business, and as all of them were not in love they were ready to die for hunger. The chief lady of honor, being as sharp set as other folks, grew very impatient, and told the Princess aloud that supper was served up. The Prince helped the Princess to rise; she was entirely dressed, and very magnificently, but his royal highness took care not to tell her that she was dressed like his great-grandmother, and had a point band peeping over a high collar; she looked not a bit less charming and beautiful for all that.

They went into the great hall of looking-glasses, where they supped, and were served by the Princess's officers, the violins and hautboys played old tunes, but very excellent, though it was now above a hundred years since they had played; and after supper, without losing any time, the lord almoner married them in the chapel of the castle, and the chief lady of honor drew the curtains. They had but very little sleep--the Princess had no occasion; and the Prince left her next morning to return to the city, where his father must needs have been in pain for him. The Prince told him:

That he lost his way in the forest as he was hunting, and that he had lain in the cottage of a charcoal-burner, who gave him cheese and brown bread.

The King, his father, who was a good man, believed him; but his mother could not be persuaded it was true; and seeing that he went almost every day a-hunting, and that he always had some excuse ready for so doing, though he had lain out three or four nights together, she began to suspect that he was married, for he lived with the Princess above two whole years, and had by her two children, the eldest of which, who was a daughter, was named Morning, and the youngest, who was a son, they called Day, because he was a great deal handsomer and more beautiful than his sister.

The Queen spoke several times to her son, to inform herself after what manner he did pass his time, and that in this he ought in duty to satisfy her. But he never dared to trust her with his secret; he feared her, though he loved her, for she was of the race of the Ogres, and the King would never have married her had it not been for her vast riches; it was even whispered about the Court that she had Ogreish inclinations, and that, whenever she saw little children passing by, she had all the difficulty in the world to avoid falling upon them. And so the Prince would never tell her one word.

But when the King was dead, which happened about two years afterward, and he saw himself lord and master, he openly declared his marriage; and he went in great ceremony to conduct his Queen to the palace. They made a magnificent entry into the capital city, she riding between her two children.

Soon after the King went to make war with the Emperor Contalabutte, his neighbor. He left the government of the kingdom to the Queen his mother, and earnestly recommended to her care his wife and children. He was obliged to continue his expedition all the summer, and as soon as he departed the Queen-mother sent her daughter-in-law to a country house among the woods, that she might with the more ease gratify her horrible longing.

Some few days afterward she went thither herself, and said to her clerk of the kitchen:

"I have a mind to eat little Morning for my dinner to-morrow."

"Ah! madam," cried the clerk of the kitchen.

"I will have it so," replied the Queen (and this she spoke in the tone of an Ogress who had a strong desire to eat fresh meat), "and will eat her with a sauce Robert."

The poor man, knowing very well that he must not play tricks with Ogresses, took his great knife and went up into little Morning's chamber. She was then four years old, and came up to him jumping and laughing, to take him about the neck, and ask him for some sugar-candy. Upon which he began to weep, the great knife fell out of his hand, and he went into the back yard, and killed a little lamb, and dressed it with such good sauce that his mistress assured him that she had never eaten anything so good in her life. He had at the same time taken up little Morning, and carried her to his wife, to conceal her in the lodging he had at the bottom of the courtyard.

About eight days afterward the wicked Queen said to the clerk of the kitchen, "I will sup on little Day."

He answered not a word, being resolved to cheat her as he had done before. He went to find out little Day, and saw him with a little foil in his hand, with which he was fencing with a great monkey, the child being then only three years of age. He took him up in his arms and carried him to his wife, that she might conceal him in her chamber along with his sister, and in the room of little Day cooked up a young kid, very tender, which the Ogress found to be wonderfully good.

This was hitherto all mighty well; but one evening this wicked Queen said to her clerk of the kitchen:

"I will eat the Queen with the same sauce I had with her children."

It was now that the poor clerk of the kitchen despaired of being able to deceive her. The young Queen was turned of twenty, not reckoning the hundred years she had been asleep; and how to find in the yard a beast so firm was what puzzled him. He took then a resolution, that he might save his own life, to cut the Queen's throat; and going up into her chamber, with intent to do it at once, he put himself into as great fury as he could possibly, and came into the young Queen's room with his dagger in his hand. He would not, however, surprise her, but told her, with a great deal of respect, the orders he had received from the Queen-mother.

"Do it; do it" (said she, stretching out her neck). "Execute your orders, and then I shall go and see my children, my poor children, whom I so much and so tenderly loved."

For she thought them dead ever since they had been taken away without her knowledge.

"No, no, madam" (cried the poor clerk of the kitchen, all in tears); "you shall not die, and yet you shall see your children again; but then you must go home with me to my lodgings, where I have concealed them, and I shall deceive the Queen once more, by giving her in your stead a young hind."

Upon this he forthwith conducted her to his chamber, where, leaving her to embrace her children, and cry along with them, he went and dressed a young hind, which the Queen had for her supper, and devoured it with the same appetite as if it had been the young Queen. Exceedingly was she delighted with her cruelty, and she had invented a story to tell the King, at his return, how the mad wolves had eaten up the Queen his wife and her two children.

One evening, as she was, according to her custom, rambling round about the courts and yards of the palace to see if she could smell any fresh meat, she heard, in a ground room, little Day crying, for his mamma was going to whip him, because he had been naughty; and she heard, at the same time, little Morning begging pardon for her brother.

The Ogress presently knew the voice of the Queen and her children, and being quite mad that she had been thus deceived, she commanded next morning, by break of day (with a most horrible voice, which made everybody tremble), that they should bring into the middle of the great court a large tub, which she caused to be filled with toads, vipers, snakes, and all sorts of serpents, in order to have thrown into it the Queen and her children, the clerk of the kitchen, his wife and maid; all whom she had given orders should be brought thither with their hands tied behind them.

They were brought out accordingly, and the executioners were just going to throw them into the tub, when the King (who was not so soon expected) entered the court on horseback (for he came post) and asked, with the utmost astonishment, what was the meaning of that horrible spectacle.

No one dared to tell him, when the Ogress, all enraged to see what had happened, threw herself head foremost into the tub, and was instantly devoured by the ugly creatures she had ordered to be thrown into it for others. The King could not but be very sorry, for she was his mother; but he soon comforted himself with his beautiful wife and his pretty children.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

CINDERELLA, OR THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER

Once there was a gentleman who married, for his second wife, the proudest and most haughty woman that was ever seen. She had, by a former husband, two daughters of her own humor, who were, indeed, exactly like her in all things. He had likewise, by another wife, a young daughter, but of unparalleled goodness and sweetness of temper, which she took from her mother, who was the best creature in the world.

No sooner were the ceremonies of the wedding over but the mother-in-law began to show herself in her true colors. She could not bear the good qualities of this pretty girl, and the less because they made her own daughters appear the more odious. She employed her in the meanest work of the house: she scoured the dishes, tables, etc., and scrubbed madam's chamber, and those of misses, her daughters; she lay up in a sorry garret, upon a wretched straw bed, while her sisters lay in fine rooms, with floors all inlaid, upon beds of the very newest fashion, and where they had looking-glasses so large that they might see themselves at their full length from head to foot.

The poor girl bore all patiently, and dared not tell her father, who would have rattled her off; for his wife governed him entirely. When she had done her work, she used to go into the chimney-corner, and sit down among cinders and ashes, which made her commonly be called Cinderwench; but the youngest, who was not so rude and uncivil as the eldest, called her Cinderella. However, Cinderella, notwithstanding her mean apparel, was a hundred times handsomer than her sisters, though they were always dressed very richly.

It happened that the King's son gave a ball, and invited all persons of fashion to it. Our young misses were also invited, for they cut a very grand figure among the quality. They were mightily delighted at this invitation, and wonderfully busy in choosing out such gowns, petticoats, and head-clothes as might become them. This was a new trouble to Cinderella; for it was she who ironed her sisters' linen, and plaited their ruffles; they talked all day long of nothing but how they should be dressed.

"For my part," said the eldest, "I will wear my red velvet suit with French trimming."

"And I," said the youngest, "shall have my usual petticoat; but then, to make amends for that, I will put on my gold-flowered manteau, and my diamond stomacher, which is far from being the most ordinary one in the world."

They sent for the best tire-woman they could get to make up their head-dresses and adjust their double pinners, and they had their red brushes and patches from Mademoiselle de la Poche.

Cinderella was likewise called up to them to be consulted in all these matters, for she had excellent notions, and advised them always for the best, nay, and offered her services to dress their heads, which they were very willing she should do. As she was doing this, they said to her:

"Cinderella, would you not be glad to go to the ball?"

"Alas!" said she, "you only jeer me; it is not for such as I am to go thither."

"Thou art in the right of it," replied they; "it would make the people laugh to see a Cinderwench at a ball."

Anyone but Cinderella would have dressed their heads awry, but she was very good, and dressed them perfectly well They were almost two days without eating, so much were they transported with joy. They broke above a dozen laces in trying to be laced up close, that they might have a fine slender shape, and they were continually at their looking-glass. At last the happy day came; they went to Court, and Cinderella followed them with her eyes as long as she could, and when she had lost sight of them, she fell a-crying.

Her godmother, who saw her all in tears, asked her what was the matter.

"I wish I could--I wish I could--"; she was not able to speak the rest, being interrupted by her tears and sobbing.

This godmother of hers, who was a fairy, said to her, "Thou wishest thou couldst go to the ball; is it not so?"

"Y--es," cried Cinderella, with a great sigh.

"Well," said her godmother, "be but a good girl, and I will contrive that thou shalt go." Then she took her into her chamber, and said to her, "Run into the garden, and bring me a pumpkin."

Cinderella went immediately to gather the finest she could get, and brought it to her godmother, not being able to imagine how this pumpkin could make her go to the ball. Her godmother scooped out all the inside of it, having left nothing but the rind; which done, she struck it with her wand, and the pumpkin was instantly turned into a fine coach, gilded all over with gold.

She then went to look into her mouse-trap, where she found six mice, all alive, and ordered Cinderella to lift up a little the trapdoor, when, giving each mouse, as it went out, a little tap with her wand, the mouse was that moment turned into a fine horse, which altogether made a very fine set of six horses of a beautiful mouse-colored dapple-gray. Being at a loss for a coachman,

"I will go and see," says Cinderella, "if there is never a rat in the rat-trap--we may make a coachman of him."

"Thou art in the right," replied her godmother; "go and look."

Cinderella brought the trap to her, and in it there were three huge rats. The fairy made choice of one of the three which had the largest beard, and, having touched him with her wand, he was turned into a fat, jolly coachman, who had the smartest whiskers eyes ever beheld. After that, she said to her:

"Go again into the garden, and you will find six lizards behind the watering-pot, bring them to me."

She had no sooner done so but her godmother turned them into six footmen, who skipped up immediately behind the coach, with their liveries all bedaubed with gold and silver, and clung as close behind each other as if they had done nothing else their whole lives. The Fairy then said to Cinderella:

"Well, you see here an equipage fit to go to the ball with; are you not pleased with it?"

"Oh! yes," cried she; "but must I go thither as I am, in these nasty rags?"

Her godmother only just touched her with her wand, and, at the same instant, her clothes were turned into cloth of gold and silver, all beset with jewels. This done, she gave her a pair of glass slippers, the prettiest in the whole world. Being thus decked out, she got up into her coach; but her godmother, above all things, commanded her not to stay till after midnight, telling her, at the same time, that if she stayed one moment longer, the coach would be a pumpkin again, her horses mice, her coachman a rat, her footmen lizards, and her clothes become just as they were before.

She promised her godmother she would not fail of leaving the ball before midnight; and then away she drives, scarce able to contain herself for joy. The King's son who was told that a great princess, whom nobody knew, was come, ran out to receive her; he gave her his hand as she alighted out of the coach, and led her into the ball, among all the company. There was immediately a profound silence, they left off dancing, and the violins ceased to play, so attentive was everyone to contemplate the singular beauties of the unknown new-comer. Nothing was then heard but a confused noise of:

"Ha! how handsome she is! Ha! how handsome she is!"

The King himself, old as he was, could not help watching her, and telling the Queen softly that it was a long time since he had seen so beautiful and lovely a creature.

All the ladies were busied in considering her clothes and headdress, that they might have some made next day after the same pattern, provided they could meet with such fine material and as able hands to make them.

The King's son conducted her to the most honorable seat, and afterward took her out to dance with him; she danced so very gracefully that they all more and more admired her. A fine collation was served up, whereof the young prince ate not a morsel, so intently was he busied in gazing on her.

She went and sat down by her sisters, showing them a thousand civilities, giving them part of the oranges and citrons which the Prince had presented her with, which very much surprised them, for they did not know her. While Cinderella was thus amusing her sisters, she heard the clock strike eleven and three-quarters, whereupon she immediately made a courtesy to the company and hasted away as fast as she could.

When she got home she ran to seek out her godmother, and, after having thanked her, she said she could not but heartily wish she might go next day to the ball, because the King's son had desired her.

As she was eagerly telling her godmother whatever had passed at the ball, her two sisters knocked at the door, which Cinderella ran and opened.

"How long you have stayed!" cried she, gaping, rubbing her eyes and stretching herself as if she had been just waked out of her sleep; she had not, however, any manner of inclination to sleep since they went from home.

"If thou hadst been at the ball," said one of her sisters, "thou wouldst not have been tired with it. There came thither the finest princess, the most beautiful ever was seen with mortal eyes; she showed us a thousand civilities, and gave us oranges and citrons."

Cinderella seemed very indifferent in the matter; indeed, she asked them the name of that princess; but they told her they did not know it, and that the King's son was very uneasy on her account and would give all the world to know who she was. At this Cinderella, smiling, replied:

"She must, then, be very beautiful indeed; how happy you have been! Could not I see her? Ah! dear Miss Charlotte, do lend me your yellow suit of clothes which you wear every day."

"Ay, to be sure!" cried Miss Charlotte; "lend my clothes to such a dirty Cinderwench as thou art! I should be a fool."

Cinderella, indeed, expected well such answer, and was very glad of the refusal; for she would have been sadly put to it if her sister had lent her what she asked for jestingly.

The next day the two sisters were at the ball, and so was Cinderella, but dressed more magnificently than before. The King's son was always by her, and never ceased his compliments and kind speeches to her; to whom all this was so far from being tiresome that she quite forgot what her godmother had recommended to her; so that she, at last, counted the clock striking twelve when she took it to be no more than eleven; she then rose up and fled, as nimble as a deer. The Prince followed, but could not overtake her. She left behind one of her glass slippers, which the Prince took up most carefully. She got home but quite out of breath, and in her nasty old clothes, having nothing left her of all her finery but one of the little slippers, fellow to that she dropped. The guards at the palace gate were asked:

If they had not seen a princess go out.

Who said: They had seen nobody go out but a young girl, very meanly dressed, and who had more the air of a poor country wench than a gentlewoman.

When the two sisters returned from the ball Cinderella asked them: If they had been well diverted, and if the fine lady had been there.

They told her: Yes, but that she hurried away immediately when it struck twelve, and with so much haste that she dropped one of her little glass slippers, the prettiest in the world, which the King's son had taken up; that he had done nothing but look at her all the time at the ball, and that most certainly he was very much in love with the beautiful person who owned the glass slipper.

What they said was very true; for a few days after the King's son caused it to be proclaimed, by sound of trumpet, that he would marry her whose foot the slipper would just fit. They whom he employed began to try it upon the princesses, then the duchesses and all the Court, but in vain; it was brought to the two sisters, who did all they possibly could to thrust their foot into the slipper, but they could not effect it. Cinderella, who saw all this, and knew her slipper, said to them, laughing:

"Let me see if it will not fit me."

Her sisters burst out a-laughing, and began to banter her. The gentleman who was sent to try the slipper looked earnestly at Cinderella, and, finding her very handsome, said:

It was but just that she should try, and that he had orders to let everyone make trial.

He obliged Cinderella to sit down, and, putting the slipper to her foot, he found it went on very easily, and fitted her as if it had been made of wax. The astonishment her two sisters were in was excessively great, but still abundantly greater when Cinderella pulled out of her pocket the other slipper, and put it on her foot. Thereupon, in came her godmother, who, having touched with her wand Cinderella's clothes, made them richer and more magnificent than any of those she had before.

And now her two sisters found her to be that fine, beautiful lady whom they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet to beg pardon for all the ill-treatment they had made her undergo. Cinderella took them up, and, as she embraced them, cried:

That she forgave them with all her heart, and desired them always to love her.

She was conducted to the young prince, dressed as she was; he thought her more charming than ever, and, a few days after, married her. Cinderella, who was no less good than beautiful, gave her two sisters lodgings in the palace, and that very same day matched them with two great lords of the Court.[1]

[1] Charles Perrault.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

ALADDIN AND THE WONDERFUL LAMP

There once lived a poor tailor, who had a son called Aladdin, a careless, idle boy who would do nothing but play ball all day long in the streets with little idle boys like himself. This so grieved the father that he died; yet, in spite of his mother's tears and prayers, Aladdin did not mend his ways. One day, when he was playing in the streets as usual, a stranger asked him his age, and if he was not the son of Mustapha the tailor. "I am, sir," replied Aladdin; "but he died a long while ago." On this the stranger, who was a famous African magician, fell on his neck and kissed him, saying, "I am your uncle, and knew you from your likeness to my brother. Go to your mother and tell her I am coming." Aladdin ran home and told his mother of his newly found uncle. "Indeed, child," she said, "your father had a brother, but I always thought he was dead." However, she prepared supper, and bade Aladdin seek his uncle, who came laden with wine and fruit. He presently fell down and kissed the place where Mustapha used to sit, bidding Aladdin's mother not to be surprised at not having seen him before, as he had been forty years out of the country. He then turned to Aladdin, and asked him his trade, at which the boy hung his head, while his mother burst into tears. On learning that Aladdin was idle and would learn no trade, he offered to take a shop for him and stock it with merchandise. Next day he bought Aladdin a fine suit of clothes and took him all over the city, showing him the sights, and brought him home at nightfall to his mother, who was overjoyed to see her son so fine.

The next day the magician led Aladdin into some beautiful gardens a long way outside the city gates. They sat down by a fountain and the magician pulled a cake from his girdle, which he divided between them. They then journeyed onward till they almost reached the mountains. Aladdin was so tired that he begged to go back, but the magician beguiled him with pleasant stories, and led him on in spite of himself. At last they came to two mountains divided by a narrow valley. "We will go no farther," said the false uncle. "I will show you something wonderful; only do you gather up sticks while I kindle a fire." When it was lit the magician threw on it a powder he had about him, at the same time saying some magical words. The earth trembled a little and opened in front of them, disclosing a square flat stone with a brass ring in the middle to raise it by. Aladdin tried to run away, but the magician caught him and gave him a blow that knocked him down. "What have I done, uncle?" he said piteously; whereupon the magician said more kindly: "Fear nothing, but obey me. Beneath this stone lies a treasure which is to be yours, and no one else may touch it, so you must do exactly as I tell you." At the word treasure Aladdin forgot his fears, and grasped the ring as he was told, saying the names of his father and grandfather. The stone came up quite easily, and some steps appeared. "Go down," said the magician; "at the foot of those steps you will find an open door leading into three large halls. Tuck up your gown and go through them without touching anything, or you will die instantly. These halls lead into a garden of fine fruit trees. Walk on until you come to a niche in a terrace where stands a lighted lamp. Pour out the oil it contains, and bring it to me." He drew a ring from his finger and gave it to Aladdin, bidding him prosper.

Aladdin found everything as the magician had said, gathered some fruit off the trees, and, having got the lamp, arrived at the mouth of the cave. The magician cried out in a great hurry: "Make haste and give me the lamp." This Aladdin refused to do until he was out of the cave. The magician flew into a terrible passion, and throwing some more powder on to the fire, he said something, and the stone rolled back into its place.

The magician left Persia for ever, which plainly showed that he was no uncle of Aladdin's, but a cunning magician, who had read in his magic books of a wonderful lamp, which would make him the most powerful man in the world. Though he alone knew where to find it, he could only receive it from the hand of another. He had picked out the foolish Aladdin for this purpose, intending to get the lamp and kill him afterward.

For two days Aladdin remained in the dark, crying and lamenting. At last he clasped his hands in prayer, and in so doing rubbed the ring, which the magician had forgotten to take from him. Immediately an enormous and frightful genie rose out of the earth, saying: "What wouldst thou with me? I am the Slave of the Ring, and will obey thee in all things." Aladdin fearlessly replied: "Deliver me from this place!" whereupon the earth opened, and he found himself outside. As soon as his eyes could bear the light he went home, but fainted on the threshold. When he came to himself he told his mother what had passed, and showed her the lamp and the fruits he had gathered in the garden, which were, in reality, precious stones. He then asked for some food. "Alas! child," she said, "I have nothing in the house, but I have spun a little cotton and will go and sell it." Aladdin bade her keep her cotton, for he would sell the lamp instead. As it was very dirty she began to rub it, that it might fetch a higher price. Instantly a hideous genie appeared, and asked what she would have. She fainted away, but Aladdin, snatching the lamp, said boldly: "Fetch me something to eat!" The genie returned with a silver bowl, twelve silver plates containing rich meats, two silver cups, and two bottles of wine. Aladdin's mother, when she came to herself, said: "Whence comes this splendid feast?" "Ask not, but eat," replied Aladdin. So they sat at breakfast till it was dinner-time, and Aladdin told his mother about the lamp. She begged him to sell it, and have nothing to do with devils. "No," said Aladdin, "since chance hath made us aware of its virtues, we will use it, and the ring likewise, which I shall always wear on my finger." When they had eaten all the genie had brought, Aladdin sold one of the silver plates, and so on until none were left. He then had recourse to the genie, who gave him another set of plates, and thus they lived for many years.

One day Aladdin heard an order from the Sultan proclaimed that everyone was to stay at home and close his shutters while the Princess, his daughter, went to and from the bath. Aladdin was seized by a desire to see her face, which was very difficult, as she always went veiled. He hid himself behind the door of the bath, and peeped through a chink. The Princess lifted her veil as she went in, and looked so beautiful that Aladdin fell in love with her at first sight. He went home so changed that his mother was frightened. He told her he loved the Princess so deeply that he could not live without her, and meant to ask her in marriage of her father. His mother, on hearing this, burst out laughing, but Aladdin at last prevailed upon her to go before the Sultan and carry his request. She fetched a napkin and laid in it the magic fruits from the enchanted garden, which sparkled and shone like the most beautiful jewels. She took these with her to please the Sultan, and set out, trusting in the lamp. The Grand Vizier and the lords of council had just gone in as she entered the hall and placed herself in front of the Sultan. He, however, took no notice of her. She went every day for a week, and stood in the same place. When the council broke up on the sixth day the Sultan said to his Vizier: "I see a certain woman in the audience-chamber every day carrying something in a napkin. Call her next time, that I may find out what she wants." Next day, at a sign from the Vizier, she went up to the foot of the throne and remained kneeling till the Sultan said to her: "Rise, good woman, and tell me what you want." She hesitated, so the Sultan sent away all but the Vizier, and bade her speak frankly, promising to forgive her beforehand for anything she might say. She then told him of her son's violent love for the Princess. "I prayed him to forget her," she said, "but in vain; he threatened to do some desperate deed if I refused to go and ask your Majesty for the hand of the Princess. Now I pray you to forgive not me alone, but my son Aladdin." The Sultan asked her kindly what she had in the napkin, whereupon she unfolded the jewels and presented them. He was thunderstruck, and turning to the Vizier said: "What sayest thou? Ought I not to bestow the Princess on one who values her at such a price?" The Vizier, who wanted her for his own son, begged the Sultan to withhold her for three months, in the course of which he hoped his son would contrive to make him a richer present. The Sultan granted this, and told Aladdin's mother that, though he consented to the marriage, she must not appear before him again for three months.

Aladdin waited patiently for nearly three months, but after two had elapsed his mother, going into the city to buy oil, found every one rejoicing, and asked what was going on. "Do you not know," was the answer, "that the son of the Grand Vizier is to marry the Sultan's daughter to-night?" Breathless, she ran and told Aladdin, who was overwhelmed at first, but presently bethought him of the lamp. He rubbed it, and the genie appeared, saying, "What is thy will?" Aladdin replied: "The Sultan, as thou knowest, has broken his promise to me, and the Vizier's son is to have the Princess. My command is that to-night you bring hither the bride and bridegroom." "Master, I obey," said the genie. Aladdin then went to his chamber, where, sure enough, at midnight the genie transported the bed containing the Vizier's son and the Princess. "Take this new-married man," he said, "and put him outside in the cold, and return at daybreak." Whereupon the genie took the Vizier's son out of bed, leaving Aladdin with the Princess. "Fear nothing," Aladdin said to her; "you are my wife, promised to me by your unjust father, and no harm shall come to you." The Princess was too frightened to speak, and passed the most miserable night of her life, while Aladdin lay down beside her and slept soundly. At the appointed hour the genie fetched in the shivering bridegroom, laid him in his place, and transported the bed back to the palace.

Presently the Sultan came to wish his daughter good-morning. The unhappy Vizier's son jumped up and hid himself, while the Princess would not say a word, and was very sorrowful. The Sultan sent her mother to her, who said: "How comes it, child, that you will not speak to your father? What has happened?" The Princess sighed deeply, and at last told her mother how, during the night, the bed had been carried into some strange house, and what had passed there. Her mother did not believe her in the least, but bade her rise and consider it an idle dream.

The following night exactly the same thing happened, and next morning, on the Princess's refusal to speak, the Sultan threatened to cut off her head. She then confessed all, bidding him to ask the Vizier's son if it were not so. The Sultan told the Vizier to ask his son, who owned the truth, adding that, dearly as he loved the Princess, he had rather die than go through another such fearful night, and wished to be separated from her. His wish was granted, and there was an end to feasting and rejoicing.

When the three months were over, Aladdin sent his mother to remind the Sultan of his promise. She stood in the same place as before, and the Sultan, who had forgotten Aladdin, at once remembered him, and sent for her. On seeing her poverty the Sultan felt less inclined than ever to keep his word, and asked his Vizier's advice, who counselled him to set so high a value on the Princess that no man living could come up to it. The Sultan then turned to Aladdin's mother, saying: "Good woman, a Sultan must remember his promises, and I will remember mine, but your son must first send me forty basins of gold brimful of jewels, carried by forty black slaves, led by as many white ones, splendidly dressed. Tell him that I await his answer." The mother of Aladdin bowed low and went home, thinking all was lost. She gave Aladdin the message, adding: "He may wait long enough for your answer!" "Not so long, mother, as you think," her son replied. "I would do a great deal more than that for the Princess." He summoned the genie, and in a few moments the eighty slaves arrived, and filled up the small house and garden. Aladdin made them set out to the palace, two and two, followed by his mother. They were so richly dressed, with such splendid jewels in their girdles, that everyone crowded to see them and the basins of gold they carried on their heads. They entered the palace, and, after kneeling before the Sultan, stood in a half-circle round the throne with their arms crossed, while Aladdin's mother presented them to the Sultan. He hesitated no longer, but said: "Good woman, return and tell your son that I wait for him with open arms." She lost no time in telling Aladdin, bidding him make haste. But Aladdin first called the genie. "I want a scented bath," he said, "a richly embroidered habit, a horse surpassing the Sultan's, and twenty slaves to attend me. Besides this, six slaves, beautifully dressed, to wait on my mother; and lastly, ten thousand pieces of gold in ten purses." No sooner said than done. Aladdin mounted his horse and passed through the streets, the slaves strewing gold as they went. Those who had played with him in his childhood knew him not, he had grown so handsome. When the Sultan saw him he came down from his throne, embraced him, and led him into a hall where a feast was spread, intending to marry him to the Princess that very day. But Aladdin refused, saying, "I must build a palace fit for her," and took his leave. Once home, he said to the genie: "Build me a palace of the finest marble, set with jasper, agate, and other precious stones. In the middle you shall build me a large hall with a dome, its four walls of massy gold and silver, each having six windows, whose lattices, all except one which is to be left unfinished, must be set with diamonds and rubies. There must be stables and horses and grooms and slaves; go and see about it!"

The palace was finished by the next day, and the genie carried him there and showed him all his orders faithfully carried out, even to the laying of a velvet carpet from Aladdin's palace to the Sultan's. Aladdin's mother then dressed herself carefully, and walked to the palace with her slaves, while he followed her on horseback. The Sultan sent musicians with trumpets and cymbals to meet them, so that the air resounded with music and cheers. She was taken to the Princess, who saluted her and treated her with great honor. At night the Princess said good-by to her father, and set out on the carpet for Aladdin's palace, with his mother at her side, and followed by the hundred slaves. She was charmed at the sight of Aladdin, who ran to receive her. "Princess," he said, "blame your beauty for my boldness if I have displeased you." She told him that, having seen him, she willingly obeyed her father in this matter. After the wedding had taken place Aladdin led her into the hall, where a feast was spread, and she supped with him, after which they danced till midnight. Next day Aladdin invited the Sultan to see the palace. On entering the hall with the four-and-twenty windows, with their rubies, diamonds, and emeralds, he cried: "It is a world's wonder! There is only one thing that surprises me. Was it by accident that one window was left unfinished?" "No, sir, by design," returned Aladdin. "I wished your Majesty to have the glory of finishing this palace." The Sultan was pleased, and sent for the best jewelers in the city. He showed them the unfinished window, and bade them fit it up like the others. "Sir," replied their spokesman, "we cannot find jewels enough." The Sultan had his own fetched, which they soon used, but to no purpose, for in a month's time the work was not half done. Aladdin, knowing that their task was vain, bade them undo their work and carry the jewels back, and the genie finished the window at his command. The Sultan was surprised to receive his jewels again, and visited Aladdin, who showed him the window finished. The Sultan embraced him, the envious Vizier meanwhile hinting that it was the work of enchantment.

Aladdin had won the hearts of the people by his gentle bearing. He was made captain of the Sultan's armies, and won several battles for him, but remained modest and courteous as before, and lived thus in peace and content for several years.

But far away in Africa the magician remembered Aladdin, and by his magic arts discovered that Aladdin, instead of perishing miserably in the cave, had escaped, and had married a princess, with whom he was living in great honor and wealth. He knew that the poor tailor's son could only have accomplished this by means of the lamp, and traveled night and day until he reached the capital of China, bent on Aladdin's ruin. As he passed through the town he heard people talking everywhere about a marvellous palace. "Forgive my ignorance," he asked, "what is this palace you speak Of?" "Have you not heard of Prince Aladdin's palace," was the reply, "the greatest wonder of the world? I will direct you if you have a mind to see it." The magician thanked him who spoke, and having seen the palace, knew that it had been raised by the Genie of the Lamp, and became half mad with rage. He determined to get hold of the lamp, and again plunge Aladdin into the deepest poverty.

Unluckily, Aladdin had gone a-hunting for eight days, which gave the magician plenty of time. He bought a dozen copper lamps, put them into a basket, and went to the palace, crying: "New lamps for old!" followed by a jeering crowd. The Princess, sitting in the hall of four-and-twenty windows, sent a slave to find out what the noise was about, who came back laughing, so that the Princess scolded her. "Madam," replied the slave, "who can help laughing to see an old fool offering to exchange fine new lamps for old ones?" Another slave, hearing this, said: "There is an old one on the cornice there which he can have." Now this was the magic lamp, which Aladdin had left there, as he could not take it out hunting with him. The Princess, not knowing its value, laughingly bade the slave take it and make the exchange. She went and said to the magician: "Give me a new lamp for this." He snatched it and bade the slave take her choice, amid the jeers of the crowd. Little he cared, but left off crying his lamps, and went out of the city gates to a lonely place, where he remained till nightfall, when he pulled out the lamp and rubbed it. The genie appeared, and at the magician's command carried him, together with the palace and the Princess in it, to a lonely place in Africa.

Next morning the Sultan looked out of the window toward Aladdin's palace and rubbed his eyes, for it was gone. He sent for the Vizier and asked what had become of the palace. The Vizier looked out too, and was lost in astonishment. He again put it down to enchantment, and this time the Sultan believed him, and sent thirty men on horseback to fetch Aladdin in chains. They met him riding home, bound him, and forced him to go with them on foot. The people, however, who loved him, followed, armed, to see that he came to no harm. He was carried before the Sultan, who ordered the executioner to cut off his head. The executioner made Aladdin kneel down, bandaged his eyes, and raised his scimitar to strike. At that instant the Vizier, who saw that the crowd had forced their way into the courtyard and were scaling the walls to rescue Aladdin, called to the executioner to stay his hand. The people, indeed, looked so threatening that the Sultan gave way and ordered Aladdin to be unbound, and pardoned him in the sight of the crowd. Aladdin now begged to know what he had done. "False wretch!" said the Sultan, "come thither," and showed him from the window the place where his palace had stood. Aladdin was so amazed that he could not say a word. "Where is my palace and my daughter?" demanded the Sultan. "For the first I am not so deeply concerned, but my daughter I must have, and you must find her or lose your head." Aladdin begged for forty days in which to find her, promising, if he failed, to return and suffer death at the Sultan's pleasure. His prayer was granted, and he went forth sadly from the Sultan's presence. For three days he wandered about like a madman, asking everyone what had become of his palace, but they only laughed and pitied him. He came to the banks of a river, and knelt down to say his prayers before throwing himself in. In so doing he rubbed the magic ring he still wore. The genie he had seen in the cave appeared, and asked his will. "Save my life, genie," said Aladdin, "bring my palace back." "That is not in my power," said the genie; "I am only the Slave of the Ring; you must ask him of the lamp." "Even so," said Aladdin, "but thou canst take me to the palace, and set me down under my dear wife's window." He at once found himself in Africa, under the window of the Princess, and fell asleep out of sheer weariness.

He was awakened by the singing of the birds, and his heart was lighter. He saw plainly that all his misfortunes were owing to the loss of the lamp, and vainly wondered who had robbed him of it.

That morning the Princess rose earlier than she had done since she had been carried into Africa by the magician, whose company she was forced to endure once a day. She, however, treated him so harshly that he dared not live there altogether. As she was dressing, one of her women looked out and saw Aladdin. The Princess ran and opened the window, and at the noise she made Aladdin looked up. She called to him to come to her, and great was the joy of these lovers at seeing each other again. After he had kissed her Aladdin said: "I beg of you, Princess, in God's name, before we speak of anything else, for your own sake and mine, tell me that has become of an old lamp I left on the cornice in the hall of four-and-twenty windows, when I went a-hunting." "Alas!" she said, "I am the innocent cause of our sorrows," and told him of the exchange of the lamp. "Now I know," cried Aladdin, "that we have to thank the African magician for this! Where is the lamp?" "He carries it about with him," said the Princess. "I know, for he pulled it out of his breast to show me. He wishes me to break my faith with you and marry him, saying that you were beheaded by my father's command. He is for ever speaking ill of you but I only reply by my tears. If I persist, I doubt not but he will use violence." Aladdin comforted her, and left her for a while. He changed clothes with the first person he met in the town, and having bought a certain powder, returned to the Princess, who let him in by a little side door. "Put on your most beautiful dress," he said to her "and receive the magician with smiles, leading him to believe that you have forgotten me. Invite him to sup with you, and say you wish to taste the wine of his country. He will go for some and while he is gone I will tell you what to do." She listened carefully to Aladdin and when he left she arrayed herself gaily for the first time since she left China. She put on a girdle and head-dress of diamonds, and, seeing in a glass that she was more beautiful than ever, received the magician, saying, to his great amazement: "I have made up my mind that Aladdin is dead, and that all my tears will not bring him back to me, so I am resolved to mourn no more, and have therefore invited you to sup with me; but I am tired of the wines of China, and would fain taste those of Africa." The magician flew to his cellar, and the Princess put the powder Aladdin had given her in her cup. When he returned she asked him to drink her health in the wine of Africa, handing him her cup in exchange for his, as a sign she was reconciled to him. Before drinking the magician made her a speech in praise of her beauty, but the Princess cut him short, saying: "Let us drink first, and you shall say what you will afterward." She set her cup to her lips and kept it there, while the magician drained his to the dregs and fell back lifeless. The Princess then opened the door to Aladdin, and flung her arms round his neck; but Aladdin put her away, bidding her leave him, as he had more to do. He then went to the dead magician, took the lamp out of his vest, and bade the genie carry the palace and all in it back to China. This was done, and the Princess in her chamber only felt two little shocks, and little thought she was at home again.

The Sultan, who was sitting in his closet, mourning for his lost daughter, happened to look up, and rubbed his eyes, for there stood the palace as before! He hastened thither, and Aladdin received him in the hall of the four-and-twenty windows, with the Princess at his side. Aladdin told him what had happened, and showed him the dead body of the magician, that he might believe. A ten days' feast was proclaimed, and it seemed as if Aladdin might now live the rest of his life in peace; but it was not to be.

The African magician had a younger brother, who was, if possible, more wicked and more cunning than himself. He traveled to China to avenge his brother's death, and went to visit a pious woman called Fatima, thinking she might be of use to him. He entered her cell and clapped a dagger to her breast, telling her to rise and do his bidding on pain of death. He changed clothes with her, colored his face like hers, put on her veil, and murdered her, that she might tell no tales. Then he went toward the palace of Aladdin, and all the people, thinking he was the holy woman, gathered round him, kissing his hands and begging his blessing. When he got to the palace there was such a noise going on round him that the Princess bade her slave look out of the window and ask what was the matter. The slave said it was the holy woman, curing people by her touch of their ailments, whereupon the Princess, who had long desired to see Fatima, sent for her. On coming to the Princess the magician offered up a prayer for her health and prosperity. When he had done the Princess made him sit by her, and begged him to stay with her always. The false Fatima, who wished for nothing better, consented, but kept his veil down for fear of discovery. The Princess showed him the hall, and asked him what he thought of it. "It is truly beautiful," said the false Fatima. "In my mind it wants but one thing." "And what is that?" said the Princess. "If only a roc's egg," replied he, "were hung up from the middle of this dome, it would be the wonder of the world."

After this the Princess could think of nothing but the roc's egg, and when Aladdin returned from hunting he found her in a very ill humor. He begged to know what was amiss, and she told him that all her pleasure in the hall was spoiled for the want of a roc's egg hanging from the dome. "If that is all," replied Aladdin, "you shall soon be happy." He left her and rubbed the lamp, and when the genie appeared commanded him to bring a roc's egg. The genie gave such a loud and terrible shriek that the hall shook. "Wretch!" he cried, "is it not enough that I have done everything for you, but you must command me to bring my master and hang him up in the midst of this dome? You and your wife and your palace deserve to be burnt to ashes, but that this request does not come from you, but from the brother of the African magician, whom you destroyed. He is now in your palace disguised as the holy woman--whom he murdered. He it was who put that wish into your wife's head. Take care of yourself, for he means to kill you." So saying, the genie disappeared.

Aladdin went back to the Princess, saying his head ached, and requesting that the holy Fatima should be fetched to lay her hands on it. But when the magician came near, Aladdin, seizing his dagger, pierced him to the heart. "What have you done?" cried the Princess. "You have killed the holy woman!" "Not so," replied Aladdin, "but a wicked magician," and told her of how she had been deceived.

After this Aladdin and his wife lived in peace. He succeeded the Sultan when he died, and reigned for many years, leaving behind him a long line of kings.[1]

[1] Arabian Nights.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

THE TALE OF A YOUTH WHO SET OUT TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS

A father had two sons, of whom the eldest was clever and bright, and always knew what he was about; but the youngest was stupid, and couldn't learn or understand anything. So much so that those who saw him exclaimed: "What a burden he'll be to his father!" Now when there was anything to be done, the eldest had always to do it; but if something was required later or in the night-time, and the way led through the churchyard or some such ghostly place, he always replied: "Oh! no, father: nothing will induce me to go there, it makes me shudder!" for he was afraid. Or, when they sat of an evening around the fire telling stories which made one's flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said: "Oh! it makes one shudder," the youngest sat in a corner, heard the exclamation, and could not understand what it meant. "They are always saying it makes one shudder! it makes one shudder! Nothing makes me shudder. It's probably an art quite beyond me."

Now it happened that his father said to him one day: "Hearken, you there in the corner; you are growing big and strong, and you must learn to earn your own bread. Look at your brother, what pains he takes; but all the money I've spent on your education is thrown away." "My dear father," he replied, "I will gladly learn--in fact, if it were possible I should like to learn to shudder; I don't understand that a bit yet." The eldest laughed when he heard this, and thought to himself: "Good heavens! what a ninny my brother is! he'll never come to any good; as the twig is bent, so is the tree inclined." The father sighed, and answered him: "You'll soon learn to shudder; but that won't help you to make a living."

Shortly after this, when the sexton came to pay them a visit, the father broke out to him, and told him what a bad hand his youngest son was at everything: he knew nothing and learned nothing. "Only think! when I asked him how he purposed gaining a livelihood, he actually asked to be taught to shudder." "If that's all he wants," said the sexton, "I can teach him that; just you send him to me, I'll soon polish him up." The father was quite pleased with the proposal, because he thought: "It will be a good discipline for the youth." And so the sexton took him into his house, and his duty was to toll the bell. After a few days he woke him at midnight, and bade him rise and climb into the tower and toll. "Now, my friend, I'll teach you to shudder," thought he. He stole forth secretly in front, and when the youth was up above, and had turned round to grasp the bell-rope, he saw, standing opposite the hole of the belfry, a white figure. "Who's there?" he called out, but the figure gave no answer, and neither stirred nor moved. "Answer," cried the youth, "or begone; you have no business here at this hour of the night." But the sexton remained motionless, so that the youth might think that it was a ghost. The youth called out the second time: "What do you want here? Speak if you are an honest fellow, or I'll knock you down the stairs." The sexton thought: "He can't mean that in earnest," so gave forth no sound, and stood as though he were made of stone. Then the youth shouted out to him the third time, and as that too had no effect, he made a dash at the spectre and knocked it down the stairs, so that it fell about ten steps and remained lying in a corner. Thereupon he tolled the bell, went home to bed without saying a word, and fell asleep. The sexton's wife waited a long time for her husband, but he never appeared. At last she became anxious, and woke the youth, and asked: "Don't you know where my husband is? He went up to the tower in front of you." "No," answered the youth; "but someone stood on the stairs up there just opposite the trap-door in the belfry, and because he wouldn't answer me, or go away, I took him for a rogue and knocked him down. You'd better go and see if it was he; I should be much distressed if it were." The wife ran and found her husband who was lying groaning in a corner, with his leg broken.

She carried him down, and then hurried with loud protestations to the youth's father. "Your son has been the cause of a pretty misfortune," she cried; "he threw my husband downstairs so that he broke his leg. Take the good-for-nothing wretch out of our house." The father was horrified, hurried to the youth, and gave him a scolding.

"What unholy pranks are these? The evil one must have put them into your head." "Father," he replied, "only listen to me; I am quite guiltless. He stood there in the night, like one who meant harm. I didn't know who it was, and warned him three times to speak or begone." "Oh!" groaned the father, "you'll bring me nothing but misfortune; get out of my sight, I won't have anything more to do with you." "Yes, father, willingly; only wait till daylight, then I'll set out and learn to shudder, and in that way I shall be master of an art which will gain me a living." "Learn what you will," said the father, "it's all one to me. Here are fifty dollars for you, set forth into the wide world with them; but see you tell no one where you come from or who your father is, for I am ashamed of you." "Yes, father, whatever you wish; and if that's all you ask, I can easily keep it in mind."

When day broke the youth put the fifty dollars into his pocket, set out on the hard high road, and kept muttering to himself: "If I could only shudder! if I could only shudder!" Just at this moment a man came by who heard the youth speaking to himself, and when they had gone on a bit and were in sight of the gallows the man said to him: "Look! there is the tree where seven people have been hanged, and are now learning to fly; sit down under it and wait till nightfall, and then you'll pretty soon learn to shudder." "If that's all I have to do," answered the youth, "it's easily done; but if I learn to shudder so quickly, then you shall have my fifty dollars. Just come back to me to-morrow morning early." Then the youth went to the gallows-tree and sat down underneath it, and waited for the evening; and because he felt cold he lit himself a fire. But at midnight it got so chill that in spite of the fire he couldn't keep warm. And as the wind blew the corpses one against the other, tossing them to and fro, he thought to himself: "If you are perishing down here by the fire, how those poor things up there must be shaking and shivering!" And because he had a tender heart, he put up a ladder, which he climbed unhooked one body after the other, and took down all the seven. Then he stirred the fire, blew it up, and placed them all round in a circle, that they might warm themselves. But they sat there and did not move, and the fire caught their clothes. Then he spoke: "Take care, or I'll hang you up again." But the dead men did not hear and let their rags go on burning. Then he got angry, and said: "If you aren't careful yourselves, then I can't help you, and I don't mean to burn with you"; and he hung them up again in a row. Then he sat down at his fire and fell asleep. On the following morning the man came to him, and, wishing to get his fifty dollars, said: "Now you know what it is to shudder." "No," he answered, "how should I? Those fellows up there never opened their mouths, and were so stupid that they let those few old tatters they have on their bodies burn." Then the man saw he wouldn't get his fifty dollars that day, and went off, saying: "Well, I'm blessed if I ever met such a person in my life before."

The youth went too on his way, and began to murmur to himself: "Oh! if I could only shudder! if I could only shudder!" A carrier who was walking behind him heard these words, and asked him: "Who are you" "I don't know," said the youth. "Where do you hail from?" "I don't know." "Who's your father?" "I mayn't say." "What are you constantly muttering to yourself?" "Oh!" said the youth, "I would give worlds to shudder, but no one can teach me." "Stuff and nonsense!" spoke the carrier; "come along with me, and I'll soon put that right." The youth went with the carrier, and in the evening they reached an inn, where they were to spend the night. Then, just as he was entering the room, he said again, quite aloud: "Oh! if I could only shudder! if I could only shudder!" The landlord, who heard this, laughed and said: "If that's what you're sighing for, you shall be given every opportunity here." "Oh! hold your tongue!" said the landlord's wife; "so many people have paid for their curiosity with their lives, it were a thousand pities if those beautiful eyes were never again to behold daylight." But the youth said: "No matter how difficult, I insist on learning it; why, that's what I've set out to do." He left the landlord no peace till he told him that in the neighborhood stood a haunted castle, where one could easily learn to shudder if one only kept watch in it for three nights. The King had promised the man who dared to do this thing his daughter as wife, and she was the most beautiful maiden under the sun. There was also much treasure hid in the castle, guarded by evil spirits, which would then be free, and was sufficient to make a poor man more than rich. Many had already gone in, but so far none had ever come out again. So the youth went to the King and spoke: "If I were allowed, I should much like to watch for three nights in the castle." The King looked at him, and because he pleased him, he said: "You can ask for three things, none of them living, and those you may take with you into the castle." Then he answered: "Well, I shall beg for a fire, a turning lathe, and a carving bench with the knife attached."

On the following day the King had everything put into the castle; and when night drew on the youth took up his position there, lit a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the carving bench with the knife close to it, and sat himself down on the turning lathe. "Oh! if I could only shudder!" he said: "but I sha'n't learn it here either." Toward midnight he wanted to make up the fire, and as he was blowing up a blaze he heard a shriek from a corner. "Ou, miou! how cold we are!" "You fools!" he cried; "why do you scream? If you are cold, come and sit at the fire and warm yourselves." And as he spoke two huge black cats sprang fiercely forward and sat down, one on each side of him, and gazed wildly at him with their fiery eyes. After a time, when they had warmed themselves, they said: "Friend, shall we play a little game of cards?" "Why not?" he replied; "but first let me see your paws." Then they stretched out their claws. "Ha!" said he; "what long nails you've got! Wait a minute: I must first cut them off." Thereupon he seized them by the scruff of their necks, lifted them on to the carving bench, and screwed down their paws firmly. "After watching you narrowly," said he, "I no longer feel any desire to play cards with you"; and with these words he struck them dead and threw them out into the water. But when he had thus sent the two of them to their final rest, and was again about to sit down at the fire, out of every nook and corner came forth black cats and black dogs with fiery chains in such swarms that he couldn't possibly get away from them. They yelled in the most ghastly manner, jumped upon his fire, scattered it all, and tried to put it out. He looked on quietly for a time, but when it got beyond a joke he seized his carving-knife and called out: "Be off, you rabble rout!" and let fly at them. Some of them fled away, and the others he struck dead and threw them out into the pond below. When he returned he blew up the sparks of the fire once more, and warmed himself. And as he sat thus his eyes refused to keep open any longer, and a desire to sleep stole over him. Then he looked around him and beheld in the corner a large bed. "The very thing," he said, and laid himself down in it. But when he wished to close his eyes the bed began to move by itself, and ran all round the castle. "Capital," he said, "only a little quicker." Then the bed sped on as if drawn by six horses, over thresholds and stairs, up this way and down that. All of a sudden--crash, crash! with a bound it turned over, upside down, and lay like a mountain on the top of him. But he tossed the blankets and pillows in the air, emerged from underneath, and said: "Now anyone who has the fancy for it may go a drive," lay down at his fire, and slept till daylight. In the morning the King came, and when he beheld him lying on the ground he imagined the ghosts had been too much for him, and that he was dead. Then he said: "What a pity! and such a fine fellow he was." The youth heard this, got up, and said: "It's not come to that yet." Then the King was astonished, but very glad, and asked how it had fared with him. "First-rate," he answered; "and now I've survived the one night, I shall get through the other two also." The landlord, when he went to him, opened his eyes wide, and said: "Well, I never thought to see you alive again. Have you learned now what shuddering is ?" "No," he replied, "it's quite hopeless; if someone could only tell me how to!"

The second night he went up again to the old castle, sat down at the fire, and began his old refrain: "If I could only shudder!" As midnight approached, a noise and din broke out, at first gentle, but gradually increasing; then all was quiet for a minute, and at length, with a loud scream, half of a man dropped down the chimney and fell before him. "Hi, up there!" shouted he; "there's another half wanted down here, that's not enough"; then the din commenced once more, there was a shrieking and a yelling, and then the other half fell down. "Wait a bit," he said; "I'll stir up the fire for you." When he had done this and again looked around, the two pieces had united, and a horrible-looking man sat on his seat. "Come," said the youth, "I didn't bargain for that, the seat is mine." The man tried to shove him away, but the youth wouldn't allow it for a moment, and, pushing him off by force, sat down in his place again. Then more men dropped down, one after the other, who fetching nine skeleton legs and two skulls, put them up and played ninepins with them. The youth thought he would like to play too, and said: "Look here; do you mind my joining the game?" "No, not if you have money." "I've money enough," he replied, "but your balls aren't round enough." Then he took the skulls, placed them on his lathe, and turned them till they were round. "Now they'll roll along better," said he, "and houp-la! now the fun begins." He played with them and lost some of his money, but when twelve struck everything vanished before his eyes. He lay down and slept peacefully. The next morning the King came, anxious for news. "How have you got on this time?" he asked. "I played ninepins," he answered, "and lost a few pence." "Didn't you shudder then?" "No such luck," said he; "I made myself merry. Oh! if I only knew what it was to shudder!"

On the third night he sat down again on his bench, and said, in the most desponding way: "If I could only shudder!" When it got late, six big men came in carrying a coffin. Then he cried: "Ha! ha! that's most likely my little cousin who only died a few days ago"; and beckoning with his finger he called out: "Come, my small cousin, come." They placed the coffin on the ground, and he approached it and took off the cover. In it lay a dead man. He felt his face, and it was cold as ice. "Wait," he said "I'll heat you up a bit," went to the fire, warmed his hand, and laid it on the man's face, but the dead remained cold. Then he lifted him out, sat down at the fire, laid him on his knee, and rubbed his arms that the blood should circulate again. When that too had no effect it occurred to him that if two people lay together in bed they warmed each other; so he put him into the bed, covered him up, and lay down beside him; after a time the corpse became warm and began to move. Then the youth said: "Now, my little cousin, what would have happened if I hadn't warmed you?" But the dead man rose up and cried out: "Now I will strangle you." "What!" said he, "is that all the thanks I get? You should be put straight back into your coffin," lifted him up, threw him in, and closed the lid. Then the six men came and carried him out again. "I simply can't shudder," he said, "and it's clear I sha'n't learn it in a lifetime here."

Then a man entered, of more than ordinary size and of a very fearful appearance; but he was old and had a white beard. "Oh! you miserable creature, now you will soon know what it is to shudder," he cried, "for you must die." "Not so quickly," answered the youth. "If I am to die, you must catch me first." "I shall soon lay hold of you," spoke the monster. "Gently, gently, don't boast too much, I'm as strong as you, and stronger too." "We'll soon see," said the old man; "if you are stronger than I then I'll let you off; come, let's have a try." Then he led him through some dark passages to a forge, and grasping an axe he drove one of the anvils with a blow into the earth. "I can do better than that," cried the youth, and went to the other anvil. The old man drew near him in order to watch closely, and his white beard hung right down. The youth seized the axe, cleft the anvil open, and jammed in the old man's beard. "Now I have you," said the youth; "this time it's your turn to die." Then he seized an iron rod and belabored the old man till he, whimpering, begged him to leave off, and he would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and let him go. The old man led him back to the castle and showed him in a cellar three chests of gold. "One of these," said he, "belongs to the poor, one to the King, and the third is yours." At that moment twelve struck, and the spirit vanished, leaving the youth alone in the dark. "I'll surely be able to find a way out," said he, and groping about he at length found his way back to the room, and fell asleep at his fire. The next morning the King came, and said: "Well, now you've surely learned to shudder?" "No," he answered; "what can it be? My dead cousin was here, and an old bearded man came, who showed me heaps of money down below there, but what shuddering is no one has told me." Then the King spoke: "You have freed the castle from its curse, and you shall marry my daughter." "That's all charming," he said; "but I still don't know what it is to shudder."

Then the gold was brought up, and the wedding was celebrated, but the young King, though he loved his wife dearly, and though he was very happy, still kept on saying: "If I could only shudder! if I could only shudder!" At last he reduced her to despair. Then her maid said: "I'll help you; we'll soon make him shudder." So she went out to the stream that flowed through the garden, and had a pail full of little gudgeons brought to her. At night, when the young King was asleep, his wife had to pull the clothes off him, and pour the pail full of little gudgeons over him, so that the little fish swam all about him. Then he awoke and cried out: "Oh! how I shudder, how I shudder, dear wife! Yes, now I know what shuddering is."[1]

[1] Grimm.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

RUMPELSTILTZKIN

There was once upon a time a poor miller who had a very beautiful daughter. Now it happened one day that he had an audience with the King, and in order to appear a person of some importance he told him that he had a daughter who could spin straw into gold. "Now that's a talent worth having," said the King to the miller; "if your daughter is as clever as you say, bring her to my palace to-morrow, and I'll put her to the test." When the girl was brought to him he led her into a room full of straw, gave her a spinning-wheel and spindle, and said: "Now set to work and spin all night till early dawn, and if by that time you haven't spun the straw into gold you shall die." Then he closed the door behind him and left her alone inside.

So the poor miller's daughter sat down, and didn't know what in the world she was to do. She hadn't the least idea of how to spin straw into gold, and became at last so miserable that she began to cry. Suddenly the door opened, and in stepped a tiny little man and said: "Good-evening, Miss Miller-maid; why are you crying so bitterly?" "Oh!" answered the girl, "I have to spin straw into gold, and haven't a notion how it's done." "What will you give me if I spin it for you?" asked the manikin. "My necklace," replied the girl. The little man took the necklace, sat himself down at the wheel, and whir, whir, whir, the wheel went round three times, and the bobbin was full. Then he put on another, and whir, whir, whir, the wheel went round three times, and the second too was full; and so it went on till the morning, when all the straw was spun away, and all the bobbins were full of gold. As soon as the sun rose the King came, and when he perceived the gold he was astonished and delighted, but his heart only lusted more than ever after the precious metal. He had the miller's daughter put into another room full of straw, much bigger than the first, and bade her, if she valued her life, spin it all into gold before the following morning. The girl didn't know what to do, and began to cry; then the door opened as before, and the tiny little man appeared and said: "What'll you give me if I spin the straw into gold for you?" "The ring from my finger," answered the girl. The manikin took the ring, and whir! round went the spinning-wheel again, and when morning broke he had spun all the straw into glittering gold. The King was pleased beyond measure at the sights but his greed for gold was still not satisfied, and he had the miller's daughter brought into a yet bigger room full of straw, and said: "You must spin all this away in the night; but if you succeed this time you shall become my wife." "She's only a miller's daughter, it's true," he thought; "but I couldn't find a richer wife if I were to search the whole world over." When the girl was alone the little man appeared for the third time, and said: "What'll you give me if I spin the straw for you once again?" "I've nothing more to give," answered the girl. "Then promise me when you are Queen to give me your first child." "Who knows what may not happen before that?" thought the miller's daughter; and besides, she saw no other way out of it, so she promised the manikin what he demanded, and he set to work once more and spun the straw into gold. When the King came in the morning, and found everything as he had desired, he straightway made her his wife, and the miller's daughter became a queen.  When a year had passed a beautiful son was born to her, and she thought no more of the little man, till all of a sudden one day he stepped into her room and said: "Now give me what you promised." The Queen was in a great state, and offered the little man all the riches in her kingdom if he would only leave her the child. But the manikin said: "No, a living creature is dearer to me than all the treasures in the world." Then the Queen began to cry and sob so bitterly that the little man was sorry for her, and said: "I'll give you three days to guess my name, and if you find it out in that time you may keep your child."

Then the Queen pondered the whole night over all the names she had ever heard, and sent a messenger to scour the land, and to pick up far and near any names he could come across. When the little man arrived on the following day she began with Kasper, Melchior, Belshazzar, and all the other names she knew, in a string, but at each one the manikin called out: "That's not my name." The next day she sent to inquire the names of all the people in the neighborhood, and had a long list of the most uncommon and extraordinary for the little man when he made his appearance. "Is your name, perhaps, Sheepshanks Cruickshanks, Spindleshanks?" but he always replied: "That's not my name." On the third day the messenger returned and announced: "I have not been able to find any new names, but as I came upon a high hill round the corner of the wood, where the foxes and hares bid each other good-night, I saw a little house, and in front of the house burned a fire, and round the fire sprang the most grotesque little man, hopping on one leg and crying:

"To-morrow I brew, to-day I bake,
 And then the child away I'll take;
 For little deems my royal dame
 That Rumpelstiltzkin is my name!"

You can imagine the Queen's delight at hearing the name, and when the little man stepped in shortly afterward and asked: "Now, my lady Queen, what's my name?" she asked first: "Is your name Conrad?" "No." "Is your name Harry?" "No." "Is your name perhaps, Rumpelstiltzkin?" "Some demon has told you that! some demon has told you that!" screamed the little man, and in his rage drove his right foot so far into the ground that it sank in up to his waist; then in a passion he seized the left foot with both hands and tore himself in two.[1]

[1] Grimm.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

BEAUTY AND THE BEAST

Once upon a time, in a very far-off country, there lived a merchant who had been so fortunate in all his undertakings that he was enormously rich. As he had, however, six sons and six daughters, he found that his money was not too much to let them all have everything they fancied, as they were accustomed to do.

But one day a most unexpected misfortune befell them. Their house caught fire and was speedily burnt to the ground, with all the splendid furniture, the books, pictures, gold, silver, and precious goods it contained; and this was only the beginning of their troubles. Their father, who had until this moment prospered in all ways, suddenly lost every ship he had upon the sea, either by dint of pirates, shipwreck, or fire. Then he heard that his clerks in distant countries, whom he trusted entirely, had proved unfaithful; and at last from great wealth he fell into the direst poverty.

All that he had left was a little house in a desolate place at least a hundred leagues from the town in which he had lived, and to this he was forced to retreat with his children, who were in despair at the idea of leading such a different life. Indeed, the daughters at first hoped that their friends, who had been so numerous while they were rich, would insist on their staying in their houses now they no longer possessed one. But they soon found that they were left alone, and that their former friends even attributed their misfortunes to their own extravagance, and showed no intention of offering them any help. So nothing was left for them but to take their departure to the cottage, which stood in the midst of a dark forest, and seemed to be the most dismal place upon the face of the earth. As they were too poor to have any servants, the girls had to work hard, like peasants, and the sons, for their part, cultivated the fields to earn their living. Roughly clothed, and living in the simplest way, the girls regretted unceasingly the luxuries and amusements of their former life; only the youngest tried to be brave and cheerful. She had been as sad as anyone when misfortune overtook her father, but, soon recovering her natural gaiety, she set to work to make the best of things, to amuse her father and brothers as well as she could, and to try to persuade her sisters to join her in dancing and singing. But they would do nothing of the sort, and, because she was not as doleful as themselves, they declared that this miserable life was all she was fit for. But she was really far prettier and cleverer than they were; indeed, she was so lovely that she was always called Beauty. After two years, when they were all beginning to get used to their new life, something happened to disturb their tranquillity. Their father received the news that one of his ships, which he had believed to be lost, had come safely into port with a rich cargo. All the sons and daughters at once thought that their poverty was at an end, and wanted to set out directly for the town; but their father, who was more prudent, begged them to wait a little, and, though it was harvest time, and he could ill be spared, determined to go himself first, to make inquiries. Only the youngest daughter had any doubt but that they would soon again be as rich as they were before, or at least rich enough to live comfortably in some town where they would find amusement and gay companions once more. So they all loaded their father with commissions for jewels and dresses which it would have taken a fortune to buy; only Beauty, feeling sure that it was of no use, did not ask for anything. Her father, noticing her silence, said: "And what shall I bring for you, Beauty?"

"The only thing I wish for is to see you come home safely," she answered.

But this only vexed her sisters, who fancied she was blaming them for having asked for such costly things. Her father, however, was pleased, but as he thought that at her age she certainly ought to like pretty presents, he told her to choose something.

"Well, dear father," she said, "as you insist upon it, I beg that you will bring me a rose. I have not seen one since we came here, and I love them so much."

So the merchant set out and reached the town as quickly as possible, but only to find that his former companions, believing him to be dead, had divided between them the goods which the ship had brought; and after six months of trouble and expense he found himself as poor as when he started, having been able to recover only just enough to pay the cost of his journey. To make matters worse, he was obliged to leave the town in the most terrible weather, so that by the time he was within a few leagues of his home he was almost exhausted with cold and fatigue. Though he knew it would take some hours to get through the forest, he was so anxious to be at his journey's end that he resolved to go on; but night overtook him, and the deep snow and bitter frost made it impossible for his horse to carry him any further. Not a house was to be seen; the only shelter he could get was the hollow trunk of a great tree, and there he crouched all the night which seemed to him the longest he had ever known. In spite of his weariness the howling of the wolves kept him awake, and even when at last the day broke he was not much better off, for the falling snow had covered up every path, and he did not know which way to turn.

At length he made out some sort of track, and though at the beginning it was so rough and slippery that he fell down more than once, it presently became easier, and led him into an avenue of trees which ended in a splendid castle. It seemed to the merchant very strange that no snow had fallen in the avenue, which was entirely composed of orange trees, covered with flowers and fruit. When he reached the first court of the castle he saw before him a flight of agate steps, and went up them, and passed through several splendidly furnished rooms. The pleasant warmth of the air revived him, and he felt very hungry; but there seemed to be nobody in all this vast and splendid palace whom he could ask to give him something to eat. Deep silence reigned everywhere, and at last, tired of roaming through empty rooms and galleries, he stopped in a room smaller than the rest, where a clear fire was burning and a couch was drawn up closely to it. Thinking that this must be prepared for someone who was expected, he sat down to wait till he should come, and very soon fell into a sweet sleep.

When his extreme hunger wakened him after several hours, he was still alone; but a little table, upon which was a good dinner, had been drawn up close to him, and, as he had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, he lost no time in beginning his meal, hoping that he might soon have an opportunity of thanking his considerate entertainer, whoever it might be. But no one appeared, and even after another long sleep, from which he awoke completely refreshed, there was no sign of anybody, though a fresh meal of dainty cakes and fruit was prepared upon the little table at his elbow. Being naturally timid, the silence began to terrify him, and he resolved to search once more through all the rooms; but it was of no use. Not even a servant was to be seen; there was no sign of life in the palace! He began to wonder what he should do, and to amuse himself by pretending that all the treasures he saw were his own, and considering how he would divide them among his children. Then he went down into the garden, and though it was winter everywhere else, here the sun shone, and the birds sang, and the flowers bloomed, and the air was soft and sweet. The merchant, in ecstacies with all he saw and heard, said to himself:

"All this must be meant for me. I will go this minute and bring my children to share all these delights."

In spite of being so cold and weary when he reached the castle, he had taken his horse to the stable and fed it. Now he thought he would saddle it for his homeward journey, and he turned down the path which led to the stable. This path had a hedge of roses on each side of it, and the merchant thought he had never seen or smelt such exquisite flowers. They reminded him of his promise to Beauty, and he stopped and had just gathered one to take to her when he was startled by a strange noise behind him. Turning round, he saw a frightful Beast, which seemed to be very angry and said, in a terrible voice:

"Who told you that you might gather my roses? Was it not enough that I allowed you to be in my palace and was kind to you? This is the way you show your gratitude, by stealing my flowers! But your insolence shall not go unpunished." The merchant, terrified by these furious words, dropped the fatal rose, and, throwing himself on his knees, cried: "Pardon me, noble sir. I am truly grateful to you for your hospitality, which was so magnificent that I could not imagine that you would be offended by my taking such a little thing as a rose." But the Beast's anger was not lessened by this speech.

"You are very ready with excuses and flattery," he cried; "but that will not save you from the death you deserve."

"Alas!" thought the merchant, "if my daughter could only know what danger her rose has brought me into!"

And in despair he began to tell the Beast all his misfortunes, and the reason of his journey, not forgetting to mention Beauty's request.

"A king's ransom would hardly have procured all that my other daughters asked." he said: "but I thought that I might at least take Beauty her rose. I beg you to forgive me, for you see I meant no harm."

The Beast considered for a moment, and then he said, in a less furious tone:

"I will forgive you on one condition--that is, that you will give me one of your daughters."

"Ah!" cried the merchant, "if I were cruel enough to buy my own life at the expense of one of my children's, what excuse could I invent to bring her here?"

"No excuse would be necessary," answered the Beast. "If she comes at all she must come willingly. On no other condition will I have her. See if any one of them is courageous enough, and loves you well enough to come and save your life. You seem to be an honest man, so I will trust you to go home. I give you a month to see if either of your daughters will come back with you and stay here, to let you go free. If neither of them is willing, you must come alone, after bidding them good-by for ever, for then you will belong to me. And do not imagine that you can hide from me, for if you fail to keep your word I will come and fetch you!" added the Beast grimly.

The merchant accepted this proposal, though he did not really think any of his daughters could be persuaded to come. He promised to return at the time appointed, and then, anxious to escape from the presence of the Beast, he asked permission to set off at once. But the Beast answered that he could not go until next day.

"Then you will find a horse ready for you," he said. "Now go and eat your supper, and await my orders."

The poor merchant, more dead than alive, went back to his room, where the most delicious supper was already served on the little table which was drawn up before a blazing fire. But he was too terrified to eat, and only tasted a few of the dishes, for fear the Beast should be angry if he did not obey his orders. When he had finished he heard a great noise in the next room, which he knew meant that the Beast was coming. As he could do nothing to escape his visit, the only thing that remained was to seem as little afraid as possible; so when the Beast appeared and asked roughly if he had supped well, the merchant answered humbly that he had, thanks to his host's kindness. Then the Beast warned him to remember their agreement, and to prepare his daughter exactly for what she had to expect.

"Do not get up to-morrow," he added, "until you see the sun and hear a golden bell ring. Then you will find your breakfast waiting for you here, and the horse you are to ride will be ready in the courtyard. He will also bring you back again when you come with your daughter a month hence. Farewell. Take a rose to Beauty, and remember your promise!"

The merchant was only too glad when the Beast went away, and though he could not sleep for sadness, he lay down until the sun rose. Then, after a hasty breakfast, he went to gather Beauty's rose, and mounted his horse, which carried him off so swiftly that in an instant he had lost sight of the palace, and he was still wrapped in gloomy thoughts when it stopped before the door of the cottage.

His sons and daughters, who had been very uneasy at his long absence, rushed to meet him, eager to know the result of his journey, which, seeing him mounted upon a splendid horse and wrapped in a rich mantle, they supposed to be favorable. He hid the truth from them at first, only saying sadly to Beauty as he gave her the rose:

"Here is what you asked me to bring you; you little know what it has cost."

But this excited their curiosity so greatly that presently he told them his adventures from beginning to end, and then they were all very unhappy. The girls lamented loudly over their lost hopes, and the sons declared that their father should not return to this terrible castle, and began to make plans for killing the Beast if it should come to fetch him. But he reminded them that he had promised to go back. Then the girls were very angry with Beauty, and said it was all her fault, and that if she had asked for something sensible this would never have happened, and complained bitterly that they should have to suffer for her folly.

Poor Beauty, much distressed, said to them:

"I have, indeed, caused this misfortune, but I assure you I did it innocently. Who could have guessed that to ask for a rose in the middle of summer would cause so much misery? But as I did the mischief it is only just that I should suffer for it. I will therefore go back with my father to keep his promise."

At first nobody would hear of this arrangement, and her father and brothers, who loved her dearly, declared that nothing should make them let her go; but Beauty was firm. As the time drew near she divided all her little possessions between her sisters, and said good-by to everything she loved, and when the fatal day came she encouraged and cheered her father as they mounted together the horse which had brought him back. It seemed to fly rather than gallop, but so smoothly that Beauty was not frightened; indeed, she would have enjoyed the journey if she had not feared what might happen to her at the end of it. Her father still tried to persuade her to go back, but in vain. While they were talking the night fell, and then, to their great surprise, wonderful colored lights began to shine in all directions, and splendid fireworks blazed out before them; all the forest was illuminated by them, and even felt pleasantly warm, though it had been bitterly cold before. This lasted until they reached the avenue of orange trees, where were statues holding flaming torches, and when they got nearer to the palace they saw that it was illuminated from the roof to the ground, and music sounded softly from the courtyard. "The Beast must be very hungry," said Beauty, trying to laugh, "if he makes all this rejoicing over the arrival of his prey."

But, in spite of her anxiety, she could not help admiring all the wonderful things she saw.

The horse stopped at the foot of the flight of steps leading to the terrace, and when they had dismounted her father led her to the little room he had been in before, where they found a splendid fire burning, and the table daintily spread with a delicious supper.

The merchant knew that this was meant for them, and Beauty, who was rather less frightened now that she had passed through so many rooms and seen nothing of the Beast, was quite willing to begin, for her long ride had made her very hungry. But they had hardly finished their meal when the noise of the Beast's footsteps was heard approaching, and Beauty clung to her father in terror, which became all the greater when she saw how frightened he was. But when the Beast really appeared, though she trembled at the sight of him, she made a great effort to hide her terror, and saluted him respectfully.

This evidently pleased the Beast. After looking at her he said, in a tone that might have struck terror into the boldest heart, though he did not seem to be angry:

"Good-evening, old man. Good-evening, Beauty."

The merchant was too terrified to reply, but Beauty answered sweetly: "Good-evening, Beast."

"Have you come willingly?" asked the Beast. "Will you be content to stay here when your father goes away?"

Beauty answered bravely that she was quite prepared to stay.

"I am pleased with you," said the Beast. "As you have come of your own accord, you may stay. As for you, old man," he added, turning to the merchant, "at sunrise to-morrow you will take your departure. When the bell rings get up quickly and eat your breakfast, and you will find the same horse waiting to take you home; but remember that you must never expect to see my palace again."

Then turning to Beauty, he said:

"Take your father into the next room, and help him to choose everything you think your brothers and sisters would like to have. You will find two traveling-trunks there; fill them as full as you can. It is only just that you should send them something very precious as a remembrance of yourself."

Then he went away, after saying, "Good-by, Beauty; good-by, old man"; and though Beauty was beginning to think with great dismay of her father's departure, she was afraid to disobey the Beast's orders; and they went into the next room, which had shelves and cupboards all round it. They were greatly surprised at the riches it contained. There were splendid dresses fit for a queen, with all the ornaments that were to be worn with them; and when Beauty opened the cupboards she was quite dazzled by the gorgeous jewels that lay in heaps upon every shelf. After choosing a vast quantity, which she divided between her sisters--for she had made a heap of the wonderful dresses for each of them--she opened the last chest, which was full of gold.

"I think, father," she said, "that, as the gold will be more useful to you, we had better take out the other things again, and fill the trunks with it." So they did this; but the more they put in the more room there seemed to be, and at last they put back all the jewels and dresses they had taken out, and Beauty even added as many more of the jewels as she could carry at once; and then the trunks were not too full, but they were so heavy that an elephant could not have carried them!

"The Beast was mocking us," cried the merchant; "he must have pretended to give us all these things, knowing that I could not carry them away."

"Let us wait and see," answered Beauty. "I cannot believe that he meant to deceive us. All we can do is to fasten them up and leave them ready."

So they did this and returned to the little room, where, to their astonishment, they found breakfast ready. The merchant ate his with a good appetite, as the Beast's generosity made him believe that he might perhaps venture to come back soon and see Beauty. But she felt sure that her father was leaving her for ever, so she was very sad when the bell rang sharply for the second time, and warned them that the time had come for them to part. They went down into the courtyard, where two horses were waiting, one loaded with the two trunks, the other for him to ride. They were pawing the ground in their impatience to start, and the merchant was forced to bid Beauty a hasty farewell; and as soon as he was mounted he went off at such a pace that she lost sight of him in an instant. Then Beauty began to cry, and wandered sadly back to her own room. But she soon found that she was very sleepy, and as she had nothing better to do she lay down and instantly fell asleep. And then she dreamed that she was walking by a brook bordered with trees, and lamenting her sad fate, when a young prince, handsomer than anyone she had ever seen, and with a voice that went straight to her heart, came and said to her, "Ah, Beauty! you are not so unfortunate as you suppose. Here you will be rewarded for all you have suffered elsewhere. Your every wish shall be gratified. Only try to find me out, no matter how I may be disguised, as I love you dearly, and in making me happy you will find your own happiness. Be as true-hearted as you are beautiful, and we shall have nothing left to wish for."

"What can I do, Prince, to make you happy?" said Beauty.

"Only be grateful," he answered, "and do not trust too much to your eyes. And, above all, do not desert me until you have saved me from my cruel misery."

After this she thought she found herself in a room with a stately and beautiful lady, who said to her:

"Dear Beauty, try not to regret all you have left behind you, for you are destined to a better fate. Only do not let yourself be deceived by appearances."

Beauty found her dreams so interesting that she was in no hurry to awake, but presently the clock roused her by calling her name softly twelve times, and then she got up and found her dressing-table set out with everything she could possibly want; and when her toilet was finished she found dinner was waiting in the room next to hers. But dinner does not take very long when you are all by yourself, and very soon she sat down cosily in the corner of a sofa, and began to think about the charming Prince she had seen in her dream.

"He said I could make him happy," said Beauty to herself.

"It seems, then, that this horrible Beast keeps him a prisoner. How can I set him free? I wonder why they both told me not to trust to appearances? I don't understand it. But, after all, it was only a dream, so why should I trouble myself about it? I had better go and find something to do to amuse myself."

So she got up and began to explore some of the many rooms of the palace.

The first she entered was lined with mirrors, and Beauty saw herself reflected on every side, and thought she had never seen such a charming room. Then a bracelet which was hanging from a chandelier caught her eye, and on taking it down she was greatly surprised to find that it held a portrait of her unknown admirer, just as she had seen him in her dream. With great delight she slipped the bracelet on her arm, and went on into a gallery of pictures, where she soon found a portrait of the same handsome Prince, as large as life, and so well painted that as she studied it he seemed to smile kindly at her. Tearing herself away from the portrait at last, she passed through into a room which contained every musical instrument under the sun, and here she amused herself for a long while in trying some of them, and singing until she was tired. The next room was a library, and she saw everything she had ever wanted to read, as well as everything she had read, and it seemed to her that a whole lifetime would not be enough to even read the names of the books, there were so many. By this time it was growing dusk, and wax candles in diamond and ruby candlesticks were beginning to light themselves in every room.

Beauty found her supper served just at the time she preferred to have it, but she did not see anyone or hear a sound, and, though her father had warned her that she would be alone, she began to find it rather dull.

But presently she heard the Beast coming, and wondered tremblingly if he meant to eat her up now.

However, as he did not seem at all ferocious, and only said gruffly:

"Good-evening, Beauty," she answered cheerfully and managed to conceal her terror. Then the Beast asked her how she had been amusing herself, and she told him all the rooms she had seen.

Then he asked if she thought she could be happy in his palace; and Beauty answered that everything was so beautiful that she would be very hard to please if she could not be happy. And after about an hour's talk Beauty began to think that the Beast was not nearly so terrible as she had supposed at first. Then he got up to leave her, and said in his gruff voice:

"Do you love me, Beauty? Will you marry me?"

"Oh! what shall I say?" cried Beauty, for she was afraid to make the Beast angry by refusing.

"Say 'yes' or 'no' without fear," he replied.

"Oh! no, Beast," said Beauty hastily.

"Since you will not, good-night, Beauty," he said.

And she answered, "Good-night, Beast," very glad to find that her refusal had not provoked him. And after he was gone she was very soon in bed and asleep, and dreaming of her unknown Prince. She thought he came and said to her:

"Ah, Beauty! why are you so unkind to me? I fear I am fated to be unhappy for many a long day still."

And then her dreams changed, but the charming Prince figured in them all; and when morning came her first thought was to look at the portrait, and see if it was really like him, and she found that it certainly was.

This morning she decided to amuse herself in the garden, for the sun shone, and all the fountains were playing; but she was astonished to find that every place was familiar to her, and presently she came to the brook where the myrtle trees were growing where she had first met the Prince in her dream, and that made her think more than ever that he must be kept a prisoner by the Beast. When she was tired she went back to the palace, and found a new room full of materials for every kind of work--ribbons to make into bows, and silks to work into flowers. Then there was an aviary full of rare birds, which were so tame that they flew to Beauty as soon as they saw her, and perched upon her shoulders and her head.

"Pretty little creatures," she said, "how I wish that your cage was nearer to my room, that I might often hear you sing!"

So saying she opened a door, and found, to her delight, that it led into her own room, though she had thought it was quite the other side of the palace.

There were more birds in a room farther on, parrots and cockatoos that could talk, and they greeted Beauty by name; indeed, she found them so entertaining that she took one or two back to her room, and they talked to her while she was at supper; after which the Beast paid her his usual visit, and asked her the same questions as before, and then with a gruff "good-night" he took his departure, and Beauty went to bed to dream of her mysterious Prince. The days passed swiftly in different amusements, and after a while Beauty found out another strange thing in the palace, which often pleased her when she was tired of being alone. There was one room which she had not noticed particularly; it was empty, except that under each of the windows stood a very comfortable chair; and the first time she had looked out of the window it had seemed to her that a black curtain prevented her from seeing anything outside. But the second time she went into the room, happening to be tired, she sat down in one of the chairs, when instantly the curtain was rolled aside, and a most amusing pantomime was acted before her; there were dances, and colored lights, and music, and pretty dresses, and it was all so gay that Beauty was in ecstacies. After that she tried the other seven windows in turn, and there was some new and surprising entertainment to be seen from each of them, so that Beauty never could feel lonely any more. Every evening after supper the Beast came to see her, and always before saying good-night asked her in his terrible voice:

"Beauty, will you marry me?"

And it seemed to Beauty, now she understood him better, that when she said, "No, Beast," he went away quite sad. But her happy dreams of the handsome young Prince soon made her forget the poor Beast, and the only thing that at all disturbed her was to be constantly told to distrust appearances, to let her heart guide her, and not her eyes, and many other equally perplexing things, which, consider as she would, she could not understand.

So everything went on for a long time, until at last, happy as she was, Beauty began to long for the sight of her father and her brothers and sisters; and one night, seeing her look very sad, the Beast asked her what was the matter. Beauty had quite ceased to be afraid of him. Now she knew that he was really gentle in spite of his ferocious looks and his dreadful voice. So she answered that she was longing to see her home once more. Upon hearing this the Beast seemed sadly distressed, and cried miserably.

"Ah! Beauty, have you the heart to desert an unhappy Beast like this? What more do you want to make you happy? Is it because you hate me that you want to escape?"

"No, dear Beast," answered Beauty softly, "I do not hate you, and I should be very sorry never to see you any more, but I long to see my father again. Only let me go for two months, and I promise to come back to you and stay for the rest of my life."

The Beast, who had been sighing dolefully while she spoke, now replied:

"I cannot refuse you anything you ask, even though it should cost me my life. Take the four boxes you will find in the room next to your own, and fill them with everything you wish to take with you. But remember your promise and come back when the two months are over, or you may have cause to repent it, for if you do not come in good time you will find your faithful Beast dead. You will not need any chariot to bring you back. Only say good-by to all your brothers and sisters the night before you come away, and when you have gone to bed turn this ring round upon your finger and say firmly: 'I wish to go back to my palace and see my Beast again.' Good-night, Beauty. Fear nothing, sleep peacefully, and before long you shall see your father once more."

As soon as Beauty was alone she hastened to fill the boxes with all the rare and precious things she saw about her, and only when she was tired of heaping things into them did they seem to be full.

Then she went to bed, but could hardly sleep for joy. And when at last she did begin to dream of her beloved Prince she was grieved to see him stretched upon a grassy bank, sad and weary, and hardly like himself.

"What is the matter?" she cried.

He looked at her reproachfully, and said:

"How can you ask me, cruel one? Are you not leaving me to my death perhaps?"

"Ah! don't be so sorrowful," cried Beauty; "I am only going to assure my father that I am safe and happy. I have promised the Beast faithfully that I will come back, and he would die of grief if I did not keep my word!"

"What would that matter to you?" said the Prince "Surely you would not care?"

"Indeed, I should be ungrateful if I did not care for such a kind Beast," cried Beauty indignantly. "I would die to save him from pain. I assure you it is not his fault that he is so ugly."

Just then a strange sound woke her--someone was speaking not very far away; and opening her eyes she found herself in a room she had never seen before, which was certainly not nearly so splendid as those she was used to in the Beast's palace. Where could she be? She got up and dressed hastily, and then saw that the boxes she had packed the night before were all in the room. While she was wondering by what magic the Beast had transported them and herself to this strange place she suddenly heard her father's voice, and rushed out and greeted him joyfully. Her brothers and sisters were all astonished at her appearance, as they had never expected to see her again, and there was no end to the questions they asked her. She had also much to hear about what had happened to them while she was away, and of her father's journey home. But when they heard that she had only come to be with them for a short time, and then must go back to the Beast's palace for ever, they lamented loudly. Then Beauty asked her father what he thought could be the meaning of her strange dreams, and why the Prince constantly begged her not to trust to appearances. After much consideration, he answered: "You tell me yourself that the Beast, frightful as he is, loves you dearly, and deserves your love and gratitude for his gentleness and kindness; I think the Prince must mean you to understand that you ought to reward him by doing as he wishes you to, in spite of his ugliness."

Beauty could not help seeing that this seemed very probable; still, when she thought of her dear Prince who was so handsome, she did not feel at all inclined to marry the Beast. At any rate, for two months she need not decide, but could enjoy herself with her sisters. But though they were rich now, and lived in town again, and had plenty of acquaintances, Beauty found that nothing amused her very much; and she often thought of the palace, where she was so happy, especially as at home she never once dreamed of her dear Prince, and she felt quite sad without him.

Then her sisters seemed to have got quite used to being without her, and even found her rather in the way, so she would not have been sorry when the two months were over but for her father and brothers, who begged her to stay, and seemed so grieved at the thought of her departure that she had not the courage to say good-by to them. Every day when she got up she meant to say it at night, and when night came she put it off again, until at last she had a dismal dream which helped her to make up her mind. She thought she was wandering in a lonely path in the palace gardens, when she heard groans which seemed to come from some bushes hiding the entrance of a cave, and running quickly to see what could be the matter, she found the Beast stretched out upon his side, apparently dying. He reproached her faintly with being the cause of his distress, and at the same moment a stately lady appeared, and said very gravely:

"Ah! Beauty, you are only just in time to save his life. See what happens when people do not keep their promises! If you had delayed one day more, you would have found him dead."

Beauty was so terrified by this dream that the next morning she announced her intention of going back at once, and that very night she said good-by to her father and all her brothers and sisters, and as soon as she was in bed she turned her ring round upon her finger, and said firmly, "I wish to go back to my palace and see my Beast again," as she had been told to do.

Then she fell asleep instantly, and only woke up to hear the clock saying "Beauty, Beauty" twelve times in its musical voice, which told her at once that she was really in the palace once more. Everything was just as before, and her birds were so glad to see her! But Beauty thought she had never known such a long day, for she was so anxious to see the Beast again that she felt as if suppertime would never come.

But when it did come and no Beast appeared she was really frightened; so, after listening and waiting for a long time, she ran down into the garden to search for him. Up and down the paths and avenues ran poor Beauty, calling him in vain, for no one answered, and not a trace of him could she find; until at last, quite tired, she stopped for a minute's rest, and saw that she was standing opposite the shady path she had seen in her dream. She rushed down it, and, sure enough, there was the cave, and in it lay the Beast--asleep, as Beauty thought. Quite glad to have found him, she ran up and stroked his head, but, to her horror, he did not move or open his eyes.

"Oh! he is dead; and it is all my fault," said Beauty, crying bitterly.

But then, looking at him again, she fancied he still breathed, and, hastily fetching some water from the nearest fountain, she sprinkled it over his face, and, to her great delight, he began to revive.

"Oh! Beast, how you frightened me!" she cried. "I never knew how much I loved you until just now, when I feared I was too late to save your life."

"Can you really love such an ugly creature as I am?" said the Beast faintly. "Ah! Beauty, you only came just in time. I was dying because I thought you had forgotten your promise. But go back now and rest, I shall see you again by and by."

Beauty, who had half expected that he would be angry with her, was reassured by his gentle voice, and went back to the palace, where supper was awaiting her; and afterward the Beast came in as usual, and talked about the time she had spent with her father, asking if she had enjoyed herself, and if they had all been very glad to see her.

Beauty answered politely, and quite enjoyed telling him all that had happened to her. And when at last the time came for him to go, and he asked, as he had so often asked before, "Beauty, will you marry me?"

She answered softly, "Yes, dear Beast."

As she spoke a blaze of light sprang up before the windows of the palace; fireworks crackled and guns banged, and across the avenue of orange trees, in letters all made of fire-flies, was written: "Long live the Prince and his Bride."

Turning to ask the Beast what it could all mean, Beauty found that he had disappeared, and in his place stood her long-loved Prince! At the same moment the wheels of a chariot were heard upon the terrace, and two ladies entered the room. One of them Beauty recognized as the stately lady she had seen in her dreams; the other was also so grand and queenly that Beauty hardly knew which to greet first.

But the one she already knew said to her companion:

"Well, Queen, this is Beauty, who has had the courage to rescue your son from the terrible enchantment. They love one another, and only your consent to their marriage is wanting to make them perfectly happy."

"I consent with all my heart," cried the Queen. "How can I ever thank you enough, charming girl, for having restored my dear son to his natural form?"

And then she tenderly embraced Beauty and the Prince, who had meanwhile been greeting the Fairy and receiving her congratulations.

"Now," said the Fairy to Beauty, "I suppose you would like me to send for all your brothers and sisters to dance at your wedding?"

And so she did, and the marriage was celebrated the very next day with the utmost splendor, and Beauty and the Prince lived happily ever after.[1]

[1] La Belle et la Bete. Par Madame de Villeneuve.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

THE MASTER-MAID

Once upon a time there was a king who had many sons. I do not exactly know how many there were, but the youngest of them could not stay quietly at home, and was determined to go out into the world and try his luck, and after a long time the King was forced to give him leave to go. When he had traveled about for several days, he came to a giant's house, and hired himself to the giant as a servant. In the morning the giant had to go out to pasture his goats, and as he was leaving the house he told the King's son that he must clean out the stable. "And after you have done that," he said, "you need not do any more work to-day, for you have come to a kind master, and that you shall find. But what I set you to do must be done both well and thoroughly, and you must on no account go into any of the rooms which lead out of the room in which you slept last night. If you do, I will take your life."

"Well to be sure, he is an easy master!" said the Prince to himself as he walked up and down the room humming and singing, for he thought there would be plenty of time left to clean out the stable; "but it would be amusing to steal a glance into his other rooms as well," thought the Prince, "for there must be something that he is afraid of my seeing, as I am not allowed to enter them." So he went into the first room. A cauldron was hanging from the walls; it was boiling, but the Prince could see no fire under it. "I wonder what is inside it," he thought, and dipped a lock of his hair in, and the hair became just as if it were all made of copper. "That's a nice kind of soup. If anyone were to taste that his throat would be gilded," said the youth, and then he went into the next chamber. There, too, a cauldron was hanging from the wall, bubbling and boiling, but there was no fire under this either. "I will just try what this is like too," said the Prince, thrusting another lock of his hair into it, and it came out silvered over. "Such costly soup is not to be had in my father's palace," said the Prince; "but everything depends on how it tastes," and then he went into the third room. There, too, a cauldron was hanging from the wall, boiling, exactly the same as in the two other rooms, and the Prince took pleasure in trying this also, so he dipped a lock of hair in, and it came out so brightly gilded that it shone again. "Some talk about going from bad to worse," said the Prince; "but this is better and better. If he boils gold here, what can he boil in there?" He was determined to see, and went through the door into the fourth room. No cauldron was to be seen there, but on a bench someone was seated who was like a king's daughter, but, whosoever she was, she was so beautiful that never in the Prince's life had he seen her equal.

"Oh! in heaven's name what are you doing here?" said she who sat upon the bench.

"I took the place of servant here yesterday," said the Prince.

"May you soon have a better place, if you have come to serve here!" said she.

"Oh, but I think I have got a kind master," said the Prince. "He has not given me hard work to do to-day. When I have cleaned out the stable I shall be done."

"Yes, but how will you be able to do that?" she asked again. "If you clean it out as other people do, ten pitchforksful will come in for every one you throw out. But I will teach you how to do it; you must turn your pitchfork upside down, and work with the handle, and then all will fly out of its own accord."

"Yes, I will attend to that," said the Prince, and stayed sitting where he was the whole day, for it was soon settled between them that they would marry each other, he and the King's daughter; so the first day of his service with the giant did not seem long to him. But when evening was drawing near she said that it would now be better for him to clean out the stable before the giant came home. When he got there he had a fancy to try if what she had said were true, so he began to work in the same way that he had seen the stable-boys doing in his father's stables, but he soon saw that he must give up that, for when he had worked a very short time he had scarcely any room left to stand. So he did what the Princess had taught him, turned the pitchfork round, and worked with the handle, and in the twinkling of an eye the stable was as clean as if it had been scoured. When he had done that, he went back again into the room in which the giant had given him leave to stay, and there he walked backward and forward on the floor, and began to hum and sing.

Then came the giant home with the goats. "Have you cleaned the stable?" asked the giant.

"Yes, now it is clean and sweet, master," said the King's son.

"I shall see about that," said the giant, and went round to the stable, but it was just as the Prince had said.

"You have certainly been talking to my Master-maid, for you never got that out of your own head," said the giant.

"Master-maid! What kind of a thing is that, master?" said the Prince, making himself look as stupid as an ass; "I should like to see that."

"Well, you will see her quite soon enough," said the giant.

On the second morning the giant had again to go out with his goats, so he told the Prince that on that day he was to fetch home his horse, which was out on the mountain-side, and when he had done that he might rest himself for the remainder of the day, "for you have come to a kind master, and that you shall find," said the giant once more. "But do not go into any of the rooms that I spoke of yesterday, or I will wring your head off," said he, and then went away with his flock of goats.

"Yes, indeed, you are a kind master," said the Prince; "but I will go in and talk to the Master-maid again; perhaps before long she may like better to be mine than yours."

So he went to her. Then she asked him what he had to do that day.

"Oh! not very dangerous work, I fancy," said the King's son. "I have only to go up the mountain-side after his horse."

"Well, how do you mean to set about it?" asked the Master-maid.

"Oh! there is no great art in riding a horse home," said the King's son. "I think I must have ridden friskier horses before now."

"Yes, but it is not so easy a thing as you think to ride the horse home," said the Master-maid; "but I will teach you what to do. When you go near it, fire will burst out of its nostrils like flames from a pine torch; but be very careful, and take the bridle which is hanging by the door there, and fling the bit straight into his jaws, and then it will become so tame that you will be able to do what you like with it." He said he would bear this in mind, and then he again sat in there the whole day by the Master-maid, and they chatted and talked of one thing and another, but the first thing and the last now was, how happy and delightful it would be if they could but marry each other, and get safely away from the giant; and the Prince would have forgotten both the mountain-side and the horse if the Master-maid had not reminded him of them as evening drew near, and said that now it would be better if he went to fetch the horse before the giant came. So he did this, and took the bridle which was hanging on a crook, and strode up the mountain-side, and it was not long before he met with the horse, and fire and red flames streamed forth out of its nostrils. But the youth carefully watched his opportunity, and just as it was rushing at him with open jaws he threw the bit straight into its mouth, and the horse stood as quiet as a young lamb, and there was no difficulty at all in getting it home to the stable. Then the Prince went back into his room again, and began to hum and to sing.

Toward evening the giant came home. "Have you fetched the horse back from the mountain-side?" he asked.

"That I have, master; it was an amusing horse to ride, but I rode him straight home, and put him in the stable too," said the Prince.

"I will see about that," said the giant, and went out to the stable, but the horse was standing there just as the Prince had said. "You have certainly been talking with my Master-maid, for you never got that out of your own head," said the giant again.

"Yesterday, master, you talked about this Master-maid, and to-day you are talking about her; ah, heaven bless you, master, why will you not show me the thing? for it would be a real pleasure to me to see it," said the Prince, who again pretended to be silly and stupid.

"Oh! you will see her quite soon enough," said the giant.

On the morning of the third day the giant again had to go into the wood with the goats. "To-day you must go underground and fetch my taxes," he said to the Prince. "When you have done this, you may rest for the remainder of the day, for you shall see what an easy master you have come to," and then he went away.

"Well, however easy a master you may be, you set me very hard work to do," thought the Prince; "but I will see if I cannot find your Master-maid; you say she is yours, but for all that she may be able to tell me what to do now," and he went back to her. So, when the Master-maid asked him what the giant had set him to do that day, he told her that he was to go underground and get the taxes.

"And how will you set about that?" said the Master-maid.

"Oh! you must tell me how to do it," said the Prince, "for I have never yet been underground, and even if I knew the way I do not know how much I am to demand."

"Oh! yes, I will soon tell you that; you must go to the rock there under the mountain-ridge, and take the club that is there, and knock on the rocky wall," said the Master-maid. "Then someone will come out who will sparkle with fire; you shall tell him your errand, and when he asks you how much you want to have you are to say: 'As much as I can carry.'"

"Yes, I will keep that in mind," said he, and then he sat there with the Master-maid the whole day, until night drew near, and he would gladly have stayed there till now if the Master-maid had not reminded him that it was time to be off to fetch the taxes before the giant came.

So he set out on his way, and did exactly what the Master-maid had told him. He went to the rocky wall, and took the club, and knocked on it. Then came one so full of sparks that they flew both out of his eyes and his nose. "What do you want?" said he.

"I was to come here for the giant, and demand the tax for him," said the King's son.

"How much are you to have then?" said the other.

"I ask for no more than I am able to carry with me," said the Prince.

"It is well for you that you have not asked for a horse-load," said he who had come out of the rock. "But now come in with me."

This the Prince did, and what a quantity of gold and silver he saw! It was lying inside the mountain like heaps of stones in a waste place, and he got a load that was as large as he was able to carry, and with that he went his way. So in the evening, when the giant came home with the goats, the Prince went into the chamber and hummed and sang again as he had done on the other two evenings.

"Have you been for the tax?" said the giant.

"Yes, that I have, master," said the Prince.

"Where have you put it then?" said the giant again.

"The bag of gold is standing there on the bench," said the Prince.

"I will see about that," said the giant, and went away to the bench, but the bag was standing there, and it was so full that gold and silver dropped out when the giant untied the string.

"You have certainly been talking with my Master-maid!" said the giant, "and if you have I will wring your neck."

"Master-maid?" said the Prince; "yesterday my master talked about this Master-maid, and to-day he is talking about her again, and the first day of all it was talk of the same kind. I do wish I could see the thing myself," said he.

"Yes, yes, wait till to-morrow," said the giant, "and then I myself will take you to her."

"Ah! master, I thank you--but you are only mocking me," said the King's son.

Next day the giant took him to the Master-maid. "Now you shall kill him, and boil him in the great big cauldron you know of, and when you have got the broth ready give me a call," said the giant; then he lay down on the bench to sleep, and almost immediately began to snore so that it sounded like thunder among the hills.

So the Master-maid took a knife, and cut the Prince's little finger, and dropped three drops of blood upon a wooden stool; then she took all the old rags, and shoe-soles, and all the rubbish she could lay hands on, and put them in the cauldron; and then she filled a chest with gold dust, and a lump of salt, and a water-flask which was hanging by the door, and she also took with her a golden apple, and two gold chickens; and then she and the Prince went away with all the speed they could, and when they had gone a little way they came to the sea, and then they sailed, but where they got the ship from I have never been able to learn.

Now, when the giant had slept a good long time, he began to stretch himself on the bench on which he was lying. "Will it soon boil?" said he.

"It is just beginning," said the first drop of blood on the stool.

So the giant lay down to sleep again, and slept for a long, long time. Then he began to move about a little again. "Will it soon be ready now?" said he, but he did not look up this time any more than he had done the first time, for he was still half asleep.

"Half done!" said the second drop of blood, and the giant believed it was the Master-maid again, and turned himself on the bench, and lay down to sleep once more. When he had slept again for many hours, he began to move and stretch himself. "Is it not done yet?" said he.

"It is quite ready," said the third drop of blood. Then the giant began to sit up and rub his eyes, but he could not see who it was who had spoken to him, so he asked for the Master-maid, and called her. But there was no one to give him an answer.

"Ah! well, she has just stolen out for a little," thought the giant, and he took a spoon, and went off to the cauldron to have a taste; but there was nothing in it but shoe-soles, and rags, and such trumpery as that, and all was boiled up together, so that he could not tell whether it was porridge or milk pottage. When he saw this, he understood what had happened, and fell into such a rage that he hardly knew what he was doing. Away he went after the Prince and the Master-maid so fast that the wind whistled behind him, and it was not long before he came to the water, but he could not get over it. "Well, well, I will soon find a cure for that; I have only to call my river-sucker," said the giant, and he did call him. So his river-sucker came and lay down, and drank one, two, three draughts, and with that the water in the sea fell so low that the giant saw the Master-maid and the Prince out on the sea in their ship. "Now you must throw out the lump of salt," said the Master-maid, and the Prince did so, and it grew up into such a great high mountain right across the sea that the giant could not come over it, and the river-sucker could not drink any more water. "Well, well, I will soon find a cure for that," said the giant, so he called to his hill-borer to come and bore through the mountain so that the river-sucker might be able to drink up the water again. But just as the hole was made, and the river-sucker was beginning to drink, the Master-maid told the Prince to throw one or two drops out of the flask, and when he did this the sea instantly became full of water again, and before the river-sucker could take one drink they reached the land and were in safety. So they determined to go home to the Prince's father, but the Prince would on no account permit the Master-maid to walk there, for he thought that it was unbecoming either for her or for him to go on foot.

"Wait here the least little bit of time, while I go home for the seven horses which stand in my father's stable," said he; "it is not far off, and I shall not be long away, but I will not let my betrothed bride go on foot to the palace."

"Oh! no, do not go, for if you go home to the King's palace you will forget me, I foresee that."

"How could I forget you? We have suffered so much evil together, and love each other so much," said the Prince; and he insisted on going home for the coach with the seven horses, and she was to wait for him there, by the sea-shore. So at last the Master-maid had to yield, for he was so absolutely determined to do it. "But when you get there you must not even give yourself time to greet anyone, but go straight into the stable, and take the horses, and put them in the coach, and drive back as quickly as you can. For they will all come round about you; but you must behave just as if you did not see them, and on no account must you taste anything, for if you do it will cause great misery both to you and to me," said she; and this he promised.

But when he got home to the King's palace one of his brothers was just going to be married, and the bride and all her kith and kin had come to the palace; so they all thronged round him, and questioned him about this and that, and wanted him to go in with them; but he behaved as if he did not see them, and went straight to the stable, and got out the horses and began to harness them. When they saw that they could not by any means prevail on him to go in with them, they came out to him with meat and drink, and the best of everything that they had prepared for the wedding; but the Prince refused to touch anything, and would do nothing but put the horses in as quickly as he could. At last, however, the bride's sister rolled an apple across the yard to him, and said: "As you won't eat anything else, you may like to take a bite of that, for you must be both hungry and thirsty after your long journey." And he took up the apple and bit a piece out of it. But no sooner had he got the piece of apple in his mouth than he forgot the Master-maid and that he was to go back in the coach to fetch her.  "I think I must be mad! what do I want with this coach and horses?" said he; and then he put the horses back into the stable, and went into the King's palace, and there it was settled that he should marry the bride's sister, who had rolled the apple to him.

The Master-maid sat by the sea-shore for a long, long time, waiting for the Prince, but no Prince came. So she went away, and when she had walked a short distance she came to a little hut which stood all alone in a small wood, hard by the King's palace. She entered it and asked if she might be allowed to stay there. The hut belonged to an old crone, who was also an ill-tempered and malicious troll. At first she would not let the Master-maid remain with her; but at last, after a long time, by means of good words and good payment, she obtained leave. But the hut was as dirty and black inside as a pigsty, so the Master-maid said that she would smarten it up a little, that it might look a little more like what other people's houses looked inside. The old crone did not like this either. She scowled, and was very cross, but the Master-maid did not trouble herself about that. She took out her chest of gold, and flung a handful of it or so into the fire, and the gold boiled up and poured out over the whole of the hut, until every part of it both inside and out was gilded. But when the gold began to bubble up the old hag grew so terrified that she fled as if the Evil One himself were pursuing her, and she did not remember to stoop down as she went through the doorway, and so she split her head and died. Next morning the sheriff came traveling by there. He was greatly astonished when he saw the gold hut shining and glittering there in the copse, and he was still more astonished when he went in and caught sight of the beautiful young maiden who was sitting there; he fell in love with her at once, and straightway on the spot he begged her, both prettily and kindly, to marry him.

"Well, but have you a great deal of money?" said the Master-maid.

"Oh! yes; so far as that is concerned, I am not ill off," said the sheriff. So now he had to go home to get the money, and in the evening he came back, bringing with him a bag with two bushels in it, which he set down on the bench. Well, as he had such a fine lot of money, the Master-maid said she would have him, so they sat down to talk.

But scarcely had they sat down together before the Master-maid wanted to jump up again. "I have forgotten to see to the fire," she said.

"Why should you jump up to do that?" said the sheriff; "I will do that!" So he jumped up, and went to the chimney in one bound.

"Just tell me when you have got hold of the shovel," said the Master-maid.

"Well, I have hold of it now," said the sheriff.

"Then you may hold the shovel, and the shovel you, and pour red-hot coals over you, till day dawns," said the Master-maid. So the sheriff had to stand there the whole night and pour red-hot coals over himself, and, no matter how much he cried and begged and entreated, the red-hot coals did not grow the colder for that. When the day began to dawn, and he had power to throw down the shovel, he did not stay long where he was, but ran away as fast as he possibly could; and everyone who met him stared and looked after him, for he was flying as if he were mad, and he could not have looked worse if he had been both flayed and tanned, and everyone wondered where he had been, but for very shame he would tell nothing.

The next day the attorney came riding by the place where the Master-maid dwelt. He saw how brightly the hut shone and gleamed through the wood, and he too went into it to see who lived there, and when he entered and saw the beautiful young maiden he fell even more in love with her than the sheriff had done, and began to woo her at once. So the Master-maid asked him, as she had asked the sheriff, if he had a great deal of money, and the attorney said he was not ill off for that, and would at once go home to get it; and at night he came with a great big sack of money--this time it was a four-bushel sack--and set it on the bench by the Master-maid. So she promised to have him, and he sat down on the bench by her to arrange about it, but suddenly she said that she had forgotten to lock the door of the porch that night, and must do it.

"Why should you do that?" said the attorney; "sit still, I will do it."

So he was on his feet in a moment, and out in the porch.

"Tell me when you have got hold of the door-latch," said the Master-maid.

"I have hold of it now," cried the attorney.

"Then you may hold the door, and the door you, and may you go between wall and wall till day dawns."

What a dance the attorney had that night! He had never had such a waltz before, and he never wished to have such a dance again. Sometimes he was in front of the door, and sometimes the door was in front of him, and it went from one side of the porch to the other, till the attorney was well-nigh beaten to death. At first he began to abuse the Master-maid, and then to beg and pray, but the door did not care for anything but keeping him where he was till break of day.

As soon as the door let go its hold of him, off went the attorney. He forgot who ought to be paid off for what he had suffered, he forgot both his sack of money and his wooing, for he was so afraid lest the house-door should come dancing after him. Everyone who met him stared and looked after him, for he was flying like a madman, and he could not have looked worse if a herd of rams had been butting at him all night long.

On the third day the bailiff came by, and he too saw the gold house in the little wood, and he too felt that he must go and see who lived there; and when he caught sight of the Master-maid he became so much in love with her that he wooed her almost before he greeted her.

The Master-maid answered him as she had answered the other two, that if he had a great deal of money, she would have him. "So far as that is concerned, I am not ill off," said the bailiff; so he was at once told to go home and fetch it, and this he did. At night he came back, and he had a still larger sack of money with him than the attorney had brought; it must have been at least six bushels, and he set it down on the bench. So it was settled that he was to have the Master-maid. But hardly had they sat down together before she said that she had forgotten to bring in the calf, and must go out to put it in the byre.

"No, indeed, you shall not do that," said the bailiff; "I am the one to do that." And, big and fat as he was, he went out as briskly as a boy.

"Tell me when you have got hold of the calf's tail," said the Master-maid.

"I have hold of it now," cried the bailiff.

"Then may you hold the calf's tail, and the calf's tail hold you, and may you go round the world together till day dawns!" said the Master-maid. So the bailiff had to bestir himself, for the calf went over rough and smooth, over hill and dale, and, the more the bailiff cried and screamed, the faster the calf went. When daylight began to appear, the bailiff was half dead; and so glad was he to leave loose of the calf's tail, that he forgot the sack of money and all else. He walked now slowly--more slowly than the sheriff and the attorney had done, but, the slower he went, the more time had everyone to stare and look at him; and they used it too, and no one can imagine how tired out and ragged he looked after his dance with the calf.

On the following day the wedding was to take place in the King's palace, and the elder brother was to drive to church with his bride, and the brother who had been with the giant with her sister. But when they had seated themselves in the coach and were about to drive off from the palace one of the trace-pins broke, and, though they made one, two, and three to put in its place, that did not help them, for each broke in turn, no matter what kind of wood they used to make them of. This went on for a long time, and they could not get away from the palace, so they were all in great trouble. Then the sheriff said (for he too had been bidden to the wedding at Court): "Yonder away in the thicket dwells a maiden, and if you can get her to lend you the handle of the shovel that she uses to make up her fire I know very well that it will hold fast." So they sent off a messenger to the thicket, and begged so prettily that they might have the loan of her shovel-handle of which the sheriff had spoken that they were not refused; so now they had a trace-pin which would not snap in two.

But all at once, just as they were starting, the bottom of the coach fell in pieces. They made a new bottom as fast as they could, but, no matter how they nailed it together, or what kind of wood they used, no sooner had they got the new bottom into the coach and were about to drive off than it broke again, so that they were still worse off than when they had broken the trace-pin. Then the attorney said, for he too was at the wedding in the palace: "Away there in the thicket dwells a maiden, and if you could but get her to lend you one-half of her porch-door I am certain that it will hold together." So they again sent a messenger to the thicket, and begged so prettily for the loan of the gilded porch-door of which the attorney had told them that they got it at once. They were just setting out again, but now the horses were not able to draw the coach. They had six horses already, and now they put in eight, and then ten, and then twelve, but the more they put in, and the more the coachman whipped them, the less good it did; and the coach never stirred from the spot. It was already beginning to be late in the day, and to church they must and would go, so everyone who was in the palace was in a state of distress. Then the bailiff spoke up and said: "Out there in the gilded cottage in the thicket dwells a girl, and if you could but get her to lend you her calf I know it could draw the coach, even if it were as heavy as a mountain." They all thought that it was ridiculous to be drawn to church by a calf, but there was nothing else for it but to send a messenger once more, and beg as prettily as they could, on behalf of the King, that she would let them have the loan of the calf that the bailiff had told them about. The Master-maid let them have it immediately--this time also she would not say "no."

Then they harnessed the calf to see if the coach would move; and away it went, over rough and smooth, over stock and stone, so that they could scarcely breathe, and sometimes they were on the ground, and sometimes up in the air; and when they came to the church the coach began to go round and round like a spinning-wheel, and it was with the utmost difficulty and danger that they were able to get out of the coach and into the church. And when they went back again the coach went quicker still, so that most of them did not know how they got back to the palace at all.

When they had seated themselves at the table the Prince who had been in service with the giant said that he thought they ought to have invited the maiden who had lent them the shovel-handle, and the porch-door, and the calf up to the palace, "for," said he, "if we had not got these three things, we should never have got away from the palace."

The King also thought that this was both just and proper, so he sent five of his best men down to the gilded hut, to greet the maiden courteously from the King, and to beg her to be so good as to come up to the palace to dinner at mid-day.

"Greet the King, and tell him that, if he is too good to come to me, I am too good to come to him," replied the Master-maid.

So the King had to go himself, and the Master-maid went with him immediately, and, as the King believed that she was more than she appeared to be, he seated her in the place of honor by the youngest bridegroom. When they had sat at the table for a short time, the Master-maid took out the cock, and the hen, and the golden apple which she had brought away with her from the giant's house, and set them on the table in front of her, and instantly the cock and the hen began to fight with each other for the golden apple.

"Oh! look how those two there are fighting for the golden apple," said the King's son.

"Yes, and so did we two fight to get out that time when we were in the mountain," said the Master-maid.

So the Prince knew her again, and you may imagine how delighted he was. He ordered the troll-witch who had rolled the apple to him to be torn in pieces between four-and-twenty horses, so that not a bit of her was left, and then for the first time they began really to keep the wedding, and, weary as they were, the sheriff, the attorney, and the bailiff kept it up too.[1]

[1] Asbjornsen and Moe.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

WHY THE SEA IS SALT

Once upon a time, long, long ago, there were two brothers, the one rich and the other poor. When Christmas Eve came, the poor one had not a bite in the house, either of meat or bread; so he went to his brother, and begged him, in God's name, to give him something for Christmas Day. It was by no means the first time that the brother had been forced to give something to him, and he was not better pleased at being asked now than he generally was.

"If you will do what I ask you, you shall have a whole ham," said he. The poor one immediately thanked him, and promised this.

"Well, here is the ham, and now you must go straight to Dead Man's Hall," said the rich brother, throwing the ham to him.

"Well, I will do what I have promised," said the other, and he took the ham and set off. He went on and on for the livelong day, and at nightfall he came to a place where there was a bright light.

"I have no doubt this is the place," thought the man with the ham.

An old man with a long white beard was standing in the outhouse, chopping Yule logs.

"Good-evening," said the man with the ham.

"Good-evening to you. Where are you going at this late hour?" said the man.

"I am going to Dead Man's Hall, if only I am on the right track," answered the poor man.

"Oh! yes, you are right enough, for it is here," said the old man. "When you get inside they will all want to buy your ham, for they don't get much meat to eat there; but you must not sell it unless you can get the hand-mill which stands behind the door for it. When you come out again I will teach you how to stop the hand-mill, which is useful for almost everything."

So the man with the ham thanked the other for his good advice, and rapped at the door.

When he got in, everything happened just as the old man had said it would: all the people, great and small, came round him like ants on an ant-hill, and each tried to outbid the other for the ham.

"By rights my old woman and I ought to have it for our Christmas dinner, but, since you have set your hearts upon it, I must just give it up to you," said the man. "But, if I sell it, I will have the hand-mill which is standing there behind the door."

At first they would not hear to this, and haggled and bargained with the man, but he stuck to what he had said, and the people were forced to give him the hand-mill. When the man came out again into the yard, he asked the old wood-cutter how he was to stop the hand-mill, and when he had learned that, he thanked him and set off home with all the speed he could, but did not get there until after the clock had struck twelve on Christmas Eve.

"Where in the world have you been?" said the old woman. "Here I have sat waiting hour after hour, and have not even two sticks to lay across each other under the Christmas porridge-pot."

"Oh! I could not come before; I had something of importance to see about, and a long way to go, too; but now you shall just see!" said the man, and then he set the hand-mill on the table, and bade it first grind light, then a table-cloth, and then meat, and beer, and everything else that was good for a Christmas Eve's supper; and the mill ground all that he ordered. "Bless me!" said the old woman as one thing after another appeared; and she wanted to know where her husband had got the mill from, but he would not tell her that.

"Never mind where I got it; you can see that it is a good one, and the water that turns it will never freeze," said the man. So he ground meat and drink, and all kinds of good things, to last all Christmas-tide, and on the third day he invited all his friends to come to a feast.

Now when the rich brother saw all that there was at the banquet and in the house, he was both vexed and angry, for he grudged everything his brother had. "On Christmas Eve he was so poor that he came to me and begged for a trifle, for God's sake, and now he gives a feast as if he were both a count and a king!" thought he. "But, for heaven's sake, tell me where you got your riches from," said he to his brother.

"From behind the door," said he who owned the mill, for he did not choose to satisfy his brother on that point; but later in the evening, when he had taken a drop too much, he could not refrain from telling how he had come by the hand-mill. "There you see what has brought me all my wealth!" said he, and brought out the mill, and made it grind first one thing and then another. When the brother saw that, he insisted on having the mill, and after a great deal of persuasion got it; but he had to give three hundred dollars for it, and the poor brother was to keep it till the haymaking was over, for he thought: "If I keep it as long as that, I can make it grind meat and drink that will last many a long year." During that time you may imagine that the mill did not grow rusty, and when hay-harvest came the rich brother got it, but the other had taken good care not to teach him how to stop it. It was evening when the rich man got the mill home, and in the morning he bade the old woman go out and spread the hay after the mowers, and he would attend to the house himself that day, he said.

So, when dinner-time drew near, he set the mill on the kitchen-table, and said: "Grind herrings and milk pottage, and do it both quickly and well."

So the mill began to grind herrings and milk pottage, and first all the dishes and tubs were filled, and then it came out all over the kitchen-floor. The man twisted and turned it, and did all he could to make the mill stop, but, howsoever he turned it and screwed it, the mill went on grinding, and in a short time the pottage rose so high that the man was like to be drowned. So he threw open the parlor door, but it was not long before the mill had ground the parlor full too, and it was with difficulty and danger that the man could go through the stream of pottage and get hold of the door-latch. When he got the door open, he did not stay long in the room, but ran out, and the herrings and pottage came after him, and it streamed out over both farm and field. Now the old woman, who was out spreading the hay, began to think dinner was long in coming, and said to the women and the mowers: "Though the master does not call us home, we may as well go. It may be that he finds he is not good at making pottage and I should do well to help him." So they began to straggle homeward, but when they had got a little way up the hill they met the herrings and pottage and bread, all pouring forth and winding about one over the other, and the man himself in front of the flood. "Would to heaven that each of you had a hundred stomachs! Take care that you are not drowned in the pottage!" he cried as he went by them as if Mischief were at his heels, down to where his brother dwelt. Then he begged him, for God's sake, to take the mill back again, and that in an instant, for, said he: "If it grind one hour more the whole district will be destroyed by herrings and pottage." But the brother would not take it until the other paid him three hundred dollars, and that he was obliged to do. Now the poor brother had both the money and the mill again. So it was not long before he had a farmhouse much finer than that in which his brother lived, but the mill ground him so much money that he covered it with plates of gold; and the farmhouse lay close by the sea-shore, so it shone and glittered far out to sea. Everyone who sailed by there now had to be put in to visit the rich man in the gold farmhouse, and everyone wanted to see the wonderful mill, for the report of it spread far and wide, and there was no one who had not heard tell of it.

After a long, long time came also a skipper who wished to see the mill. He asked if it could make salt. "Yes, it could make salt," said he who owned it, and when the skipper heard that, he wished with all his might and main to have the mill, let it cost what it might, for, he thought, if he had it, he would get off having to sail far away over the perilous sea for freights of salt. At first the man would not hear of parting with it, but the skipper begged and prayed, and at last the man sold it to him, and got many, many thousand dollars for it. When the skipper had got the mill on his back he did not stay there long, for he was so afraid that the man would change his mind, and he had no time to ask how he was to stop it grinding, but got on board his ship as fast as he could.

When he had gone a little way out to sea he took the mill on deck. "Grind salt, and grind both quickly and well," said the skipper. So the mill began to grind salt, till it spouted out like water, and when the skipper had got the ship filled he wanted to stop the mill, but whichsoever way he turned it, and how much soever he tried, it went on grinding, and the heap of salt grew higher and higher, until at last the ship sank. There lies the mill at the bottom of the sea, and still, day by day, it grinds on; and that is why the sea is salt.[1]

[1] Asbjornsen and Moe.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

THE MASTER CAT; OR, PUSS IN BOOTS

There was a miller who left no more estate to the three sons he had than his mill, his ass, and his cat. The partition was soon made. Neither scrivener nor attorney was sent for. They would soon have eaten up all the poor patrimony. The eldest had the mill, the second the ass, and the youngest nothing but the cat. The poor young fellow was quite comfortless at having so poor a lot.

"My brothers," said he, "may get their living handsomely enough by joining their stocks together; but for my part, when I have eaten up my cat, and made me a muff of his skin, I must die of hunger."

The Cat, who heard all this, but made as if he did not, said to him with a grave and serious air:

"Do not thus afflict yourself, my good master. You have nothing else to do but to give me a bag and get a pair of boots made for me that I may scamper through the dirt and the brambles, and you shall see that you have not so bad a portion in me as you imagine."  The Cat's master did not build very much upon what he said. He had often seen him play a great many cunning tricks to catch rats and mice, as when he used to hang by the heels, or hide himself in the meal, and make as if he were dead; so that he did not altogether despair of his affording him some help in his miserable condition. When the Cat had what he asked for he booted himself very gallantly, and putting his bag about his neck, he held the strings of it in his two forepaws and went into a warren where was great abundance of rabbits. He put bran and sow-thistle into his bag, and stretching out at length, as if he had been dead, he waited for some young rabbits, not yet acquainted with the deceits of the world, to come and rummage his bag for what he had put into it.

Scarce was he lain down but he had what he wanted. A rash and foolish young rabbit jumped into his bag, and Monsieur Puss, immediately drawing close the strings, took and killed him without pity. Proud of his prey, he went with it to the palace and asked to speak with his majesty. He was shown upstairs into the King's apartment, and, making a low reverence, said to him:

"I have brought you, sir, a rabbit of the warren, which my noble lord the Marquis of Carabas" (for that was the title which puss was pleased to give his master) "has commanded me to present to your majesty from him."

"Tell thy master," said the king, "that I thank him and that he does me a great deal of pleasure."

Another time he went and hid himself among some standing corn, holding still his bag open, and when a brace of partridges ran into it he drew the strings and so caught them both. He went and made a present of these to the king, as he had done before of the rabbit which he took in the warren. The king, in like manner, received the partridges with great pleasure, and ordered him some money for drink.

The Cat continued for two or three months thus to carry his Majesty, from time to time, game of his master's taking. One day in particular, when he knew for certain that he was to take the air along the river-side, with his daughter, the most beautiful princess in the world, he said to his master:

"If you will follow my advice your fortune is made. You have nothing else to do but go and wash yourself in the river, in that part I shall show you, and leave the rest to me."

The Marquis of Carabas did what the Cat advised him to, without knowing why or wherefore. While he was washing the King passed by, and the Cat began to cry out:

"Help! help! My Lord Marquis of Carabas is going to be drowned."

At this noise the King put his head out of the coach-window, and, finding it was the Cat who had so often brought him such good game, he commanded his guards to run immediately to the assistance of his Lordship the Marquis of Carabas. While they were drawing the poor Marquis out of the river, the Cat came up to the coach and told the King that, while his master was washing, there came by some rogues, who went off with his clothes, though he had cried out: "Thieves! thieves!" several times, as loud as he could.

This cunning Cat had hidden them under a great stone. The King immediately commanded the officers of his wardrobe to run and fetch one of his best suits for the Lord Marquis of Carabas.

The King caressed him after a very extraordinary manner, and as the fine clothes he had given him extremely set off his good mien (for he was well made and very handsome in his person), the King's daughter took a secret inclination to him, and the Marquis of Carabas had no sooner cast two or three respectful and somewhat tender glances but she fell in love with him to distraction. The King would needs have him come into the coach and take part of the airing. The Cat, quite overjoyed to see his project begin to succeed, marched on before, and, meeting with some countrymen, who were mowing a meadow, he said to them:

"Good people, you who are mowing, if you do not tell the King that the meadow you mow belongs to my Lord Marquis of Carabas, you shall be chopped as small as herbs for the pot."

The King did not fail asking of the mowers to whom the meadow they were mowing belonged.

"To my Lord Marquis of Carabas," answered they altogether, for the Cat's threats had made them terribly afraid.

"You see, sir," said the Marquis, "this is a meadow which never fails to yield a plentiful harvest every year."

The Master Cat, who went still on before, met with some reapers, and said to them:

"Good people, you who are reaping, if you do not tell the King that all this corn belongs to the Marquis of Carabas, you shall be chopped as small as herbs for the pot."

The King, who passed by a moment after, would needs know to whom all that corn, which he then saw, did belong.

"To my Lord Marquis of Carabas," replied the reapers, and the King was very well pleased with it, as well as the Marquis, whom he congratulated thereupon. The Master Cat, who went always before, said the same words to all he met, and the King was astonished at the vast estates of my Lord Marquis of Carabas.

Monsieur Puss came at last to a stately castle, the master of which was an ogre, the richest had ever been known; for all the lands which the King had then gone over belonged to this castle. The Cat, who had taken care to inform himself who this ogre was and what he could do, asked to speak with him, saying he could not pass so near his castle without having the honor of paying his respects to him.

The ogre received him as civilly as an ogre could do, and made him sit down.

"I have been assured," said the Cat, "that you have the gift of being able to change yourself into all sorts of creatures you have a mind to; you can, for example, transform yourself into a lion, or elephant, and the like."

"That is true," answered the ogre very briskly; "and to convince you, you shall see me now become a lion."

Puss was so sadly terrified at the sight of a lion so near him that he immediately got into the gutter, not without abundance of trouble and danger, because of his boots, which were of no use at all to him in walking upon the tiles. A little while after, when Puss saw that the ogre had resumed his natural form, he came down, and owned he had been very much frightened.

"I have been, moreover, informed," said the Cat, "but I know not how to believe it, that you have also the power to take on you the shape of the smallest animals; for example, to change yourself into a rat or a mouse; but I must own to you I take this to be impossible."

"Impossible!" cried the ogre; "you shall see that presently."

And at the same time he changed himself into a mouse, and began to run about the floor. Puss no sooner perceived this but he fell upon him and ate him up.

Meanwhile the King, who saw, as he passed, this fine castle of the ogre's, had a mind to go into it. Puss, who heard the noise of his Majesty's coach running over the draw-bridge, ran out, and said to the King:

"Your Majesty is welcome to this castle of my Lord Marquis of Carabas."

"What! my Lord Marquis," cried the King, "and does this castle also belong to you? There can be nothing finer than this court and all the stately buildings which surround it; let us go into it, if you please."

The Marquis gave his hand to the Princess, and followed the King, who went first. They passed into a spacious hall, where they found a magnificent collation, which the ogre had prepared for his friends, who were that very day to visit him, but dared not to enter, knowing the King was there. His Majesty was perfectly charmed with the good qualities of my Lord Marquis of Carabas, as was his daughter, who had fallen violently in love with him, and, seeing the vast estate he possessed, said to him, after having drunk five or six glasses:

"It will be owing to yourself only, my Lord Marquis, if you are not my son-in-law."

The Marquis, making several low bows, accepted the honor which his Majesty conferred upon him, and forthwith, that very same day, married the Princess.

Puss became a great lord, and never ran after mice any more but only for his diversion.[1]

[1] Charles Perrault.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

FELICIA AND THE POT OF PINKS

Once upon a time there was a poor laborer who, feeling that he had not much longer to live, wished to divide his possessions between his son and daughter, whom he loved dearly.

So he called them to him, and said: "Your mother brought me as her dowry two stools and a straw bed; I have, besides, a hen, a pot of pinks, and a silver ring, which were given me by a noble lady who once lodged in my poor cottage. When she went away she said to me:

"'Be careful of my gifts, good man; see that you do not lose the ring or forget to water the pinks. As for your daughter, I promise you that she shall be more beautiful than anyone you ever saw in your life; call her Felicia, and when she grows up give her the ring and the pot of pinks to console her for her poverty.' Take them both, then, my dear child," he added, "and your brother shall have everything else."

The two children seemed quite contented, and when their father died they wept for him, and divided his possessions as he had told them. Felicia believed that her brother loved her, but when she sat down upon one of the stools he said angrily:

"Keep your pot of pinks and your ring, but let my things alone. I like order in my house."

Felicia, who was very gentle, said nothing, but stood up crying quietly; while Bruno, for that was her brother's name, sat comfortably by the fire. Presently, when supper-time came, Bruno had a delicious egg, and he threw the shell to Felicia, saying:

"There, that is all I can give you; if you don't like it, go out and catch frogs; there are plenty of them in the marsh close by." Felicia did not answer, but she cried more bitterly than ever, and went away to her own little room. She found it filled with the sweet scent of the pinks, and, going up to them, she said sadly:

"Beautiful pinks, you are so sweet and so pretty, you are the only comfort I have left. Be very sure that I will take care of you, and water you well, and never allow any cruel hand to tear you from your stems."

As she leaned over them she noticed that they were very dry. So taking her pitcher, she ran off in the clear moonlight to the fountain, which was at some distance. When she reached it she sat down upon the brink to rest, but she had hardly done so when she saw a stately lady coming toward her, surrounded by numbers of attendants. Six maids of honor carried her train, and she leaned upon the arm of another.

When they came near the fountain a canopy was spread for her, under which was placed a sofa of cloth-of-gold, and presently a dainty supper was served, upon a table covered with dishes of gold and crystal, while the wind in the trees and the falling water of the fountain murmured the softest music.

Felicia was hidden in the shade, too much astonished by all she saw to venture to move; but in a few moments the Queen said:

"I fancy I see a shepherdess near that tree; bid her come hither."

So Felicia came forward and saluted the Queen timidly, but with so much grace that all were surprised.

"What are you doing here, my pretty child?" asked the Queen. "Are you not afraid of robbers?"

"Ah! madam," said Felicia, "a poor shepherdess who has nothing to lose does not fear robbers."

"You are not very rich, then?" said the Queen, smiling.

"I am so poor," answered Felicia, "that a pot of pinks and a silver ring are my only possessions in the world."

"But you have a heart," said the Queen. "What should you say if anybody wanted to steal that?"

"I do not know what it is like to lose one's heart, madam," she replied; "but I have always heard that without a heart one cannot live, and if it is broken one must die; and in spite of my poverty I should be sorry not to live."

"You are quite right to take care of your heart, pretty one," said the Queen. "But tell me, have you supped?"

"No, madam," answered Felicia; "my brother ate all the supper there was."

Then the Queen ordered that a place should be made for her at the table, and herself loaded Felicia's plate with good things; but she was too much astonished to be hungry.

"I want to know what you were doing at the fountain so late?" said the Queen presently.

"I came to fetch a pitcher of water for my pinks, madam," she answered, stooping to pick up the pitcher which stood beside her; but when she showed it to the Queen she was amazed to see that it had turned to gold, all sparkling with great diamonds, and the water, of which it was full, was more fragrant than the sweetest roses. She was afraid to take it until the Queen said:

"It is yours, Felicia; go and water your pinks with it, and let it remind you that the Queen of the Woods is your friend."

The shepherdess threw herself at the Queen's feet, and thanked her humbly for her gracious words.

"Ah! madam," she cried, "if I might beg you to stay here a moment I would run and fetch my pot of pinks for you--they could not fall into better hands."

"Go, Felicia," said the Queen, stroking her cheek softly; "I will wait here until you come back."

So Felicia took up her pitcher and ran to her little room, but while she had been away Bruno had gone in and taken the pot of pinks, leaving a great cabbage in its place. When she saw the unlucky cabbage Felicia was much distressed, and did not know what to do; but at last she ran back to the fountain, and, kneeling before the Queen, said:

"Madam, Bruno has stolen my pot of pinks, so I have nothing but my silver ring; but I beg you to accept it as a proof of my gratitude."

"But if I take your ring, my pretty shepherdess," said the Queen, "you will have nothing left; and what will you do then?"

"Ah! madam," she answered simply, "if I have your friendship I shall do very well."

So the Queen took the ring and put it on her finger, and mounted her chariot, which was made of coral studded with emeralds, and drawn by six milk-white horses. And Felicia looked after her until the winding of the forest path hid her from her sight, and then she went back to the cottage, thinking over all the wonderful things that had happened.

The first thing she did when she reached her room was to throw the cabbage out of the window.

But she was very much surprised to hear an odd little voice cry out: "Oh! I am half killed!" and could not tell where it came from, because cabbages do not generally speak.  As soon as it was light, Felicia, who was very unhappy about her pot of pinks, went out to look for it, and the first thing she found was the unfortunate cabbage. She gave it a push with her foot, saying: "What are you doing here, and how dared you put yourself in the place of my pot of pinks?"

"If I hadn't been carried," replied the cabbage, "you may be very sure that I shouldn't have thought of going there."

It made her shiver with fright to hear the cabbage talk, but he went on:

"If you will be good enough to plant me by my comrades again, I can tell you where your pinks are at this moment--hidden in Bruno's bed!"

Felicia was in despair when she heard this, not knowing how she was to get them back. But she replanted the cabbage very kindly in his old place, and, as she finished doing it, she saw Bruno's hen, and said, catching hold of it:

"Come here, horrid little creature! you shall suffer for all the unkind things my brother has done to me."

"Ah! shepherdess," said the hen, "don't kill me; I am rather a gossip, and I can tell you some surprising things that you will like to hear. Don't imagine that you are the daughter of the poor laborer who brought you up; your mother was a queen who had six girls already, and the King threatened that unless she had a son who could inherit his kingdom she should have her head cut off.

"So when the Queen had another little daughter she was quite frightened, and agreed with her sister (who was a fairy) to exchange her for the fairy's little son. Now the Queen had been shut up in a great tower by the King's orders, and when a great many days went by and still she heard nothing from the Fairy she made her escape from the window by means of a rope ladder, taking her little baby with her. After wandering about until she was half dead with cold and fatigue she reached this cottage. I was the laborer's wife, and was a good nurse, and the Queen gave you into my charge, and told me all her misfortunes, and then died before she had time to say what was to become of you.

"As I never in all my life could keep a secret, I could not help telling this strange tale to my neighbors, and one day a beautiful lady came here, and I told it to her also. When I had finished she touched me with a wand she held in her hand, and instantly I became a hen, and there was an end of my talking! I was very sad, and my husband, who was out when it happened, never knew what had become of me. After seeking me everywhere he believed that I must have been drowned, or eaten up by wild beasts in the forest. That same lady came here once more, and commanded that you should be called Felicia, and left the ring and the pot of pinks to be given to you; and while she was in the house twenty-five of the King's guards came to search for you, doubtless meaning to kill you; but she muttered a few words, and immediately they all turned into cabbages. It was one of them whom you threw out of your window yesterday.

"I don't know how it was that he could speak--I have never heard either of them say a word before, nor have I been able to do it myself until now."

The Princess was greatly astonished at the hen's story, and said kindly: "I am truly sorry for you, my poor nurse, and wish it was in my power to restore you to your real form. But we must not despair; it seems to me, after what you have told me, that something must be going to happen soon. Just now, however, I must go and look for my pinks, which I love better than anything in the world."

Bruno had gone out into the forest, never thinking that Felicia would search in his room for the pinks, and she was delighted by his unexpected absence, and thought to get them back without further trouble. But as soon as she entered the room she saw a terrible army of rats, who were guarding the straw bed; and when she attempted to approach it they sprang at her, biting and scratching furiously. Quite terrified, she drew back, crying out: "Oh! my dear pinks, how can you stay here in such bad company?"

Then she suddenly bethought herself of the pitcher of water, and, hoping that it might have some magic power, she ran to fetch it, and sprinkled a few drops over the fierce-looking swarm of rats. In a moment not a tail or a whisker was to be seen. Each one had made for his hole as fast as his legs could carry him, so that the Princess could safely take her pot of pinks. She found them nearly dying for want of water, and hastily poured all that was left in the pitcher upon them. As she bent over them, enjoying their delicious scent, a soft voice, that seemed to rustle among the leaves, said:

"Lovely Felicia, the day has come at last when I may have the happiness of telling you how even the flowers love you and rejoice in your beauty."

The Princess, quite overcome by the strangeness of hearing a cabbage, a hen, and a pink speak, and by the terrible sight of an army of rats, suddenly became very pale, and fainted away.

At this moment in came Bruno. Working hard in the heat had not improved his temper, and when he saw that Felicia had succeeded in finding her pinks he was so angry that he dragged her out into the garden and shut the door upon her. The fresh air soon made her open her pretty eyes, and there before her stood the Queen of the Woods, looking as charming as ever.

"You have a bad brother," she said; "I saw he turned you out. Shall I punish him for it?"

"Ah! no, madam," she said; "I am not angry with him.

"But supposing he was not your brother, after all, what would you say then?" asked the Queen.

"Oh! but I think he must be," said Felicia.

"What!" said the Queen, "have you not heard that you are a Princess?"

"I was told so a little while ago, madam, but how could I believe it without a single proof?"

"Ah! dear child," said the Queen, "the way you speak assures me that, in spite of your humble upbringing, you are indeed a real princess, and I can save you from being treated in such a way again."

She was interrupted at this moment by the arrival of a very handsome young man. He wore a coat of green velvet fastened with emerald clasps, and had a crown of pinks on his head. He knelt upon one knee and kissed the Queen's hand.

"Ah!" she cried, "my pink, my dear son, what a happiness to see you restored to your natural shape by Felicia's aid!" And she embraced him joyfully. Then, turning to Felicia, she said:

"Charming Princess, I know all the hen told you, but you cannot have heard that the zephyrs, to whom was entrusted the task of carrying my son to the tower where the Queen, your mother, so anxiously waited for him, left him instead in a garden of flowers, while they flew off to tell your mother. Whereupon a fairy with whom I had quarrelled changed him into a pink, and I could do nothing to prevent it.

"You can imagine how angry I was, and how I tried to find some means of undoing the mischief she had done; but there was no help for it. I could only bring Prince Pink to the place where you were being brought up, hoping that when you grew up he might love you, and by your care be restored to his natural form. And you see everything has come right, as I hoped it would. Your giving me the silver ring was the sign that the power of the charm was nearly over, and my enemy's last chance was to frighten you with her army of rats. That she did not succeed in doing; so now, my dear Felicia, if you will be married to my son with this silver ring your future happiness is certain. Do you think him handsome and amiable enough to be willing to marry him?"

"Madam," replied Felicia, blushing, "you overwhelm me with your kindness. I know that you are my mother's sister, and that by your art you turned the soldiers who were sent to kill me into cabbages, and my nurse into a hen, and that you do me only too much honor in proposing that I shall marry your son. How can I explain to you the cause of my hesitation? I feel, for the first time in my life, how happy it would make me to be beloved. Can you indeed give me the Prince's heart?"

"It is yours already, lovely Princess!" he cried, taking her hand in his; "but for the horrible enchantment which kept me silent I should have told you long ago how dearly I love you."

This made the Princess very happy, and the Queen, who could not bear to see her dressed like a poor shepherdess, touched her with her wand, saying:

"I wish you to be attired as befits your rank and beauty." And immediately the Princess's cotton dress became a magnificent robe of silver brocade embroidered with carbuncles, and her soft dark hair was encircled by a crown of diamonds, from which floated a clear white veil. With her bright eyes, and the charming color in her cheeks, she was altogether such a dazzling sight that the Prince could hardly bear it.

"How pretty you are, Felicia!" he cried. "Don't keep me in suspense, I entreat you; say that you will marry me."

"Ah!" said the Queen, smiling, "I think she will not refuse now."

Just then Bruno, who was going back to his work, came out of the cottage, and thought he must be dreaming when he saw Felicia; but she called him very kindly, and begged the Queen to take pity on him.

"What!" she said, "when he was so unkind to you?"

"Ah! madam," said the Princess, "I am so happy that I should like everybody else to be happy too."

The Queen kissed her, and said: "Well, to please you, let me see what I can do for this cross Bruno." And with a wave of her wand she turned the poor little cottage into a splendid palace, full of treasures; only the two stools and the straw bed remained just as they were, to remind him of his former poverty. Then the Queen touched Bruno himself, and made him gentle and polite and grateful, and he thanked her and the Princess a thousand times. Lastly, the Queen restored the hen and the cabbages to their natural forms, and left them all very contented. The Prince and Princess were married as soon as possible with great splendor, and lived happily ever after.[1]

[1] Fortunee. Par Madame la Comtesse d'Aulnoy.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

THE WHITE CAT

Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons, who were all so clever and brave that he began to be afraid that they would want to reign over the kingdom before he was dead. Now the King, though he felt that he was growing old, did not at all wish to give up the government of his kingdom while he could still manage it very well, so he thought the best way to live in peace would be to divert the minds of his sons by promises which he could always get out of when the time came for keeping them.

So he sent for them all, and, after speaking to them kindly, he added:

"You will quite agree with me, my dear children, that my great age makes it impossible for me to look after my affairs of state as carefully as I once did. I begin to fear that this may affect the welfare of my subjects, therefore I wish that one of you should succeed to my crown; but in return for such a gift as this it is only right that you should do something for me. Now, as I think of retiring into the country, it seems to me that a pretty, lively, faithful little dog would be very good company for me; so, without any regard for your ages, I promise that the one who brings me the most beautiful little dog shall succeed me at once."

The three Princes were greatly surprised by their father's sudden fancy for a little dog, but as it gave the two younger ones a chance they would not otherwise have had of being king, and as the eldest was too polite to make any objection, they accepted the commission with pleasure. They bade farewell to the King, who gave them presents of silver and precious stones, and appointed to meet them at the same hour, in the same place, after a year had passed, to see the little dogs they had brought for him.

Then they went together to a castle which was about a league from the city, accompanied by all their particular friends, to whom they gave a grand banquet, and the three brothers promised to be friends always, to share whatever good fortune befell them, and not to be parted by any envy or jealousy; and so they set out, agreeing to meet at the same castle at the appointed time, to present themselves before the King together. Each one took a different road, and the two eldest met with many adventures; but it is about the youngest that you are going to hear. He was young, and gay, and handsome, and knew everything that a prince ought to know; and as for his courage, there was simply no end to it.

Hardly a day passed without his buying several dogs--big and little, greyhounds, mastiffs, spaniels, and lapdogs. As soon as he had bought a pretty one he was sure to see a still prettier, and then he had to get rid of all the others and buy that one, as, being alone, he found it impossible to take thirty or forty thousand dogs about with him. He journeyed from day to day, not knowing where he was going, until at last, just at nightfall, he reached a great, gloomy forest. He did not know his way, and, to make matters worse, it began to thunder, and the rain poured down. He took the first path he could find, and after walking for a long time he fancied he saw a faint light, and began to hope that he was coming to some cottage where he might find shelter for the night. At length, guided by the light, he reached the door of the most splendid castle he could have imagined. This door was of gold covered with carbuncles, and it was the pure red light which shone from them that had shown him the way through the forest. The walls were of the finest porcelain in all the most delicate colors, and the Prince saw that all the stories he had ever read were pictured upon them; but as he was terribly wet, and the rain still fell in torrents, he could not stay to look about any more, but came back to the golden door. There he saw a deer's foot hanging by a chain of diamonds, and he began to wonder who could live in this magnificent castle.

"They must feel very secure against robbers," he said to himself. "What is to hinder anyone from cutting off that chain and digging out those carbuncles, and making himself rich for life?"

He pulled the deer's foot, and immediately a silver bell sounded and the door flew open, but the Prince could see nothing but numbers of hands in the air, each holding a torch. He was so much surprised that he stood quite still, until he felt himself pushed forward by other hands, so that, though he was somewhat uneasy, he could not help going on. With his hand on his sword, to be prepared for whatever might happen, he entered a hall paved with lapis-lazuli, while two lovely voices sang:

"The hands you see floating above
 Will swiftly your bidding obey;
 If your heart dreads not conquering Love,
 In this place you may fearlessly stay."

The Prince could not believe that any danger threatened him when he was welcomed in this way, so, guided by the mysterious hands, he went toward a door of coral, which opened of its own accord, and he found himself in a vast hall of mother-of-pearl, out of which opened a number of other rooms, glittering with thousands of lights, and full of such beautiful pictures and precious things that the Prince felt quite bewildered. After passing through sixty rooms the hands that conducted him stopped, and the Prince saw a most comfortable-looking arm-chair drawn up close to the chimney-corner; at the same moment the fire lighted itself, and the pretty, soft, clever hands took off the Prince's wet, muddy clothes, and presented him with fresh ones made of the richest stuffs, all embroidered with gold and emeralds. He could not help admiring everything he saw, and the deft way in which the hands waited on him, though they sometimes appeared so suddenly that they made him jump.

When he was quite ready--and I can assure you that he looked very different from the wet and weary Prince who had stood outside in the rain, and pulled the deer's foot--the hands led him to a splendid room, upon the walls of which were painted the histories of Puss in Boots and a number of other famous cats. The table was laid for supper with two golden plates, and golden spoons and forks, and the sideboard was covered with dishes and glasses of crystal set with precious stones. The Prince was wondering who the second place could be for, when suddenly in came about a dozen cats carrying guitars and rolls of music, who took their places at one end of the room, and under the direction of a cat who beat time with a roll of paper began to mew in every imaginable key, and to draw their claws across the strings of the guitars, making the strangest kind of music that could be heard. The Prince hastily stopped up his ears, but even then the sight of these comical musicians sent him into fits of laughter.

"What funny thing shall I see next?" he said to himself, and instantly the door opened, and in came a tiny figure covered by a long black veil. It was conducted by two cats wearing black mantles and carrying swords, and a large party of cats followed, who brought in cages full of rats and mice.

The Prince was so much astonished that he thought he must be dreaming, but the little figure came up to him and threw back its veil, and he saw that it was the loveliest little white cat it is possible to imagine. She looked very young and very sad, and in a sweet little voice that went straight to his heart she said to the Prince:

"King's son, you are welcome; the Queen of the Cats is glad to see you."

"Lady Cat," replied the Prince, "I thank you for receiving me so kindly, but surely you are no ordinary pussy-cat? Indeed, the way you speak and the magnificence of your castle prove it plainly."

"King's son," said the White Cat, "I beg you to spare me these compliments, for I am not used to them. But now," she added, "let supper be served, and let the musicians be silent, as the Prince does not understand what they are saying."

So the mysterious hands began to bring in the supper, and first they put on the table two dishes, one containing stewed pigeons and the other a fricassee of fat mice. The sight of the latter made the Prince feel as if he could not enjoy his supper at all; but the White Cat, seeing this, assured him that the dishes intended for him were prepared in a separate kitchen, and he might be quite certain that they contained neither rats nor mice; and the Prince felt so sure that she would not deceive him that he had no more hesitation in beginning. Presently he noticed that on the little paw that was next him the White Cat wore a bracelet containing a portrait, and he begged to be allowed to look at it. To his great surprise he found it represented an extremely handsome young man, who was so like himself that it might have been his own portrait! The White Cat sighed as he looked at it, and seemed sadder than ever, and the Prince dared not ask any questions for fear of displeasing her; so he began to talk about other things, and found that she was interested in all the subjects he cared for himself, and seemed to know quite well what was going on in the world. After supper they went into another room, which was fitted up as a theatre, and the cats acted and danced for their amusement, and then the White Cat said good-night to him, and the hands conducted him into a room he had not seen before, hung with tapestry worked with butterflies' wings of every color; there were mirrors that reached from the ceiling to the floor, and a little white bed with curtains of gauze tied up with ribbons. The Prince went to bed in silence, as he did not quite know how to begin a conversation with the hands that waited on him, and in the morning he was awakened by a noise and confusion outside of his window, and the hands came and quickly dressed him in hunting costume. When he looked out all the cats were assembled in the courtyard, some leading greyhounds, some blowing horns, for the White Cat was going out hunting. The hands led a wooden horse up to the Prince, and seemed to expect him to mount it, at which he was very indignant; but it was no use for him to object, for he speedily found himself upon its back, and it pranced gaily off with him.

The White Cat herself was riding a monkey, which climbed even up to the eagles' nests when she had a fancy for the young eaglets. Never was there a pleasanter hunting party, and when they returned to the castle the Prince and the White Cat supped together as before, but when they had finished she offered him a crystal goblet, which must have contained a magic draught, for, as soon as he had swallowed its contents, he forgot everything, even the little dog that he was seeking for the King, and only thought how happy he was to be with the White Cat! And so the days passed, in every kind of amusement, until the year was nearly gone. The Prince had forgotten all about meeting his brothers: he did not even know what country he belonged to; but the White Cat knew when he ought to go back, and one day she said to him:

"Do you know that you have only three days left to look for the little dog for your father, and your brothers have found lovely ones?"

Then the Prince suddenly recovered his memory, and cried:

"What can have made me forget such an important thing? My whole fortune depends upon it; and even if I could in such a short time find a dog pretty enough to gain me a kingdom, where should I find a horse who would carry me all that way in three days?" And he began to be very vexed. But the White Cat said to him: "King's son, do not trouble yourself; I am your friend, and will make everything easy for you. You can still stay here for a day, as the good wooden horse can take you to your country in twelve hours."

"I thank you, beautiful Cat," said the Prince; "but what good will it do me to get back if I have not a dog to take to my father?"

"See here," answered the White Cat, holding up an acorn; "there is a prettier one in this than in the Dogstar!"

"Oh! White Cat dear," said the Prince, "how unkind you are to laugh at me now!"  "Only listen," she said, holding the acorn to his ear.

And inside it he distinctly heard a tiny voice say: "Bow-wow!"

The Prince was delighted, for a dog that can be shut up in an acorn must be very small indeed. He wanted to take it out and look at it, but the White Cat said it would be better not to open the acorn till he was before the King, in case the tiny dog should be cold on the journey. He thanked her a thousand times, and said good-by quite sadly when the time came for him to set out.

"The days have passed so quickly with you," he said, "I only wish I could take you with me now."

But the White Cat shook her head and sighed deeply in answer.

After all the Prince was the first to arrive at the castle where he had agreed to meet his brothers, but they came soon after, and stared in amazement when they saw the wooden horse in the courtyard jumping like a hunter.

The Prince met them joyfully, and they began to tell him all their adventures; but he managed to hide from them what he had been doing, and even led them to think that a turnspit dog which he had with him was the one he was bringing for the King. Fond as they all were of one another, the two eldest could not help being glad to think that their dogs certainly had a better chance. The next morning they started in the same chariot. The elder brothers carried in baskets two such tiny, fragile dogs that they hardly dared to touch them. As for the turnspit, he ran after the chariot, and got so covered with mud that one could hardly see what he was like at all. When they reached the palace everyone crowded round to welcome them as they went into the King's great hall; and when the two brothers presented their little dogs nobody could decide which was the prettier. They were already arranging between themselves to share the kingdom equally, when the youngest stepped forward, drawing from his pocket the acorn the White Cat had given him. He opened it quickly, and there upon a white cushion they saw a dog so small that it could easily have been put through a ring. The Prince laid it upon the ground, and it got up at once and began to dance. The King did not know what to say, for it was impossible that anything could be prettier than this little creature. Nevertheless, as he was in no hurry to part with his crown, he told his sons that, as they had been so successful the first time, he would ask them to go once again, and seek by land and sea for a piece of muslin so fine that it could be drawn through the eye of a needle. The brothers were not very willing to set out again, but the two eldest consented because it gave them another chance, and they started as before. The youngest again mounted the wooden horse, and rode back at full speed to his beloved White Cat. Every door of the castle stood wide open, and every window and turret was illuminated, so it looked more wonderful than before. The hands hastened to meet him, and led the wooden horse off to the stable, while he hurried in to find the White Cat. She was asleep in a little basket on a white satin cushion, but she very soon started up when she heard the Prince, and was overjoyed at seeing him once more.

"How could I hope that you would come back to me King's son?" she said. And then he stroked and petted her, and told her of his successful journey, and how he had come back to ask her help, as he believed that it was impossible to find what the King demanded. The White Cat looked serious, and said she must think what was to be done, but that, luckily, there were some cats in the castle who could spin very well, and if anybody could manage it they could, and she would set them the task herself.

And then the hands appeared carrying torches, and conducted the Prince and the White Cat to a long gallery which overlooked the river, from the windows of which they saw a magnificent display of fireworks of all sorts; after which they had supper, which the Prince liked even better than the fireworks, for it was very late, and he was hungry after his long ride. And so the days passed quickly as before; it was impossible to feel dull with the White Cat, and she had quite a talent for inventing new amusements--indeed, she was cleverer than a cat has any right to be. But when the Prince asked her how it was that she was so wise, she only said:

"King's son, do not ask me; guess what you please. I may not tell you anything."

The Prince was so happy that he did not trouble himself at all about the time, but presently the White Cat told him that the year was gone, and that he need not be at all anxious about the piece of muslin, as they had made it very well.

"This time," she added, "I can give you a suitable escort"; and on looking out into the courtyard the Prince saw a superb chariot of burnished gold, enameled in flame color with a thousand different devices. It was drawn by twelve snow-white horses, harnessed four abreast; their trappings were flame-colored velvet, embroidered with diamonds. A hundred chariots followed, each drawn by eight horses, and filled with officers in splendid uniforms, and a thousand guards surrounded the procession. "Go!" said the White Cat, "and when you appear before the King in such state he surely will not refuse you the crown which you deserve. Take this walnut, but do not open it until you are before him, then you will find in it the piece of stuff you asked me for."

"Lovely Blanchette," said the Prince, "how can I thank you properly for all your kindness to me? Only tell me that you wish it, and I will give up for ever all thought of being king, and will stay here with you always."

"King's son," she replied, "it shows the goodness of your heart that you should care so much for a little white cat, who is good for nothing but to catch mice; but you must not stay."

So the Prince kissed her little paw and set out. You can imagine how fast he traveled when I tell you that they reached the King's palace in just half the time it had taken the wooden horse to get there. This time the Prince was so late that he did not try to meet his brothers at their castle, so they thought he could not be coming, and were rather glad of it, and displayed their pieces of muslin to the King proudly, feeling sure of success. And indeed the stuff was very fine, and would go through the eye of a very large needle; but the King, who was only too glad to make a difficulty, sent for a particular needle, which was kept among the Crown jewels, and had such a small eye that everybody saw at once that it was impossible that the muslin should pass through it. The Princes were angry, and were beginning to complain that it was a trick, when suddenly the trumpets sounded and the youngest Prince came in. His father and brothers were quite astonished at his magnificence, and after he had greeted them he took the walnut from his pocket and opened it, fully expecting to find the piece of muslin, but instead there was only a hazel-nut. He cracked it, and there lay a cherry-stone. Everybody was looking on, and the King was chuckling to himself at the idea of finding the piece of muslin in a nutshell.

However, the Prince cracked the cherry-stone, but everyone laughed when he saw it contained only its own kernel. He opened that and found a grain of wheat, and in that was a millet seed. Then he himself began to wonder, and muttered softly:

"White Cat, White Cat, are you making fun of me?"

In an instant he felt a cat's claw give his hand quite a sharp scratch, and hoping that it was meant as an encouragement he opened the millet seed, and drew out of it a piece of muslin four hundred ells long, woven with the loveliest colors and most wonderful patterns; and when the needle was brought it went through the eye six times with the greatest ease! The King turned pale, and the other Princes stood silent and sorrowful, for nobody could deny that this was the most marvelous piece of muslin that was to be found in the world.

Presently the King turned to his sons, and said, with a deep sigh:

"Nothing could console me more in my old age than to realize your willingness to gratify my wishes. Go then once more, and whoever at the end of a year can bring back the loveliest princess shall be married to her, and shall, without further delay, receive the crown, for my successor must certainly be married." The Prince considered that he had earned the kingdom fairly twice over but still he was too well bred to argue about it, so he just went back to his gorgeous chariot, and, surrounded by his escort, returned to the White Cat faster than he had come. This time she was expecting him, the path was strewn with flowers, and a thousand braziers were burning scented woods which perfumed the air. Seated in a gallery from which she could see his arrival, the White Cat waited for him. "Well, King's son," she said, "here you are once more, without a crown." "Madam," said he, "thanks to your generosity I have earned one twice over; but the fact is that my father is so loth to part with it that it would be no pleasure to me to take it."

"Never mind," she answered, "it's just as well to try and deserve it. As you must take back a lovely princess with you next time I will be on the look-out for one for you. In the meantime let us enjoy ourselves; to-night I have ordered a battle between my cats and the river rats on purpose to amuse you." So this year slipped away even more pleasantly than the preceding ones. Sometimes the Prince could not help asking the White Cat how it was she could talk.

"Perhaps you are a fairy," he said. "Or has some enchanter changed you into a cat?"

But she only gave him answers that told him nothing. Days go by so quickly when one is very happy that it is certain the Prince would never have thought of its being time to go back, when one evening as they sat together the White Cat said to him that if he wanted to take a lovely princess home with him the next day he must be prepared to do what she told him.

"Take this sword," she said, "and cut off my head!"

"I!" cried the Prince, "I cut off your head! Blanchette darling, how could I do it?"

"I entreat you to do as I tell you, King's son," she replied.

The tears came into the Prince's eyes as he begged her to ask him anything but that--to set him any task she pleased as a proof of his devotion, but to spare him the grief of killing his dear Pussy. But nothing he could say altered her determination, and at last he drew his sword, and desperately, with a trembling hand, cut off the little white head. But imagine his astonishment and delight when suddenly a lovely princess stood before him, and, while he was still speechless with amazement, the door opened and a goodly company of knights and ladies entered, each carrying a cat's skin! They hastened with every sign of joy to the Princess, kissing her hand and congratulating her on being once more restored to her natural shape. She received them graciously, but after a few minutes begged that they would leave her alone with the Prince, to whom she said:

"You see, Prince, that you were right in supposing me to be no ordinary cat. My father reigned over six kingdoms. The Queen, my mother, whom he loved dearly, had a passion for traveling and exploring, and when I was only a few weeks old she obtained his permission to visit a certain mountain of which she had heard many marvelous tales, and set out, taking with her a number of her attendants. On the way they had to pass near an old castle belonging to the fairies. Nobody had ever been into it, but it was reported to be full of the most wonderful things, and my mother remembered to have heard that the fairies had in their garden such fruits as were to be seen and tasted nowhere else. She began to wish to try them for herself, and turned her steps in the direction of the garden. On arriving at the door, which blazed with gold and jewels, she ordered her servants to knock loudly, but it was useless; it seemed as if all the inhabitants of the castle must be asleep or dead. Now the more difficult it became to obtain the fruit, the more the Queen was determined that have it she would. So she ordered that they should bring ladders, and get over the wall into the garden; but though the wall did not look very high, and they tied the ladders together to make them very long, it was quite impossible to get to the top.

"The Queen was in despair, but as night was coming on she ordered that they should encamp just where they were, and went to bed herself, feeling quite ill, she was so disappointed. In the middle of the night she was suddenly awakened, and saw to her surprise a tiny, ugly old woman seated by her bedside, who said to her:

"'I must say that we consider it somewhat troublesome of your Majesty to insist upon tasting our fruit; but to save you annoyance, my sisters and I will consent to give you as much as you can carry away, on one condition--that is, that you shall give us your little daughter to bring up as our own.'

"'Ah! my dear madam,' cried the Queen, 'is there nothing else that you will take for the fruit? I will give you my kingdoms willingly.'

"'No,' replied the old fairy, 'we will have nothing but your little daughter. She shall be as happy as the day is long, and we will give her everything that is worth having in fairy-land, but you must not see her again until she is married.'

"'Though it is a hard condition,' said the Queen, 'I consent, for I shall certainly die if I do not taste the fruit, and so I should lose my little daughter either way.'

"So the old fairy led her into the castle, and, though it was still the middle of the night, the Queen could see plainly that it was far more beautiful than she had been told, which you can easily believe, Prince," said the White Cat, "when I tell you that it was this castle that we are now in. 'Will you gather the fruit yourself, Queen?' said the old fairy, 'or shall I call it to come to you?'

"'I beg you to let me see it come when it is called,' cried the Queen; 'that will be something quite new.' The old fairy whistled twice, then she cried:

"'Apricots, peaches, nectarines, cherries, plums, pears, melons, grapes, apples, oranges, lemons, gooseberries, strawberries, raspberries, come!'

"And in an instant they came tumbling in one over another, and yet they were neither dusty nor spoilt, and the Queen found them quite as good as she had fancied them. You see they grew upon fairy trees.

"The old fairy gave her golden baskets in which to take the fruit away, and it was as much as four hundred mules could carry. Then she reminded the Queen of her agreement, and led her back to the camp, and next morning she went back to her kingdom, but before she had gone very far she began to repent of her bargain, and when the King came out to meet her she looked so sad that he guessed that something had happened, and asked what was the matter. At first the Queen was afraid to tell him, but when, as soon as they reached the palace, five frightful little dwarfs were sent by the fairies to fetch me, she was obliged to confess what she had promised. The King was very angry, and had the Queen and myself shut up in a great tower and safely guarded, and drove the little dwarfs out of his kingdom; but the fairies sent a great dragon who ate up all the people he met, and whose breath burnt up everything as he passed through the country; and at last, after trying in vain to rid himself of this monster, the King, to save his subjects, was obliged to consent that I should be given up to the fairies. This time they came themselves to fetch me, in a chariot of pearl drawn by sea-horses, followed by the dragon, who was led with chains of diamonds. My cradle was placed between the old fairies, who loaded me with caresses, and away we whirled through the air to a tower which they had built on purpose for me. There I grew up surrounded with everything that was beautiful and rare, and learning everything that is ever taught to a princess, but without any companions but a parrot and a little dog, who could both talk; and receiving every day a visit from one of the old fairies, who came mounted upon the dragon. One day, however, as I sat at my window I saw a handsome young prince, who seemed to have been hunting in the forest which surrounded my prison, and who was standing and looking up at me. When he saw that I observed him he saluted me with great deference. You can imagine that I was delighted to have some one new to talk to, and in spite of the height of my window our conversation was prolonged till night fell, then my prince reluctantly bade me farewell. But after that he came again many times and at last I consented to marry him, but the question was how was I to escape from my tower. The fairies always supplied me with flax for my spinning, and by great diligence I made enough cord for a ladder that would reach to the foot of the tower; but, alas! just as my prince was helping me to descend it, the crossest and ugliest of the old fairies flew in. Before he had time to defend himself my unhappy lover was swallowed up by the dragon. As for me, the fairies, furious at having their plans defeated, for they intended me to marry the king of the dwarfs, and I utterly refused, changed me into a white cat. When they brought me here I found all the lords and ladies of my father's court awaiting me under the same enchantment, while the people of lesser rank had been made invisible, all but their hands.

"As they laid me under the enchantment the fairies told me all my history, for until then I had quite believed that I was their child, and warned me that my only chance of regaining my natural form was to win the love of a prince who resembled in every way my unfortunate lover.

"And you have won it, lovely Princess," interrupted the Prince.

"You are indeed wonderfully like him," resumed the Princess--"in voice, in features, and everything; and if you really love me all my troubles will be at an end."

"And mine too," cried the Prince, throwing himself at her feet, "if you will consent to marry me."

"I love you already better than anyone in the world," she said; "but now it is time to go back to your father, and we shall hear what he says about it."

So the Prince gave her his hand and led her out, and they mounted the chariot together; it was even more splendid than before, and so was the whole company. Even the horses' shoes were of rubies with diamond nails, and I suppose that is the first time such a thing was ever seen.

As the Princess was as kind and clever as she was beautiful, you may imagine what a delightful journey the Prince found it, for everything the Princess said seemed to him quite charming.

When they came near the castle where the brothers were to meet, the Princess got into a chair carried by four of the guards; it was hewn out of one splendid crystal, and had silken curtains, which she drew round her that she might not be seen.

The Prince saw his brothers walking upon the terrace, each with a lovely princess, and they came to meet him, asking if he had also found a wife. He said that he had found something much rarer--a white cat! At which they laughed very much, and asked him if he was afraid of being eaten up by mice in the palace. And then they set out together for the town. Each prince and princess rode in a splendid carriage; the horses were decked with plumes of feathers, and glittered with gold. After them came the youngest prince, and last of all the crystal chair, at which everybody looked with admiration and curiosity. When the courtiers saw them coming they hastened to tell the King.

"Are the ladies beautiful?" he asked anxiously.

And when they answered that nobody had ever before seen such lovely princesses he seemed quite annoyed.

However, he received them graciously, but found it impossible to choose between them.

Then turning to his youngest son he said:

"Have you come back alone, after all?"

"Your Majesty," replied the Prince, "will find in that crystal chair a little white cat, which has such soft paws, and mews so prettily, that I am sure you will be charmed with it."

The King smiled, and went to draw back the curtains himself, but at a touch from the Princess the crystal shivered into a thousand splinters, and there she stood in all her beauty; her fair hair floated over her shoulders and was crowned with flowers, and her softly falling robe was of the purest white. She saluted the King gracefully, while a murmur of admiration rose from all around.

"Sire," she said, "I am not come to deprive you of the throne you fill so worthily. I have already six kingdoms, permit me to bestow one upon you, and upon each of your sons. I ask nothing but your friendship, and your consent to my marriage with your youngest son; we shall still have three kingdoms left for ourselves."

The King and all the courtiers could not conceal their joy and astonishment, and the marriage of the three Princes was celebrated at once. The festivities lasted several months, and then each king and queen departed to their own kingdom and lived happily ever after.[1]

[1] La Chatte blanche. Par Madame la Comtesse d'Aulnoy.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

THE WATER-LILY. THE GOLD-SPINNERS

Once upon a time, in a large forest, there lived an old woman and three maidens. They were all three beautiful, but the youngest was the fairest. Their hut was quite hidden by trees, and none saw their beauty but the sun by day, and the moon by night, and the eyes of the stars. The old woman kept the girls hard at work, from morning till night, spinning gold flax into yarn, and when one distaff was empty another was given them, so they had no rest. The thread had to be fine and even, and when done was locked up in a secret chamber by the old woman, who twice or thrice every summer went a journey. Before she went she gave out work for each day of her absence, and always returned in the night, so that the girls never saw what she brought back with her, neither would she tell them whence the gold flax came, nor what it was to be used for.

Now, when the time came round for the old woman to set out on one of these journeys, she gave each maiden work for six days, with the usual warning: "Children, don't let your eyes wander, and on no account speak to a man, for, if you do, your thread will lose its brightness, and misfortunes of all kinds will follow." They laughed at this oft-repeated caution, saying to each other: "How can our gold thread lose its brightness, and have we any chance of speaking to a man?"

On the third day after the old woman's departure a young prince, hunting in the forest, got separated from his companions, and completely lost. Weary of seeking his way, he flung himself down under a tree, leaving his horse to browse at will, and fell asleep.

The sun had set when he awoke and began once more to try and find his way out of the forest. At last he perceived a narrow foot-path, which he eagerly followed and found that it led him to a small hut. The maidens, who were sitting at the door of their hut for coolness, saw him approaching, and the two elder were much alarmed, for they remembered the old woman's warning; but the youngest said: "Never before have I seen anyone like him; let me have one look." They entreated her to come in, but, seeing that she would not, left her, and the Prince, coming up, courteously greeted the maiden, and told her he had lost his way in the forest and was both hungry and weary. She set food before him, and was so delighted with his conversation that she forgot the old woman's caution, and lingered for hours. In the meantime the Prince's companions sought him far and wide, but to no purpose, so they sent two messengers to tell the sad news to the King, who immediately ordered a regiment of cavalry and one of infantry to go and look for him.

After three days' search, they found the hut. The Prince was still sitting by the door and had been so happy in the maiden's company that the time had seemed like a single hour. Before leaving he promised to return and fetch her to his father's court, where he would make her his bride. When he had gone, she sat down to her wheel to make up for lost time, but was dismayed to find that her thread had lost all its brightness. Her heart beat fast and she wept bitterly, for she remembered the old woman's warning and knew not what misfortune might now befall her.

The old woman returned in the night and knew by the tarnished thread what had happened in her absence. She was furiously angry and told the maiden that she had brought down misery both on herself and on the Prince. The maiden could not rest for thinking of this. At last she could bear it no longer, and resolved to seek help from the Prince.

As a child she had learned to understand the speech of birds, and this was now of great use to her, for, seeing a raven pluming itself on a pine bough, she cried softly to it: "Dear bird, cleverest of all birds, as well as swiftest on wing, wilt thou help me?" "How can I help thee?" asked the raven. She answered: "Fly away, until thou comest to a splendid town, where stands a king's palace; seek out the king's son and tell him that a great misfortune has befallen me." Then she told the raven how her thread had lost its brightness, how terribly angry the old woman was, and how she feared some great disaster. The raven promised faithfully to do her bidding, and, spreading its wings, flew away. The maiden now went home and worked hard all day at winding up the yarn her elder sisters had spun, for the old woman would let her spin no longer. Toward evening she heard the raven's "craa, craa," from the pine tree and eagerly hastened thither to hear the answer.

By great good fortune the raven had found a wind wizard's son in the palace garden, who understood the speech of birds, and to him he had entrusted the message. When the Prince heard it, he was very sorrowful, and took counsel with his friends how to free the maiden. Then he said to the wind wizard's son: "Beg the raven to fly quickly back to the maiden and tell her to be ready on the ninth night, for then will I come and fetch her away." The wind wizard's son did this, and the raven flew so swiftly that it reached the hut that same evening. The maiden thanked the bird heartily and went home, telling no one what she had heard.

As the ninth night drew near she became very unhappy, for she feared lest some terrible mischance should arise and ruin all. On this night she crept quietly out of the house and waited trembling at some little distance from the hut. Presently she heard the muffled tramp of horses, and soon the armed troop appeared, led by the Prince, who had prudently marked all the trees beforehand, in order to know the way. When he saw the maiden he sprang from his horse, lifted her into the saddle, and then, mounting behind, rode homeward. The moon shone so brightly that they had no difficulty in seeing the marked trees.

By and by the coming of dawn loosened the tongues of all the birds, and, had the Prince only known what they were saying, or the maiden been listening, they might have been spared much sorrow, but they were thinking only of each other, and when they came out of the forest the sun was high in the heavens.

Next morning, when the youngest girl did not come to her work, the old woman asked where she was. The sisters pretended not to know, but the old woman easily guessed what had happened, and, as she was in reality a wicked witch, determined to punish the fugitives. Accordingly, she collected nine different kinds of enchanters' nightshade, added some salt, which she first bewitched, and, doing all up in a cloth into the shape of a fluffy ball, sent it after them on the wings of the wind, saying:

"Whirlwind!--mother of the wind!
 Lend thy aid 'gainst her who sinned!
 Carry with thee this magic ball.
 Cast her from his arms for ever,
 Bury her in the rippling river."

At midday the Prince and his men came to a deep river, spanned by so narrow a bridge that only one rider could cross at a time. The horse on which the Prince and the maiden were riding had just reached the middle when the magic ball flew by. The horse in its fright suddenly reared, and before anyone could stop it flung the maiden into the swift current below. The Prince tried to jump in after her, but his men held him back, and in spite of his struggles led him home, where for six weeks he shut himself up in a secret chamber, and would neither eat nor drink, so great was his grief. At last he became so ill his life was despaired of, and in great alarm the King caused all the wizards of his country to be summoned. But none could cure him. At last the wind wizard's son said to the King: "Send for the old wizard from Finland he knows more than all the wizards of your kingdom put together." A messenger was at once sent to Finland, and a week later the old wizard himself arrived on the wings of the wind. "Honored King," said the wizard, "the wind has blown this illness upon your son, and a magic ball has snatched away his beloved. This it is which makes him grieve so constantly. Let the wind blow upon him that it may blow away his sorrow." Then the King made his son go out into the wind, and he gradually recovered and told his father all. "Forget the maiden," said the King, "and take another bride"; but the Prince said he could never love another.

A year afterward he came suddenly upon the bridge where his beloved met her death. As he recalled the misfortune he wept bitterly, and would have given all he possessed to have her once more alive. In the midst of his grief he thought he heard a voice singing, and looked round, but could see no one. Then he heard the voice again, and it said:

"Alas! bewitched and all forsaken,
 'Tis I must lie for ever here!
 My beloved no thought has taken
 To free his bride, that was so dear."

He was greatly astonished, sprang from his horse, and looked everywhere to see if no one were hidden under the bridge; but no one was there. Then he noticed a yellow water-lily floating on the surface of the water, half hidden by its broad leaves; but flowers do not sing, and in great surprise he waited, hoping to hear more. Then again the voice sang:

"Alas! bewitched and all forsaken,
 'Tis I must lie for ever here!
 My beloved no thought has taken
 To free his bride, that was so dear."

The Prince suddenly remembered the gold-spinners, and said to himself: "If I ride thither, who knows but that they could explain this to me?" He at once rode to the hut, and found the two maidens at the fountain. He told them what had befallen their sister the year before, and how he had twice heard a strange song, but yet could see no singer. They said that the yellow water-lily could be none other than their sister, who was not dead, but transformed by the magic ball. Before he went to bed, the eldest made a cake of magic herbs, which she gave him to eat. In the night he dreamed that he was living in the forest and could understand all that the birds said to each other. Next morning he told this to the maidens, and they said that the charmed cake had caused it, and advised him to listen well to the birds, and see what they could tell him, and when he had recovered his bride they begged him to return and deliver them from their wretched bondage.

Having promised this, he joyfully returned home, and as he was riding through the forest he could perfectly understand all that the birds said. He heard a thrush say to a magpie: "How stupid men are! they cannot understand the simplest thing. It is now quite a year since the maiden was transformed into a water-lily, and, though she sings so sadly that anyone going over the bridge must hear her, yet no one comes to her aid. Her former bridegroom rode over it a few days ago and heard her singing, but was no wiser than the rest."

"And he is to blame for all her misfortunes," added the magpie. "If he heeds only the words of men she will remain a flower for ever. She were soon delivered were the matter only laid before the old wizard of Finland."

After hearing this, the Prince wondered how he could get a message conveyed to Finland. He heard one swallow say to another: "Come, let us fly to Finland; we can build better nests there."

"Stop, kind friends!" cried the Prince. "Will you do something for me?" The birds consented, and he said: "Take a thousand greetings from me to the wizard of Finland, and ask him how I may restore a maiden transformed into a flower to her own form."

The swallows flew away, and the Prince rode on to the bridge. There he waited, hoping to hear the song. But he heard nothing but the rushing of the water and the moaning of the wind, and, disappointed, rode home.

Shortly after, he was sitting in the garden, thinking that the swallows must have forgotten his message, when he saw an eagle flying above him. The bird gradually descended until it perched on a tree close to the Prince and said: "The wizard of Finland greets thee and bids me say that thou mayest free the maiden thus: Go to the river and smear thyself all over with mud; then say: 'From a man into a crab,' and thou wilt become a crab. Plunge boldly into the water, swim as close as thou canst to the water-lily's roots, and loosen them from the mud and reeds. This done, fasten thy claws into the roots and rise with them to the surface. Let the water flow all over the flower, and drift with the current until thou comest to a mountain ash tree on the left bank. There is near it a large stone. Stop there and say: 'From a crab into a man, from a water-lily into a maiden,' and ye both will be restored to your own forms."

Full of doubt and fear, the Prince let some time pass before he was bold enough to attempt to rescue the maiden. Then a crow said to him: "Why dost thou hesitate? The old wizard has not told thee wrong, neither have the birds deceived thee; hasten and dry the maiden's tears."

"Nothing worse than death can befall me," thought the Prince, "and death is better than endless sorrow." So he mounted his horse and went to the bridge. Again he heard the water-lily's lament, and, hesitating no longer, smeared himself all over with mud, and, saying: "From a man into a crab," plunged into the river. For one moment the water hissed in his ears, and then all was silent. He swam up to the plant and began to loosen its roots, but so firmly were they fixed in the mud and reeds that this took him a long time. He then grasped them and rose to the surface, letting the water flow over the flower. The current carried them down the stream, but nowhere could he see the mountain ash. At last he saw it, and close by the large stone. Here he stopped and said: "From a crab into a man, from a water-lily into a maiden," and to his delight found himself once more a prince, and the maiden was by his side. She was ten times more beautiful than before, and wore a magnificent pale yellow robe, sparkling with jewels. She thanked him for having freed her from the cruel witch's power, and willingly consented to marry him.

But when they came to the bridge where he had left his horse it was nowhere to be seen, for, though the Prince thought he had been a crab only a few hours, he had in reality been under the water for more than ten days. While they were wondering how they should reach his father's court, they saw a splendid coach driven by six gaily caparisoned horses coming along the bank. In this they drove to the palace. The King and Queen were at church, weeping for their son, whom they had long mourned for dead. Great was their delight and astonishment when the Prince entered, leading the beautiful maiden by the hand. The wedding was at once celebrated and there was feasting and merry-making throughout the kingdom for six weeks.

Some time afterward the Prince and his bride were sitting in the garden, when a crow said to them: "Ungrateful creatures! Have you forgotten the two poor maidens who helped you in your distress? Must they spin gold flax for ever? Have no pity on the old witch. The three maidens are princesses, whom she stole away when they were children together, with all the silver utensils, which she turned into gold flax. Poison were her fittest punishment."

The Prince was ashamed of having forgotten his promise and set out at once, and by great good fortune reached the hut when the old woman was away. The maidens had dreamed that he was coming, and were ready to go with him, but first they made a cake in which they put poison, and left it on a table where the old woman was likely to see it when she returned. She _did_ see it, and thought it looked so tempting that she greedily ate it up and at once died.

In the secret chamber were found fifty wagon-loads of gold flax, and as much more was discovered buried. The hut was razed to the ground, and the Prince and his bride and her two sisters lived happily ever after.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

THE TERRIBLE HEAD

Once upon a time there was a king whose only child was a girl. Now the King had been very anxious to have a son, or at least a grandson, to come after him, but he was told by a prophet whom he consulted that his own daughter's son should kill him. This news terrified him so much that he determined never to let his daughter be married, for he thought it was better to have no grandson at all than to be killed by his grandson. He therefore called his workmen together, and bade them dig a deep round hole in the earth, and then he had a prison of brass built in the hole, and then, when it was finished, he locked up his daughter. No man ever saw her, and she never saw even the fields and the sea, but only the sky and the sun, for there was a wide open window in the roof of the house of brass. So the Princess would sit looking up at the sky, and watching the clouds float across, and wondering whether she should ever get out of her prison. Now one day it seemed to her that the sky opened above her, and a great shower of shining gold fell through the window in the roof, and lay glittering in her room. Not very long after, the Princess had a baby, a little boy, but when the King her father heard of it he was very angry and afraid, for now the child was born that should be his death. Yet, cowardly as he was, he had not quite the heart to kill the Princess and her baby outright, but he had them put in a huge brass-bound chest and thrust out to sea, that they might either be drowned or starved, or perhaps come to a country where they would be out of his way.

So the Princess and the baby floated and drifted in the chest on the sea all day and night, but the baby was not afraid of the waves nor of the wind, for he did not know that they could hurt him, and he slept quite soundly. And the Princess sang a song over him, and this was her song:

"Child, my child, how sound you sleep!
 Though your mother's care is deep,
 You can lie with heart at rest
 In the narrow brass-bound chest;
 In the starless night and drear
 You can sleep, and never hear
 Billows breaking, and the cry
 Of the night-wind wandering by;
 In soft purple mantle sleeping
 With your little face on mine,
 Hearing not your mother weeping
 And the breaking of the brine."

Well, the daylight came at last, and the great chest was driven by the waves against the shore of an island. There the brass-bound chest lay, with the Princess and her baby in it, till a man of that country came past, and saw it, and dragged it on to the beach, and when he had broken it open, behold! there was a beautiful lady and a little boy. So he took them home, and was very kind to them, and brought up the boy till he was a young man. Now when the boy had come to his full strength the King of that country fell in love with his mother, and wanted to marry her, but he knew that she would never part from her boy. So he thought of a plan to get rid of the boy, and this was his plan: A great Queen of a country not far off was going to be married, and this king said that all his subjects must bring him wedding presents to give her. And he made a feast to which he invited them all, and they all brought their presents; some brought gold cups, and some brought necklaces of gold and amber, and some brought beautiful horses; but the boy had nothing, though he was the son of a princess, for his mother had nothing to give him. Then the rest of the company began to laugh at him, and the King said: "If you have nothing else to give, at least you might go and fetch the Terrible Head."

The boy was proud, and spoke without thinking:

"Then I swear that I _will_ bring the Terrible Head, if it may be brought by a living man. But of what head you speak I know not."

Then they told him that somewhere, a long way off, there dwelt three dreadful sisters, monstrous ogrish women, with golden wings and claws of brass, and with serpents growing on their heads instead of hair. Now these women were so awful to look on that whoever saw them was turned at once into stone. And two of them could not be put to death, but the youngest, whose face was very beautiful, could be killed, and it was _her_ head that the boy had promised to bring. You may imagine it was no easy adventure.

When he heard all this he was perhaps sorry that he had sworn to bring the Terrible Head, but he was determined to keep his oath. So he went out from the feast, where they all sat drinking and making merry, and he walked alone beside the sea in the dusk of the evening, at the place where the great chest, with himself and his mother in it, had been cast ashore.

There he went and sat down on a rock, looking toward the sea, and wondering how he should begin to fulfill his vow. Then he felt some one touch him on the shoulder; and he turned, and saw a young man like a king's son, having with him a tall and beautiful lady, whose blue eyes shone like stars. They were taller than mortal men, and the young man had a staff in his hand with golden wings on it, and two golden serpents twisted round it, and he had wings on his cap and on his shoes. He spoke to the boy, and asked him why he was so unhappy; and the boy told him how he had sworn to bring the Terrible Head, and knew not how to begin to set about the adventure.

Then the beautiful lady also spoke, and said that "it was a foolish oath and a hasty, but it might be kept if a brave man had sworn it." Then the boy answered that he was not afraid, if only he knew the way.

Then the lady said that to kill the dreadful woman with the golden wings and the brass claws, and to cut off her head, he needed three things: first, a Cap of Darkness, which would make him invisible when he wore it; next, a Sword of Sharpness, which would cleave iron at one blow; and last, the Shoes of Swiftness, with which he might fly in the air.

The boy answered that he knew not where such things were to be procured, and that, wanting them, he could only try and fail. Then the young man, taking off his own shoes, said: "First, you shall use these shoes till you have taken the Terrible Head, and then you must give them back to me. And with these shoes you will fly as fleet as a bird, or a thought, over the land or over the waves of the sea, wherever the shoes know the way. But there are ways which they do not know, roads beyond the borders of the world. And these roads have you to travel. Now first you must go to the Three Gray Sisters, who live far off in the north, and are so very cold that they have only one eye and one tooth among the three. You must creep up close to them, and as one of them passes the eye to the other you must seize it, and refuse to give it up till they have told you the way to the Three Fairies of the Garden, and _they_ will give you the Cap of Darkness and the Sword of Sharpness, and show you how to wing beyond this world to the land of the Terrible Head."

Then the beautiful lady said: "Go forth at once, and do not return to say good-by to your mother, for these things must be done quickly, and the Shoes of Swiftness themselves will carry you to the land of the Three Gray Sisters--for they know the measure of that way."

So the boy thanked her, and he fastened on the Shoes of Swiftness, and turned to say good-by to the young man and the lady. But, behold! they had vanished, he knew not how or where! Then he leaped in the air to try the Shoes of Swiftness, and they carried him more swiftly than the wind, over the warm blue sea, over the happy lands of the south, over the northern peoples who drank mare's milk and lived in great wagons, wandering after their flocks. Across the wide rivers, where the wild fowl rose and fled before him, and over the plains and the cold North Sea he went, over the fields of snow and the hills of ice, to a place where the world ends, and all water is frozen, and there are no men, nor beasts, nor any green grass. There in a blue cave of the ice he found the Three Gray Sisters, the oldest of living things. Their hair was as white as the snow, and their flesh of an icy blue, and they mumbled and nodded in a kind of dream, and their frozen breath hung round them like a cloud. Now the opening of the cave in the ice was narrow, and it was not easy to pass in without touching one of the Gray Sisters. But, floating on the Shoes of Swiftness, the boy just managed to steal in, and waited till one of the sisters said to another, who had their one eye:

"Sister, what do you see? do you see old times coming back?"

"No, sister."

"Then give _me_ the eye, for perhaps I can see farther than you."

Then the first sister passed the eye to the second, but as the second groped for it the boy caught it cleverly out of her hand.

"Where is the eye, sister?" said the second gray woman.

"You have taken it yourself, sister," said the first gray woman.

"Have you lost the eye, sister? have you lost the eye?" said the third gray woman; "shall we _never_ find it again, and see old times coming back?"

Then the boy slipped from behind them out of the cold cave into the air, and he laughed aloud.

When the gray women heard that laugh they began to weep, for now they knew that a stranger had robbed them, and that they could not help themselves, and their tears froze as they fell from the hollows where no eyes were, and rattled on the icy ground of the cave. Then they began to implore the boy to give them their eye back again, and he could not help being sorry for them, they were so pitiful. But he said he would never give them the eye till they told him the way to the Fairies of the Garden.

Then they wrung their hands miserably, for they guessed why he had come, and how he was going to try to win the Terrible Head. Now the Dreadful Women were akin to the Three Gray Sisters, and it was hard for them to tell the boy the way. But at last they told him to keep always south, and with the land on his left and the sea on his right, till he reached the Island of the Fairies of the Garden. Then he gave them back the eye, and they began to look out once more for the old times coming back again. But the boy flew south between sea and land, keeping the land always on his left hand, till he saw a beautiful island crowned with flowering trees. There he alighted, and there he found the Three Fairies of the Garden. They were like three very beautiful young women, dressed one in green, one in white, and one in red, and they were dancing and singing round an apple tree with apples of gold, and this was their song:

THE SONG OF THE WESTERN FAIRIES

Round and round the apples of gold,
 Round and round dance we;
 Thus do we dance from the days of old
 About the enchanted tree;
 Round, and round, and round we go,
 While the spring is green, or the stream shall flow,
 Or the wind shall stir the sea!

There is none may taste of the golden fruit
 Till the golden new time come
 Many a tree shall spring from shoot,
 Many a blossom be withered at root,
 Many a song be dumb; Broken and still shall be many a lute
 Or ever the new times come!

Round and round the tree of gold,
 Round and round dance we,
 So doth the great world spin from of old,
 Summer and winter, and fire and cold,
 Song that is sung, and tale that is told,
 Even as we dance, that fold and unfold
 Round the stem of the fairy tree!

These grave dancing fairies were very unlike the Grey Women, and they were glad to see the boy, and treated him kindly. Then they asked him why he had come; and he told them how he was sent to find the Sword of Sharpness and the Cap of Darkness. And the fairies gave him these, and a wallet, and a shield, and belted the sword, which had a diamond blade, round his waist, and the cap they set on his head, and told him that now even they could not see him though they were fairies. Then he took it off, and they each kissed him and wished him good fortune, and then they began again their eternal dance round the golden tree, for it is their business to guard it till the new times come, or till the world's ending. So the boy put the cap on his head, and hung the wallet round his waist, and the shining shield on his shoulders, and flew beyond the great river that lies coiled like a serpent round the whole world. And by the banks of that river, there he found the three Terrible Women all asleep beneath a poplar tree, and the dead poplar leaves lay all about them. Their golden wings were folded and their brass claws were crossed, and two of them slept with their hideous heads beneath their wings like birds, and the serpents in their hair writhed out from under the feathers of gold. But the youngest slept between her two sisters, and she lay on her back, with her beautiful sad face turned to the sky; and though she slept her eyes were wide open. If the boy had seen her he would have been changed into stone by the terror and the pity of it, she was so awful; but he had thought of a plan for killing her without looking on her face. As soon as he caught sight of the three from far off he took his shining shield from his shoulders, and held it up like a mirror, so that he saw the Dreadful Women reflected in it, and did not see the Terrible Head itself. Then he came nearer and nearer, till he reckoned that he was within a sword's stroke of the youngest, and he guessed where he should strike a back blow behind him. Then he drew the Sword of Sharpness and struck once, and the Terrible Head was cut from the shoulders of the creature, and the blood leaped out and struck him like a blow. But he thrust the Terrible Head into his wallet, and flew away without looking behind. Then the two Dreadful Sisters who were left wakened, and rose in the air like great birds; and though they could not see him because of his Cap of Darkness, they flew after him up the wind, following by the scent through the clouds, like hounds hunting in a wood. They came so close that he could hear the clatter of their golden wings, and their shrieks to each other: "_here, here,_" "_no, there; this way he went,_" as they chased him. But the Shoes of Swiftness flew too fast for them, and at last their cries and the rattle of their wings died away as he crossed the great river that runs round the world.

Now when the horrible creatures were far in the distance, and the boy found himself on the right side of the river, he flew straight eastward, trying to seek his own country. But as he looked down from the air he saw a very strange sight--a beautiful girl chained to a stake at the high-water mark of the sea. The girl was so frightened or so tired that she was only prevented from falling by the iron chain about her waist, and there she hung, as if she were dead. The boy was very sorry for her and flew down and stood beside her. When he spoke she raised her head and looked round, but his voice only seemed to frighten her. Then he remembered that he was wearing the Cap of Darkness, and that she could only hear him, not see him. So he took it off, and there he stood before her, the handsomest young man she had ever seen in all her life, with short curly yellow hair, and blue eyes, and a laughing face. And he thought her the most beautiful girl in the world. So first with one blow of the Sword of Sharpness he cut the iron chain that bound her, and then he asked her what she did there, and why men treated her so cruelly. And she told him that she was the daughter of the King of that country, and that she was tied there to be eaten by a monstrous beast out of the sea; for the beast came and devoured a girl every day. Now the lot had fallen on her; and as she was just saying this a long fierce head of a cruel sea creature rose out of the waves and snapped at the girl. But the beast had been too greedy and too hurried, so he missed his aim the first time. Before he could rise and bite again the boy had whipped the Terrible Head out of his wallet and held it up. And when the sea beast leaped out once more its eyes fell on the head, and instantly it was turned into a stone. And the stone beast is there on the sea-coast to this day.

Then the boy and the girl went to the palace of the King, her father, where everyone was weeping for her death, and they could hardly believe their eyes when they saw her come back well. And the King and Queen made much of the boy, and could not contain themselves for delight when they found he wanted to marry their daughter. So the two were married with the most splendid rejoicings, and when they had passed some time at court they went home in a ship to the boy's own country. For he could not carry his bride through the air, so he took the Shoes of Swiftness, and the Cap of Darkness, and the Sword of Sharpness up to a lonely place in the hills. There he left them, and there they were found by the man and woman who had met him at home beside the sea, and had helped him to start on his journey.

When this had been done the boy and his bride set forth for home, and landed at the harbor of his native land. But whom should he meet in the very street of the town but his own mother, flying for her life from the wicked King, who now wished to kill her because he found that she would never marry him! For if she had liked the King ill before, she liked him far worse now that he had caused her son to disappear so suddenly. She did not know, of course, where the boy had gone, but thought the King had slain him secretly. So now she was running for her very life, and the wicked King was following her with a sword in his hand. Then, behold! she ran into her son's very arms, but he had only time to kiss her and step in front of her, when the King struck at him with his sword. The boy caught the blow on his shield, and cried to the King:

"I swore to bring you the Terrible Head, and see how I keep my oath!"

Then he drew forth the head from his wallet, and when the King's eyes fell on it, instantly he was turned into stone, just as he stood there with his sword lifted!

Now all the people rejoiced, because the wicked King should rule them no longer. And they asked the boy to be their king, but he said no, he must take his mother home to her father's house. So the people chose for king the man who had been kind to his mother when first she was cast on the island in the great chest.

Presently the boy and his mother and his wife set sail for his mother's own country, from which she had been driven so unkindly. But on the way they stayed at the court of a king, and it happened that he was holding games, and giving prizes to the best runners, boxers, and quoit-throwers. Then the boy would try his strength with the rest, but he threw the quoit so far that it went beyond what had ever been thrown before, and fell in the crowd, striking a man so that he died. Now this man was no other than the father of the boy's mother, who had fled away from his own kingdom for fear his grandson should find him and kill him after all. Thus he was destroyed by his own cowardice and by chance, and thus the prophecy was fulfilled. But the boy and his wife and his mother went back to the kingdom that was theirs, and lived long and happily after all their troubles.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

THE STORY OF PRETTY GOLDILOCKS

Once upon a time there was a princess who was the prettiest creature in the world. And because she was so beautiful, and because her hair was like the finest gold, and waved and rippled nearly to the ground, she was called Pretty Goldilocks. She always wore a crown of flowers, and her dresses were embroidered with diamonds and pearls, and everybody who saw her fell in love with her.

Now one of her neighbors was a young king who was not married. He was very rich and handsome, and when he heard all that was said about Pretty Goldilocks, though he had never seen her, he fell so deeply in love with her that he could neither eat nor drink. So he resolved to send an ambassador to ask her in marriage. He had a splendid carriage made for his ambassador, and gave him more than a hundred horses and a hundred servants, and told him to be sure and bring the Princess back with him. After he had started nothing else was talked of at Court, and the King felt so sure that the Princess would consent that he set his people to work at pretty dresses and splendid furniture, that they might be ready by the time she came. Meanwhile, the ambassador arrived at the Princess's palace and delivered his little message, but whether she happened to be cross that day, or whether the compliment did not please her, is not known. She only answered that she was very much obliged to the King, but she had no wish to be married. The ambassador set off sadly on his homeward way, bringing all the King's presents back with him, for the Princess was too well brought up to accept the pearls and diamonds when she would not accept the King, so she had only kept twenty-five English pins that he might not be vexed.

When the ambassador reached the city, where the King was waiting impatiently, everybody was very much annoyed with him for not bringing the Princess, and the King cried like a baby, and nobody could console him. Now there was at the Court a young man, who was more clever and handsome than anyone else. He was called Charming, and everyone loved him, excepting a few envious people who were angry at his being the King's favorite and knowing all the State secrets. He happened to one day be with some people who were speaking of the ambassador's return and saying that his going to the Princess had not done much good, when Charming said rashly:

"If the King had sent me to the Princess Goldilocks I am sure she would have come back with me."

His enemies at once went to the King and said:

"You will hardly believe, sire, what Charming has the audacity to say--that if _he_ had been sent to the Princess Goldilocks she would certainly have come back with him. He seems to think that he is so much handsomer than you that the Princess would have fallen in love with him and followed him willingly." The King was very angry when he heard this.

"Ha, ha!" said he; "does he laugh at my unhappiness, and think himself more fascinating than I am? Go, and let him be shut up in my great tower to die of hunger."

So the King's guards went to fetch Charming, who had thought no more of his rash speech, and carried him off to prison with great cruelty. The poor prisoner had only a little straw for his bed, and but for a little stream of water which flowed through the tower he would have died of thirst.

One day when he was in despair he said to himself:

"How can I have offended the King? I am his most faithful subject, and have done nothing against him."

The King chanced to be passing the tower and recognized the voice of his former favorite. He stopped to listen in spite of Charming's enemies, who tried to persuade him to have nothing more to do with the traitor. But the King said:

"Be quiet, I wish to hear what he says."

And then he opened the tower door and called to Charming, who came very sadly and kissed the King's hand, saying:

"What have I done, sire, to deserve this cruel treatment?"

"You mocked me and my ambassador," said the King, "and you said that if I had sent you for the Princess Goldilocks you would certainly have brought her back."

"It is quite true, sire," replied Charming; "I should have drawn such a picture of you, and represented your good qualities in such a way, that I am certain the Princess would have found you irresistible. But I cannot see what there is in that to make you angry."

The King could not see any cause for anger either when the matter was presented to him in this light, and he began to frown very fiercely at the courtiers who had so misrepresented his favorite.

So he took Charming back to the palace with him, and after seeing that he had a very good supper he said to him:

"You know that I love Pretty Goldilocks as much as ever, her refusal has not made any difference to me; but I don't know how to make her change her mind; I really should like to send you, to see if you can persuade her to marry me."

Charming replied that he was perfectly willing to go, and would set out the very next day.

"But you must wait till I can get a grand escort for you," said the King. But Charming said that he only wanted a good horse to ride, and the King, who was delighted at his being ready to start so promptly, gave him letters to the Princess, and bade him good speed. It was on a Monday morning that he set out all alone upon his errand, thinking of nothing but how he could persuade the Princess Goldilocks to marry the King. He had a writing-book in his pocket, and whenever any happy thought struck him he dismounted from his horse and sat down under the trees to put it into the harangue which he was preparing for the Princess, before he forgot it.

One day when he had started at the very earliest dawn, and was riding over a great meadow, he suddenly had a capital idea, and, springing from his horse, he sat down under a willow tree which grew by a little river. When he had written it down he was looking round him, pleased to find himself in such a pretty place, when all at once he saw a great golden carp lying gasping and exhausted upon the grass. In leaping after little flies she had thrown herself high upon the bank, where she had lain till she was nearly dead. Charming had pity upon her, and, though he couldn't help thinking that she would have been very nice for dinner, he picked her up gently and put her back into the water. As soon as Dame Carp felt the refreshing coolness of the water she sank down joyfully to the bottom of the river, then, swimming up to the bank quite boldly, she said:

"I thank you, Charming, for the kindness you have done me. You have saved my life; one day I will repay you." So saying, she sank down into the water again, leaving Charming greatly astonished at her politeness.

Another day, as he journeyed on, he saw a raven in great distress. The poor bird was closely pursued by an eagle, which would soon have eaten it up, had not Charming quickly fitted an arrow to his bow and shot the eagle dead. The raven perched upon a tree very joyfully.

"Charming," said he, "it was very generous of you to rescue a poor raven; I am not ungrateful, some day I will repay you."

Charming thought it was very nice of the raven to say so, and went on his way.

Before the sun rose he found himself in a thick wood where it was too dark for him to see his path, and here he heard an owl crying as if it were in despair.

"Hark!" said he, "that must be an owl in great trouble, I am sure it has gone into a snare"; and he began to hunt about, and presently found a great net which some bird-catchers had spread the night before.

"What a pity it is that men do nothing but torment and persecute poor creatures which never do them any harm!" said he, and he took out his knife and cut the cords of the net, and the owl flitted away into the darkness, but then turning, with one flicker of her wings, she came back to Charming and said:

"It does not need many words to tell you how great a service you have done me. I was caught; in a few minutes the fowlers would have been here--without your help I should have been killed. I am grateful, and one day I will repay you."

These three adventures were the only ones of any consequence that befell Charming upon his journey, and he made all the haste he could to reach the palace of the Princess Goldilocks.

When he arrived he thought everything he saw delightful and magnificent. Diamonds were as plentiful as pebbles, and the gold and silver, the beautiful dresses, the sweetmeats and pretty things that were everywhere quite amazed him; he thought to himself: "If the Princess consents to leave all this, and come with me to marry the King, he may think himself lucky!"

Then he dressed himself carefully in rich brocade, with scarlet and white plumes, and threw a splendid embroidered scarf over his shoulder, and, looking as gay and as graceful as possible, he presented himself at the door of the palace, carrying in his arm a tiny pretty dog which he had bought on the way. The guards saluted him respectfully, and a messenger was sent to the Princess to announce the arrival of Charming as ambassador of her neighbor the King.

"Charming," said the Princess, "the name promises well; I have no doubt that he is good looking and fascinates everybody."

"Indeed he does, madam," said all her maids of honor in one breath. "We saw him from the window of the garret where we were spinning flax, and we could do nothing but look at him as long as he was in sight."

"Well to be sure," said the Princess, "that's how you amuse yourselves, is it? Looking at strangers out of the window! Be quick and give me my blue satin embroidered dress, and comb out my golden hair. Let somebody make me fresh garlands of flowers, and give me my high-heeled shoes and my fan, and tell them to sweep my great hall and my throne, for I want everyone to say I am really 'Pretty Goldilocks.'"

You can imagine how all her maids scurried this way and that to make the Princess ready, and how in their haste they knocked their heads together and hindered each other, till she thought they would never have done. However, at last they led her into the gallery of mirrors that she might assure herself that nothing was lacking in her appearance, and then she mounted her throne of gold, ebony, and ivory, while her ladies took their guitars and began to sing softly. Then Charming was led in, and was so struck with astonishment and admiration that at first not a word could he say. But presently he took courage and delivered his harangue, bravely ending by begging the Princess to spare him the disappointment of going back without her.

"Sir Charming," answered she, "all the reasons you have given me are very good ones, and I assure you that I should have more pleasure in obliging you than anyone else, but you must know that a month ago as I was walking by the river with my ladies I took off my glove, and as I did so a ring that I was wearing slipped off my finger and rolled into the water. As I valued it more than my kingdom, you may imagine how vexed I was at losing it, and I vowed to never listen to any proposal of marriage unless the ambassador first brought me back my ring. So now you know what is expected of you, for if you talked for fifteen days and fifteen nights you could not make me change my mind."

Charming was very much surprised by this answer, but he bowed low to the Princess, and begged her to accept the embroidered scarf and the tiny dog he had brought with him. But she answered that she did not want any presents, and that he was to remember what she had just told him. When he got back to his lodging he went to bed without eating any supper, and his little dog, who was called Frisk, couldn't eat any either, but came and lay down close to him. All night Charming sighed and lamented.

"How am I to find a ring that fell into the river a month ago?" said he. "It is useless to try; the Princess must have told me to do it on purpose, knowing it was impossible." And then he sighed again.

Frisk heard him and said:

"My dear master, don't despair; the luck may change, you are too good not to be happy. Let us go down to the river as soon as it is light."

But Charming only gave him two little pats and said nothing, and very soon he fell asleep.

At the first glimmer of dawn Frisk began to jump about, and when he had waked Charming they went out together, first into the garden, and then down to the river's brink, where they wandered up and down. Charming was thinking sadly of having to go back unsuccessful when he heard someone calling: "Charming, Charming!"  He looked all about him and thought he must be dreaming, as he could not see anybody. Then he walked on and the voice called again: "Charming, Charming!"

"Who calls me?" said he. Frisk, who was very small and could look closely into the water, cried out: "I see a golden carp coming." And sure enough there was the great carp, who said to Charming:

"You saved my life in the meadow by the willow tree, and I promised that I would repay you. Take this, it is Princess Goldilock's ring." Charming took the ring out of Dame Carp's mouth, thanking her a thousand times, and he and tiny Frisk went straight to the palace, where someone told the Princess that he was asking to see her.

"Ah! poor fellow," said she, "he must have come to say good-by, finding it impossible to do as I asked."

So in came Charming, who presented her with the ring and said:

"Madam, I have done your bidding. Will it please you to marry my master?" When the Princess saw her ring brought back to her unhurt she was so astonished that she thought she must be dreaming.

"Truly, Charming," said she, "you must be the favorite of some fairy, or you could never have found it."

"Madam," answered he, "I was helped by nothing but my desire to obey your wishes."

"Since you are so kind," said she, "perhaps you will do me another service, for till it is done I will never be married. There is a prince not far from here whose name is Galifron, who once wanted to marry me, but when I refused he uttered the most terrible threats against me, and vowed that he would lay waste my country. But what could I do? I could not marry a frightful giant as tall as a tower, who eats up people as a monkey eats chestnuts, and who talks so loud that anybody who has to listen to him becomes quite deaf. Nevertheless, he does not cease to persecute me and to kill my subjects. So before I can listen to your proposal you must kill him and bring me his head."

Charming was rather dismayed at this command, but he answered:

"Very well, Princess, I will fight this Galifron; I believe that he will kill me, but at any rate I shall die in your defense."

Then the Princess was frightened and said everything she could think of to prevent Charming from fighting the giant, but it was of no use, and he went out to arm himself suitably, and then, taking little Frisk with him, he mounted his horse and set out for Galifron's country. Everyone he met told him what a terrible giant Galifron was, and that nobody dared go near him; and the more he heard, the more frightened he grew. Frisk tried to encourage him by saying: "While you are fighting the giant, dear master, I will go and bite his heels, and when he stoops down to look at me you can kill him."

Charming praised his little dog's plan, but knew that this help would not do much good.

At last he drew near the giant's castle, and saw to his horror that every path that led to it was strewn with bones. Before long he saw Galifron coming. His head was higher than the tallest trees, and he sang in a terrible voice:

"Bring out your little boys and girls,
 Pray do not stay to do their curls,
 For I shall eat so very many,
 I shall not know if they have any."

Thereupon Charming sang out as loud as he could to the same tune:

"Come out and meet the valiant Charming
 Who finds you not at all alarming;
 Although he is not very tall,
 He's big enough to make you fall."

The rhymes were not very correct, but you see he had made them up so quickly that it is a miracle that they were not worse; especially as he was horribly frightened all the time. When Galifron heard these words he looked all about him, and saw Charming standing, sword in hand this put the giant into a terrible rage, and he aimed a blow at Charming with his huge iron club, which would certainly have killed him if it had reached him, but at that instant a raven perched upon the giant's head, and, pecking with its strong beak and beating with its great wings so confused and blinded him that all his blows fell harmlessly upon the air, and Charming, rushing in, gave him several strokes with his sharp sword so that he fell to the ground. Whereupon Charming cut off his head before he knew anything about it, and the raven from a tree close by croaked out:

"You see I have not forgotten the good turn you did me in killing the eagle. To-day I think I have fulfilled my promise of repaying you."

"Indeed, I owe you more gratitude than you ever owed me," replied Charming.

And then he mounted his horse and rode off with Galifron's head.

When he reached the city the people ran after him in crowds, crying:

"Behold the brave Charming, who has killed the giant!" And their shouts reached the Princess's ear, but she dared not ask what was happening, for fear she should hear that Charming had been killed. But very soon he arrived at the palace with the giant's head, of which she was still terrified, though it could no longer do her any harm.

"Princess," said Charming, "I have killed your enemy; I hope you will now consent to marry the King my master."

"Oh dear! no," said the Princess, "not until you have brought me some water from the Gloomy Cavern.

"Not far from here there is a deep cave, the entrance to which is guarded by two dragons with fiery eyes, who will not allow anyone to pass them. When you get into the cavern you will find an immense hole, which you must go down, and it is full of toads and snakes; at the bottom of this hole there is another little cave, in which rises the Fountain of Health and Beauty. It is some of this water that I really must have: everything it touches becomes wonderful. The beautiful things will always remain beautiful, and the ugly things become lovely. If one is young one never grows old, and if one is old one becomes young. You see, Charming, I could not leave my kingdom without taking some of it with me."

"Princess," said he, "you at least can never need this water, but I am an unhappy ambassador, whose death you desire. Where you send me I will go, though I know I shall never return."

And, as the Princess Goldilocks showed no sign of relenting, he started with his little dog for the Gloomy Cavern. Everyone he met on the way said:

"What a pity that a handsome young man should throw away his life so carelessly! He is going to the cavern alone, though if he had a hundred men with him he could not succeed. Why does the Princess ask impossibilities?" Charming said nothing, but he was very sad. When he was near the top of a hill he dismounted to let his horse graze, while Frisk amused himself by chasing flies. Charming knew he could not be far from the Gloomy Cavern, and on looking about him he saw a black hideous rock from which came a thick smoke, followed in a moment by one of the dragons with fire blazing from his mouth and eyes. His body was yellow and green, and his claws scarlet, and his tail was so long that it lay in a hundred coils. Frisk was so terrified at the sight of it that he did not know where to hide. Charming, quite determined to get the water or die, now drew his sword, and, taking the crystal flask which Pretty Goldilocks had given him to fill, said to Frisk:

"I feel sure that I shall never come back from this expedition; when I am dead, go to the Princess and tell her that her errand has cost me my life. Then find the King my master, and relate all my adventures to him."

As he spoke he heard a voice calling: "Charming, Charming!"

"Who calls me?" said he; then he saw an owl sitting in a hollow tree, who said to him:

"You saved my life when I was caught in the net, now I can repay you. Trust me with the flask, for I know all the ways of the Gloomy Cavern, and can fill it from the Fountain of Beauty." Charming was only too glad to give her the flask, and she flitted into the cavern quite unnoticed by the dragon, and after some time returned with the flask, filled to the very brim with sparkling water. Charming thanked her with all his heart, and joyfully hastened back to the town.

He went straight to the palace and gave the flask to the Princess, who had no further objection to make. So she thanked Charming, and ordered that preparations should be made for her departure, and they soon set out together. The Princess found Charming such an agreeable companion that she sometimes said to him: "Why didn't we stay where we were? I could have made you king, and we should have been so happy!"

But Charming only answered:

"I could not have done anything that would have vexed my master so much, even for a kingdom, or to please you, though I think you are as beautiful as the sun."

At last they reached the King's great city, and he came out to meet the Princess, bringing magnificent presents, and the marriage was celebrated with great rejoicings. But Goldilocks was so fond of Charming that she could not be happy unless he was near her, and she was always singing his praises.

"If it hadn't been for Charming," she said to the King, "I should never have come here; you ought to be very much obliged to him, for he did the most impossible things and got me water from the Fountain of Beauty, so I can never grow old, and shall get prettier every year."

Then Charming's enemies said to the King:

"It is a wonder that you are not jealous, the Queen thinks there is nobody in the world like Charming. As if anybody you had sent could not have done just as much!"

"It is quite true, now I come to think of it," said the King. "Let him be chained hand and foot, and thrown into the tower."

So they took Charming, and as a reward for having served the King so faithfully he was shut up in the tower, where he only saw the jailer, who brought him a piece of black bread and a pitcher of water every day.

However, little Frisk came to console him, and told him all the news.

When Pretty Goldilocks heard what had happened she threw herself at the King's feet and begged him to set Charming free, but the more she cried, the more angry he was, and at last she saw that it was useless to say any more; but it made her very sad. Then the King took it into his head that perhaps he was not handsome enough to please the Princess Goldilocks, and he thought he would bathe his face with the water from the Fountain of Beauty, which was in the flask on a shelf in the Princess's room, where she had placed it that she might see it often. Now it happened that one of the Princess's ladies in chasing a spider had knocked the flask off the shelf and broken it, and every drop of the water had been spilt. Not knowing what to do, she had hastily swept away the pieces of crystal, and then remembered that in the King's room she had seen a flask of exactly the same shape, also filled with sparkling water. So, without saying a word, she fetched it and stood it upon the Queen's shelf.

Now the water in this flask was what was used in the kingdom for getting rid of troublesome people. Instead of having their heads cut off in the usual way, their faces were bathed with the water, and they instantly fell asleep and never woke up any more. So, when the King, thinking to improve his beauty, took the flask and sprinkled the water upon his face, _he_ fell asleep, and nobody could wake him.

Little Frisk was the first to hear the news, and he ran to tell Charming, who sent him to beg the Princess not to forget the poor prisoner. All the palace was in confusion on account of the King's death, but tiny Frisk made his way through the crowd to the Princess's side, and said:

"Madam, do not forget poor Charming."

Then she remembered all he had done for her, and without saying a word to anyone went straight to the tower, and with her own hands took off Charming's chains. Then, putting a golden crown upon his head, and the royal mantle upon his shoulders, she said:

"Come, faithful Charming, I make you king, and will take you for my husband."

Charming, once more free and happy, fell at her feet and thanked her for her gracious words.

Everybody was delighted that he should be king, and the wedding, which took place at once, was the prettiest that can be imagined, and Prince Charming and Princess Goldilocks lived happily ever after.[1]

[1] Madame d'Aulnoy.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

THE HISTORY OF WHITTINGTON

Dick Whittington was a very little boy when his father and mother died; so little, indeed, that he never knew them, nor the place where he was born. He strolled about the country as ragged as a colt, till he met with a wagoner who was going to London, and who gave him leave to walk all the way by the side of his wagon without paying anything for his passage. This pleased little Whittington very much, as he wanted to see London sadly, for he had heard that the streets were paved with gold, and he was willing to get a bushel of it; but how great was his disappointment, poor boy! when he saw the streets covered with dirt instead of gold, and found himself in a strange place, without a friend, without food, and without money.

Though the wagoner was so charitable as to let him walk up by the side of the wagon for nothing, he took care not to know him when he came to town, and the poor boy was, in a little time, so cold and hungry that he wished himself in a good kitchen and by a warm fire in the country.

In his distress he asked charity of several people, and one of them bid him "Go to work for an idle rogue." "That I will," said Whittington, "with all my heart; I will work for you if you will let me."

The man, who thought this savored of wit and impertinence (though the poor lad intended only to show his readiness to work), gave him a blow with a stick which broke his head so that the blood ran down. In this situation, and fainting for want of food, he laid himself down at the door of one Mr. Fitzwarren, a merchant, where the cook saw him, and, being an ill-natured hussy, ordered him to go about his business or she would scald him. At this time Mr. Fitzwarren came from the Exchange, and began also to scold at the poor boy, bidding him to go to work.

Whittington answered that he should be glad to work if anybody would employ him, and that he should be able if he could get some victuals to eat, for he had had nothing for three days, and he was a poor country boy, and knew nobody, and nobody would employ him.

He then endeavored to get up, but he was so very weak that he fell down again, which excited so much compassion in the merchant that he ordered the servants to take him in and give him some meat and drink, and let him help the cook to do any dirty work that she had to set him about. People are too apt to reproach those who beg with being idle, but give themselves no concern to put them in the way of getting business to do, or considering whether they are able to do it, which is not charity.

But we return to Whittington, who could have lived happy in this worthy family had he not been bumped about by the cross cook, who must be always roasting and basting, or when the spit was idle employed her hands upon poor Whittington! At last Miss Alice, his master's daughter, was informed of it, and then she took compassion on the poor boy, and made the servants treat him kindly.

Besides the crossness of the cook, Whittington had another difficulty to get over before he could be happy. He had, by order of his master, a flock-bed placed for him in a garret, where there was a number of rats and mice that often ran over the poor boy's nose and disturbed him in his sleep. After some time, however, a gentleman who came to his master's house gave Whittington a penny for brushing his shoes. This he put into his pocket, being determined to lay it out to the best advantage; and the next day, seeing a woman in the street with a cat under her arm, he ran up to know the price of it. The woman (as the cat was a good mouser) asked a deal of money for it, but on Whittington's telling her he had but a penny in the world, and that he wanted a cat sadly, she let him have it.

This cat Whittington concealed in the garret, for fear she should be beat about by his mortal enemy the cook, and here she soon killed or frightened away the rats and mice, so that the poor boy could now sleep as sound as a top.

Soon after this the merchant, who had a ship ready to sail, called for his servants, as his custom was, in order that each of them might venture something to try their luck; and whatever they sent was to pay neither freight nor custom, for he thought justly that God Almighty would bless him the more for his readiness to let the poor partake of his fortune.

All the servants appeared but poor Whittington, who, having neither money nor goods, could not think of sending anything to try his luck; but his good friend Miss Alice, thinking his poverty kept him away, ordered him to be called.

She then offered to lay down something for him, but the merchant told his daughter that would not do, it must be something of his own. Upon which poor Whittington said he had nothing but a cat which he bought for a penny that was given him. "Fetch thy cat, boy," said the merchant, "and send her." Whittington brought poor puss and delivered her to the captain, with tears in his eyes, for he said he should now be disturbed by the rats and mice as much as ever. All the company laughed at the adventure but Miss Alice, who pitied the poor boy, and gave him something to buy another cat.

While puss was beating the billows at sea, poor Whittington was severely beaten at home by his tyrannical mistress the cook, who used him so cruelly, and made such game of him for sending his cat to sea, that at last the poor boy determined to run away from his place, and having packed up the few things he had, he set out very early in the morning on All-Hallows day. He traveled as far as Holloway, and there sat down on a stone to consider what course he should take; but while he was thus ruminating, Bow bells, of which there were only six, began to ring; and he thought their sounds addressed him in this manner:

"Turn again, Whittington,
 Thrice Lord Mayor of London."

"Lord Mayor of London!" said he to himself, "what would not one endure to be Lord Mayor of London, and ride in such a fine coach? Well, I'll go back again, and bear all the pummelling and ill-usage of Cicely rather than miss the opportunity of being Lord Mayor!" So home he went, and happily got into the house and about his business before Mrs. Cicely made her appearance.

We must now follow Miss Puss to the coast of Africa. How perilous are voyages at sea, how uncertain the winds and the waves, and how many accidents attend a naval life!

The ship that had the cat on board was long beaten at sea, and at last, by contrary winds, driven on a part of the coast of Barbary which was inhabited by Moors unknown to the English. These people received our countrymen with civility, and therefore the captain, in order to trade with them, showed them the patterns of the goods he had on board, and sent some of them to the King of the country, who was so well pleased that he sent for the captain and the factor to come to his palace, which was about a mile from the sea. Here they were placed, according to the custom of the country, on rich carpets, flowered with gold and silver; and the King and Queen being seated at the upper end of the room, dinner was brought in, which consisted of many dishes; but no sooner were the dishes put down but an amazing number of rats and mice came from all quarters and devoured all the meat in an instant.

The factor, in surprise, turned round to the nobles and asked if these vermin were not offensive. "Oh! yes," said they, "very offensive; and the King would give half his treasure to be freed of them, for they not only destroy his dinner, as you see, but they assault him in his chamber, and even in bed, so that he is obliged to be watched while he is sleeping, for fear of them."

The factor jumped for joy; he remembered poor Whittington and his cat, and told the King he had a creature on board the ship that would despatch all these vermin immediately. The King's heart heaved so high at the joy which this news gave him that his turban dropped off his head. "Bring this creature to me," said he; "vermin are dreadful in a court, and if she will perform what you say I will load your ship with gold and jewels in exchange for her." The factor, who knew his business, took this opportunity to set forth the merits of Miss Puss. He told his Majesty that it would be inconvenient to part with her, as, when she was gone, the rats and mice might destroy the goods in the ship--but to oblige his Majesty he would fetch her. "Run, run," said the Queen; "I am impatient to see the dear creature."

Away flew the factor, while another dinner was providing, and returned with the cat just as the rats and mice were devouring that also. He immediately put down Miss Puss, who killed a great number of them.

The King rejoiced greatly to see his old enemies destroyed by so small a creature, and the Queen was highly pleased, and desired the cat might be brought near that she might look at her. Upon which the factor called "Pussy, pussy, pussy!" and she came to him. He then presented her to the Queen, who started back, and was afraid to touch a creature who had made such havoc among the rats and mice; however, when the factor stroked the cat and called "Pussy, pussy!" the Queen also touched her and cried "Putty, putty!" for she had not learned English.

He then put her down on the Queen's lap, where she, purring, played with her Majesty's hand, and then sang herself to sleep.

The King, having seen the exploits of Miss Puss, and being informed that her kittens would stock the whole country, bargained with the captain and factor for the whole ship's cargo, and then gave them ten times as much for the cat as all the rest amounted to. On which, taking leave of their Majesties and other great personages at court, they sailed with a fair wind for England, whither we must now attend them.

The morn had scarcely dawned when Mr. Fitzwarren arose to count over the cash and settle the business for that day. He had just entered the counting-house, and seated himself at the desk, when somebody came, tap, tap, at the door. "Who's there?" said Mr. Fitzwarren. "A friend," answered the other. "What friend can come at this unseasonable time?" "A real friend is never unseasonable," answered the other. "I come to bring you good news of your ship Unicorn." The merchant bustled up in such a hurry that he forgot his gout; instantly opened the door, and who should be seen waiting but the captain and factor, with a cabinet of jewels, and a bill of lading, for which the merchant lifted up his eyes and thanked heaven for sending him such a prosperous voyage. Then they told him the adventures of the cat, and showed him the cabinet of jewels which they had brought for Mr. Whittington. Upon which he cried out with great earnestness, but not in the most poetical manner:

"Go, send him in, and tell him of his fame,
 And call him Mr. Whittington by name."

It is not our business to animadvert upon these lines; we are not critics, but historians. It is sufficient for us that they are the words of Mr. Fitzwarren; and though it is beside our purpose, and perhaps not in our power to prove him a good poet, we shall soon convince the reader that he was a good man, which was a much better character; for when some who were present told him that this treasure was too much for such a poor boy as Whittington, he said: "God forbid that I should deprive him of a penny; it is his own, and he shall have it to a farthing." He then ordered Mr. Whittington in, who was at this time cleaning the kitchen and would have excused himself from going into the counting-house, saying the room was swept and his shoes were dirty and full of hob-nails. The merchant, however, made him come in, and ordered a chair to be set for him. Upon which, thinking they intended to make sport of him, as had been too often the case in the kitchen, he besought his master not to mock a poor simple fellow, who intended them no harm, but let him go about his business. The merchant, taking him by the hand, said: "Indeed, Mr. Whittington, I am in earnest with you, and sent for you to congratulate you on your great success. Your cat has procured you more money than I am worth in the world, and may you long enjoy it and be happy!"

At length, being shown the treasure, and convinced by them that all of it belonged to him, he fell upon his knees and thanked the Almighty for his providential care of such a poor and miserable creature. He then laid all the treasure at his master's feet, who refused to take any part of it, but told him he heartily rejoiced at his prosperity, and hoped the wealth he had acquired would be a comfort to him, and would make him happy. He then applied to his mistress, and to his good friend Miss Alice, who refused to take any part of the money, but told him she heartily rejoiced at his good success, and wished him all imaginable felicity. He then gratified the captain, factor, and the ship's crew for the care they had taken of his cargo. He likewise distributed presents to all the servants in the house, not forgetting even his old enemy the cook, though she little deserved it.

After this Mr. Fitzwarren advised Mr. Whittington to send for the necessary people and dress himself like a gentleman, and made him the offer of his house to live in till he could provide himself with a better.

Now it came to pass when Mr. Whittington's face was washed, his hair curled, and he dressed in a rich suit of clothes, that he turned out a genteel young fellow; and, as wealth contributes much to give a man confidence, he in a little time dropped that sheepish behavior which was principally occasioned by a depression of spirits, and soon grew a sprightly and good companion, insomuch that Miss Alice, who had formerly pitied him, now fell in love with him.

When her father perceived they had this good liking for each other he proposed a match between them, to which both parties cheerfully consented, and the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs, the Company of Stationers, the Royal Academy of Arts, and a number of eminent merchants attended the ceremony, and were elegantly treated at an entertainment made for that purpose.

History further relates that they lived very happy, had several children, and died at a good old age. Mr. Whittington served as Sheriff of London and was three times Lord Mayor. In the last year of his mayoralty he entertained King Henry V and his Queen, after his conquest of France, upon which occasion the King, in consideration of Whittington's merit, said: "Never had prince such a subject"; which being told to Whittington at the table, he replied: "Never had subject such a king." His Majesty, out of respect to his good character, conferred the honor of knighthood on him soon after.

Sir Richard many years before his death constantly fed a great number of poor citizens, built a church and a college to it, with a yearly allowance for poor scholars, and near it erected a hospital.

He also built Newgate for criminals, and gave liberally to St. Bartholomew's Hospital and other public charities.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

THE WONDERFUL SHEEP

Once upon a time--in the days when the fairies lived--there was a king who had three daughters, who were all young, and clever, and beautiful; but the youngest of the three, who was called Miranda, was the prettiest and the most beloved.

The King, her father, gave her more dresses and jewels in a month than he gave the others in a year; but she was so generous that she shared everything with her sisters, and they were all as happy and as fond of one another as they could be.

Now, the King had some quarrelsome neighbors, who, tired of leaving him in peace, began to make war upon him so fiercely that he feared he would be altogether beaten if he did not make an effort to defend himself. So he collected a great army and set off to fight them, leaving the Princesses with their governess in a castle where news of the war was brought every day--sometimes that the King had taken a town, or won a battle, and, at last, that he had altogether overcome his enemies and chased them out of his kingdom, and was coming back to the castle as quickly as possible, to see his dear little Miranda whom he loved so much.

The three Princesses put on dresses of satin, which they had had made on purpose for this great occasion, one green, one blue, and the third white; their jewels were the same colors. The eldest wore emeralds, the second turquoises, and the youngest diamonds, and thus adorned they went to meet the King, singing verses which they had composed about his victories.

When he saw them all so beautiful and so gay he embraced them tenderly, but gave Miranda more kisses than either of the others.

Presently a splendid banquet was served, and the King and his daughters sat down to it, and as he always thought that there was some special meaning in everything, he said to the eldest:

"Tell me why you have chosen a green dress."

"Sire," she answered, "having heard of your victories I thought that green would signify my joy and the hope of your speedy return."

"That is a very good answer," said the King; "and you, my daughter," he continued, "why did you take a blue dress?"

"Sire," said the Princess, "to show that we constantly hoped for your success, and that the sight of you is as welcome to me as the sky with its most beautiful stars."

"Why," said the King, "your wise answers astonish me, and you, Miranda. What made you dress yourself all in white?

"Because, sire," she answered, "white suits me better than anything else."

"What!" said the King angrily, "was that all you thought of, vain child?"

"I thought you would be pleased with me," said the Princess; "that was all."

The King, who loved her, was satisfied with this, and even pretended to be pleased that she had not told him all her reasons at first.

"And now," said he, "as I have supped well, and it is not time yet to go to bed, tell me what you dreamed last night."

The eldest said she had dreamed that he brought her a dress, and the precious stones and gold embroidery on it were brighter than the sun.

The dream of the second was that the King had brought her a spinning wheel and a distaff, that she might spin him some shirts.

But the youngest said: "I dreamed that my second sister was to be married, and on her wedding-day, you, father, held a golden ewer and said: 'Come, Miranda, and I will hold the water that you may dip your hands in it.'"

The King was very angry indeed when he heard this dream, and frowned horribly; indeed, he made such an ugly face that everyone knew how angry he was, and he got up and went off to bed in a great hurry; but he could not forget his daughter's dream.

"Does the proud girl wish to make me her slave?" he said to himself. "I am not surprised at her choosing to dress herself in white satin without a thought of me. She does not think me worthy of her consideration! But I will soon put an end to her pretensions!"

He rose in a fury, and although it was not yet daylight, he sent for the Captain of his Bodyguard, and said to him:

"You have heard the Princess Miranda's dream? I consider that it means strange things against me, therefore I order you to take her away into the forest and kill her, and, that I may be sure it is done, you must bring me her heart and her tongue. If you attempt to deceive me you shall be put to death!"

The Captain of the Guard was very much astonished when he heard this barbarous order, but he did not dare to contradict the King for fear of making him still more angry, or causing him to send someone else, so he answered that he would fetch the Princess and do as the King had said. When he went to her room they would hardly let him in, it was so early, but he said that the King had sent for Miranda, and she got up quickly and came out; a little black girl called Patypata held up her train, and her pet monkey and her little dog ran after her. The monkey was called Grabugeon, and the little dog Tintin.

The Captain of the Guard begged Miranda to come down into the garden where the King was enjoying the fresh air, and when they got there, he pretended to search for him, but as he was not to be found, he said:

"No doubt his Majesty has strolled into the forest," and he opened the little door that led to it and they went through.

By this time the daylight had begun to appear, and the Princess, looking at her conductor, saw that he had tears in his eyes and seemed too sad to speak.

"What is the matter?" she said in the kindest way. "You seem very sorrowful."

"Alas! Princess," he answered, "who would not be sorrowful who was ordered to do such a terrible thing as I am? The King has commanded me to kill you here, and carry your heart and your tongue to him, and if I disobey I shall lose my life."

The poor Princess was terrified, she grew very pale and began to cry softly.

Looking up at the Captain of the Guard with her beautiful eyes, she said gently:

Will you really have the heart to kill me? I have never done you any harm, and have always spoken well of you to the King. If I had deserved my father's anger I would suffer without a murmur, but, alas! he is unjust to complain of me, when I have always treated him with love and respect."

"Fear nothing, Princess," said the Captain of the Guard. "I would far rather die myself than hurt you; but even if I am killed you will not be safe: we must find some way of making the King believe that you are dead."

"What can we do?" said Miranda; "unless you take him my heart and my tongue he will never believe you."

The Princess and the Captain of the Guard were talking so earnestly that they did not think of Patypata, but she had overheard all they said, and now came and threw herself at Miranda's feet.

"Madam," she said, "I offer you my life; let me be killed, I shall be only too happy to die for such a kind mistress."

"Why, Patypata," cried the Princess, kissing her, "that would never do; your life is as precious to me as my own, especially after such a proof of your affection as you have just given me."

"You are right, Princess," said Grabugeon, coming forward, "to love such a faithful slave as Patypata; she is of more use to you than I am, I offer you my tongue and my heart most willingly, especially as I wish to make a great name for myself in Goblin Land."

"No, no, my little Grabugeon," replied Miranda, "I cannot bear the thought of taking your life."

"Such a good little dog as I am," cried Tintin, "could not think of letting either of you die for his mistress. If anyone is to die for her it must be me."

And then began a great dispute between Patypata, Grabugeon, and Tintin, and they came to high words, until at last Grabugeon, who was quicker than the others, ran up to the very top of the nearest tree, and let herself fall, head first, to the ground, and there she lay--quite dead!

The Princess was very sorry, but as Grabugeon was really dead, she allowed the Captain of the Guard to take her tongue; but, alas! it was such a little one--not bigger than the Princess's thumb--that they decided sorrowfully that it was of no use at all: the King would not have been taken in by it for a moment!

"Alas! my little monkey," cried the Princess, "I have lost you, and yet I am no better off than I was before."

"The honor of saving your life is to be mine," interrupted Patypata, and, before they could prevent her, she had picked up a knife and cut her head off in an instant.

But when the Captain of the Guard would have taken her tongue it turned out to be quite black, so that would not have deceived the King either.

"Am I not unlucky?" cried the poor Princess; "I lose everything I love, and am none the better for it."

"If you had accepted my offer," said Tintin, "you would only have had me to regret, and I should have had all your gratitude."

Miranda kissed her little dog, crying so bitterly, that at last she could bear it no longer, and turned away into the forest. When she looked back the Captain of the Guard was gone, and she was alone, except for Patypata, Grabugeon, and Tintin, who lay upon the ground. She could not leave the place until she had buried them in a pretty little mossy grave at the foot of a tree, and she wrote their names upon the bark of the tree, and how they had all died to save her life. And then she began to think where she could go for safety--for this forest was so close to her father's castle that she might be seen and recognized by the first passer-by, and, besides that, it was full of lions and wolves, who would have snapped up a princess just as soon as a stray chicken. So she began to walk as fast as she could, but the forest was so large and the sun was so hot that she nearly died of heat and terror and fatigue; look which way she would there seemed to be no end to the forest, and she was so frightened that she fancied every minute that she heard the King running after her to kill her. You may imagine how miserable she was, and how she cried as she went on, not knowing which path to follow, and with the thorny bushes scratching her dreadfully and tearing her pretty frock to pieces.

At last she heard the bleating of a sheep, and said to herself:

"No doubt there are shepherds here with their flocks; they will show me the way to some village where I can live disguised as a peasant girl. Alas! it is not always kings and princes who are the happiest people in the world. Who could have believed that I should ever be obliged to run away and hide because the King, for no reason at all, wishes to kill me?"

So saying she advanced toward the place where she heard the bleating, but what was her surprise when, in a lovely little glade quite surrounded by trees, she saw a large sheep; its wool was as white as snow, and its horns shone like gold; it had a garland of flowers round its neck, and strings of great pearls about its legs, and a collar of diamonds; it lay upon a bank of orange-flowers, under a canopy of cloth of gold which protected it from the heat of the sun. Nearly a hundred other sheep were scattered about, not eating the grass, but some drinking coffee, lemonade, or sherbet, others eating ices, strawberries and cream, or sweetmeats, while others, again, were playing games. Many of them wore golden collars with jewels, flowers, and ribbons.

Miranda stopped short in amazement at this unexpected sight, and was looking in all directions for the shepherd of this surprising flock, when the beautiful sheep came bounding toward her.

"Approach, lovely Princess," he cried; "have no fear of such gentle and peaceable animals as we are."

"What a marvel!" cried the Princess, starting back a little. "Here is a sheep that can talk."

"Your monkey and your dog could talk, madam," said he; "are you more astonished at us than at them?"

"A fairy gave them the power to speak," replied Miranda. "So I was used to them."

"Perhaps the same thing has happened to us," he said, smiling sheepishly. "But, Princess, what can have led you here?"

"A thousand misfortunes, Sir Sheep," she answered.

"I am the unhappiest princess in the world, and I am seeking a shelter against my father's anger."

"Come with me, madam," said the Sheep; "I offer you a hiding-place which you only will know of, and where you will be mistress of everything you see."

"I really cannot follow you," said Miranda, "for I am too tired to walk another step."

The Sheep with the golden horns ordered that his chariot should be fetched, and a moment after appeared six goats, harnessed to a pumpkin, which was so big that two people could quite well sit in it, and was all lined with cushions of velvet and down. The Princess stepped into it, much amused at such a new kind of carriage, the King of the Sheep took his place beside her, and the goats ran away with them at full speed, and only stopped when they reached a cavern, the entrance to which was blocked by a great stone. This the King touched with his foot, and immediately it fell down, and he invited the Princess to enter without fear. Now, if she had not been so alarmed by everything that had happened, nothing could have induced her to go into this frightful cave, but she was so afraid of what might be behind her that she would have thrown herself even down a well at this moment. So, without hesitation, she followed the Sheep, who went before her, down, down, down, until she thought they must come out at the other side of the world--indeed, she was not sure that he wasn't leading her into Fairyland. At last she saw before her a great plain, quite covered with all sorts of flowers, the scent of which seemed to her nicer than anything she had ever smelled before; a broad river of orange-flower water flowed round it and fountains of wine of every kind ran in all directions and made the prettiest little cascades and brooks. The plain was covered with the strangest trees, there were whole avenues where partridges, ready roasted, hung from every branch, or, if you preferred pheasants, quails, turkeys, or rabbits, you had only to turn to the right hand or to the left and you were sure to find them. In places the air was darkened by showers of lobster-patties, white puddings, sausages, tarts, and all sorts of sweetmeats, or with pieces of gold and silver, diamonds and pearls. This unusual kind of rain, and the pleasantness of the whole place, would, no doubt, have attracted numbers of people to it, if the King of the Sheep had been of a more sociable disposition, but from all accounts it is evident that he was as grave as a judge.

As it was quite the nicest time of the year when Miranda arrived in this delightful land the only palace she saw was a long row of orange trees, jasmines, honeysuckles, and musk-roses, and their interlacing branches made the prettiest rooms possible, which were hung with gold and silver gauze, and had great mirrors and candlesticks, and most beautiful pictures. The Wonderful Sheep begged that the Princess would consider herself queen over all that she saw, and assured her that, though for some years he had been very sad and in great trouble, she had it in her power to make him forget all his grief.

"You are so kind and generous, noble Sheep," said the Princess, "that I cannot thank you enough, but I must confess that all I see here seems to me so extraordinary that I don't know what to think of it."

As she spoke a band of lovely fairies came up and offered her amber baskets full of fruit, but when she held out her hands to them they glided away, and she could feel nothing when she tried to touch them.

"Oh!" she cried, "what can they be? Whom am I with?" and she began to cry.

At this instant the King of the Sheep came back to her, and was so distracted to find her in tears that he could have torn his wool.

"What is the matter, lovely Princess?" he cried. "Has anyone failed to treat you with due respect?"

"Oh! no," said Miranda; "only I am not used to living with sprites and with sheep that talk, and everything here frightens me. It was very kind of you to bring me to this place, but I shall be even more grateful to you if you will take me up into the world again."

"Do not be afraid," said the Wonderful Sheep; "I entreat you to have patience, and listen to the story of my misfortunes. I was once a king, and my kingdom was the most splendid in the world. My subjects loved me, my neighbors envied and feared me. I was respected by everyone, and it was said that no king ever deserved it more.

"I was very fond of hunting, and one day, while chasing a stag, I left my attendants far behind; suddenly I saw the animal leap into a pool of water, and I rashly urged my horse to follow it, but before we had gone many steps I felt an extraordinary heat, instead of the coolness of the water; the pond dried up, a great gulf opened before me, out of which flames of fire shot up, and I fell helplessly to the bottom of a precipice.

"I gave myself up for lost, but presently a voice said: 'Ungrateful Prince, even this fire is hardly enough to warm your cold heart!'

"'Who complains of my coldness in this dismal place?' I cried.

"'An unhappy being who loves you hopelessly,' replied the voice, and at the same moment the flames began to flicker and cease to burn, and I saw a fairy, whom I had known as long as I could remember, and whose ugliness had always horrified me. She was leaning upon the arm of a most beautiful young girl, who wore chains of gold on her wrists and was evidently her slave.

"'Why, Ragotte,' I said, for that was the fairy's name, 'what is the meaning of all this? Is it by your orders that I am here?'

"'And whose fault is it,' she answered, 'that you have never understood me until now? Must a powerful fairy like myself condescend to explain her doings to you who are no better than an ant by comparison, though you think yourself a great king?'

"'Call me what you like,' I said impatiently; 'but what is it that you want--my crown, or my cities, or my treasures?'

"'Treasures!' said the fairy, disdainfully. 'If I chose I could make any one of my scullions richer and more powerful than you. I do not want your treasures, but,' she added softly, 'if you will give me your heart--if you will marry me--I will add twenty kingdoms to the one you have already; you shall have a hundred castles full of gold and five hundred full of silver, and, in short, anything you like to ask me for.'

"'Madam Ragotte,' said I, 'when one is at the bottom of a pit where one has fully expected to be roasted alive, it is impossible to think of asking such a charming person as you are to marry one! I beg that you will set me at liberty, and then I shall hope to answer you fittingly.'

"'Ah!' said she, 'if you really loved me you would not care where you were--a cave, a wood, a fox-hole, a desert, would please you equally well. Do not think that you can deceive me; you fancy you are going to escape, but I assure you that you are going to stay here and the first thing I shall give you to do will be to keep my sheep--they are very good company and speak quite as well as you do.

"As she spoke she advanced, and led me to this plain where we now stand, and showed me her flock, but I paid little attention to it or to her.

"To tell the truth, I was so lost in admiration of her beautiful slave that I forgot everything else, and the cruel Ragotte, perceiving this, turned upon her so furious and terrible a look that she fell lifeless to the ground.

"At this dreadful sight I drew my sword and rushed at Ragotte, and should certainly have cut off her head had she not by her magic arts chained me to the spot on which I stood; all my efforts to move were useless, and at last, when I threw myself down on the ground in despair, she said to me, with a scornful smile:

"'I intend to make you feel my power. It seems that you are a lion at present, I mean you to be a sheep.'

"So saying, she touched me with her wand, and I became what you see. I did not lose the power of speech, or of feeling the misery of my present state.

"'For five years,' she said, 'you shall be a sheep, and lord of this pleasant land, while I, no longer able to see your face, which I loved so much, shall be better able to hate you as you deserve to be hated.'

"She disappeared as she finished speaking, and if I had not been too unhappy to care about anything I should have been glad that she was gone.

"The talking sheep received me as their king, and told me that they, too, were unfortunate princes who had, in different ways, offended the revengeful fairy, and had been added to her flock for a certain number of years; some more, some less. From time to time, indeed, one regains his own proper form and goes back again to his place in the upper world; but the other beings whom you saw are the rivals or the enemies of Ragotte, whom she has imprisoned for a hundred years or so; though even they will go back at last. The young slave of whom I told you about is one of these; I have seen her often, and it has been a great pleasure to me. She never speaks to me, and if I were nearer to her I know I should find her only a shadow, which would be very annoying. However, I noticed that one of my companions in misfortune was also very attentive to this little sprite, and I found out that he had been her lover, whom the cruel Ragotte had taken away from her long before; since then I have cared for, and thought of, nothing but how I might regain my freedom. I have often been in the forest; that is where I have seen you, lovely Princess, sometimes driving your chariot, which you did with all the grace and skill in the world; sometimes riding to the chase on so spirited a horse that it seemed as if no one but yourself could have managed it, and sometimes running races on the plain with the Princesses of your Court--running so lightly that it was you always who won the prize. Oh! Princess, I have loved you so long, and yet how dare I tell you of my love! what hope can there be for an unhappy sheep like myself?"

Miranda was so surprised and confused by all that she had heard that she hardly knew what answer to give to the King of the Sheep, but she managed to make some kind of little speech, which certainly did not forbid him to hope, and said that she should not be afraid of the shadows now she knew that they would some day come to life again. "Alas!" she continued, "if my poor Patypata, my dear Grabugeon, and pretty little Tintin, who all died for my sake, were equally well off, I should have nothing left to wish for here!"

Prisoner though he was, the King of the Sheep had still some powers and privileges.

"Go," said he to his Master of the Horse, "go and seek the shadows of the little black girl, the monkey, and the dog: they will amuse our Princess."

And an instant afterward Miranda saw them coming toward her, and their presence gave her the greatest pleasure, though they did not come near enough for her to touch them.

The King of the Sheep was so kind and amusing, and loved Miranda so dearly, that at last she began to love him too. Such a handsome sheep, who was so polite and considerate, could hardly fail to please, especially if one knew that he was really a king, and that his strange imprisonment would soon come to an end. So the Princess's days passed very gaily while she waited for the happy time to come. The King of the Sheep, with the help of all the flock, got up balls, concerts, and hunting parties, and even the shadows joined in all the fun, and came, making believe to be their own real selves.

One evening, when the couriers arrived (for the King sent most carefully for news--and they always brought the very best kinds), it was announced that the sister of the Princess Miranda was going to be married to a great Prince, and that nothing could be more splendid than all the preparations for the wedding.

"Ah!" cried the young Princess, "how unlucky I am to miss the sight of so many pretty things! Here am I imprisoned under the earth, with no company but sheep and shadows, while my sister is to be adorned like a queen and surrounded by all who love and admire her, and everyone but myself can go to wish her joy!"

"Why do you complain, Princess?" said the King of the Sheep. "Did I say that you were not to go to the wedding? Set out as soon as you please; only promise me that you will come back, for I love you too much to be able to live without you."

Miranda was very grateful to him, and promised faithfully that nothing in the world should keep her from coming back. The King caused an escort suitable to her rank to be got ready for her, and she dressed herself splendidly, not forgetting anything that could make her more beautiful. Her chariot was of mother-of-pearl, drawn by six dun-colored griffins just brought from the other side of the world, and she was attended by a number of guards in splendid uniforms, who were all at least eight feet high and had come from far and near to ride in the Princess's train.

Miranda reached her father's palace just as the wedding ceremony began, and everyone, as soon as she came in, was struck with surprise at her beauty and the splendor of her jewels. She heard exclamations of admiration on all sides; and the King her father looked at her so attentively that she was afraid he must recognize her; but he was so sure that she was dead that the idea never occurred to him.

However, the fear of not getting away made her leave before the marriage was over. She went out hastily, leaving behind her a little coral casket set with emeralds. On it was written in diamond letters: "Jewels for the Bride," and when they opened it, which they did as soon as it was found, there seemed to be no end to the pretty things it contained. The King, who had hoped to join the unknown Princess and find out who she was, was dreadfully disappointed when she disappeared so suddenly, and gave orders that if she ever came again the doors were to be shut that she might not get away so easily. Short as Miranda's absence had been, it had seemed like a hundred years to the King of the Sheep. He was waiting for her by a fountain in the thickest part of the forest, and the ground was strewn with splendid presents which he had prepared for her to show his joy and gratitude at her coming back.

As soon as she was in sight he rushed to meet her, leaping and bounding like a real sheep. He caressed her tenderly, throwing himself at her feet and kissing her hands, and told her how uneasy he had been in her absence, and how impatient for her return, with an eloquence which charmed her.

After some time came the news that the King's second daughter was going to be married. When Miranda heard it she begged the King of the Sheep to allow her to go and see the wedding as before. This request made him feel very sad, as if some misfortune must surely come of it, but his love for the Princess being stronger than anything else he did not like to refuse her.

"You wish to leave me, Princess," said he; "it is my unhappy fate--you are not to blame. I consent to your going, but, believe me, I can give you no stronger proof of my love than by so doing."

The Princess assured him that she would only stay a very short time, as she had done before, and begged him not to be uneasy, as she would be quite as much grieved if anything detained her as he could possibly be.

So, with the same escort, she set out, and reached the palace as the marriage ceremony began. Everybody was delighted to see her; she was so pretty that they thought she must be some fairy princess, and the Princes who were there could not take their eyes off her.

The King was more glad than anyone else that she had come again, and gave orders that the doors should all be shut and bolted that very minute. When the wedding was all but over the Princess got up quickly, hoping to slip away unnoticed among the crowd, but, to her great dismay, she found every door fastened.

She felt more at ease when the King came up to her, and with the greatest respect begged her not to run away so soon, but at least to honor him by staying for the splendid feast which was prepared for the Princes and Princesses. He led her into a magnificent hall, where all the Court was assembled, and himself taking up the golden bowl full of water, he offered it to her that she might dip her pretty fingers into it.

At this the Princess could no longer contain herself; throwing herself at the King's feet, she cried out:

"My dream has come true after all--you have offered me water to wash my hands on my sister's wedding day, and it has not vexed you to do it."

The King recognized her at once--indeed, he had already thought several times how much like his poor little Miranda she was.

"Oh! my dear daughter," he cried, kissing her, "can you ever forget my cruelty? I ordered you to be put to death because I thought your dream portended the loss of my crown. And so it did," he added, "for now your sisters are both married and have kingdoms of their own--and mine shall be for you." So saying he put his crown on the Princess's head and cried:

"Long live Queen Miranda!"

All the Court cried: "Long live Queen Miranda!" after him, and the young Queen's two sisters came running up, and threw their arms round her neck, and kissed her a thousand times, and then there was such a laughing and crying, talking and kissing, all at once, and Miranda thanked her father, and began to ask after everyone--particularly the Captain of the Guard, to whom she owed so much; but, to her great sorrow, she heard that he was dead. Presently they sat down to the banquet, and the King asked Miranda to tell them all that had happened to her since the terrible morning when he had sent the Captain of the Guard to fetch her. This she did with so much spirit that all the guests listened with breathless interest. But while she was thus enjoying herself with the King and her sisters, the King of the Sheep was waiting impatiently for the time of her return, and when it came and went, and no Princess appeared, his anxiety became so great that he could bear it no longer.

"She is not coming back any more," he cried. "My miserable sheep's face displeases her, and without Miranda what is left to me, wretched creature that I am! Oh! cruel Ragotte; my punishment is complete."

For a long time he bewailed his sad fate like this, and then, seeing that it was growing dark, and that still there was no sign of the Princess, he set out as fast as he could in the direction of the town. When he reached the palace he asked for Miranda, but by this time everyone had heard the story of her adventures, and did not want her to go back again to the King of the Sheep, so they refused sternly to let him see her. In vain he begged and prayed them to let him in; though his entreaties might have melted hearts of stone they did not move the guards of the palace, and at last, quite broken-hearted, he fell dead at their feet.

In the meantime the King, who had not the least idea of the sad thing that was happening outside the gate of his palace, proposed to Miranda that she should be driven in her chariot all round the town, which was to be illuminated with thousands and thousands of torches, placed in windows and balconies, and in all the grand squares. But what a sight met her eyes at the very entrance of the palace! There lay her dear, kind sheep, silent and motionless, upon the pavement!

She threw herself out of the chariot and ran to him, crying bitterly, for she realized that her broken promise had cost him his life, and for a long, long time she was so unhappy that they thought she would have died too.

So you see that even a princess is not always happy--especially if she forgets to keep her word; and the greatest misfortunes often happen to people just as they think they have obtained their heart's desires![1]

[1] Madame d'Aulnoy.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

LITTLE THUMB

There was, once upon a time, a man and his wife fagot-makers by trade, who had several children, all boys. The eldest was but ten years old, and the youngest only seven.

They were very poor, and their seven children incommoded them greatly, because not one of them was able to earn his bread. That which gave them yet more uneasiness was that the youngest was of a very puny constitution, and scarce ever spoke a word, which made them take that for stupidity which was a sign of good sense. He was very little, and when born no bigger than one's thumb, which made him be called Little Thumb.

The poor child bore the blame of whatsoever was done amiss in the house, and, guilty or not, was always in the wrong; he was, notwithstanding, more cunning and had a far greater share of wisdom than all his brothers put together; and, if he spake little, he heard and thought the more.

There happened now to come a very bad year, and the famine was so great that these poor people resolved to rid themselves of their children. One evening, when they were all in bed and the fagot-maker was sitting with his wife at the fire, he said to her, with his heart ready to burst with grief:

"Thou seest plainly that we are not able to keep our children, and I cannot see them starve to death before my face; I am resolved to lose them in the wood to-morrow, which may very easily be done; for, while they are busy in tying up fagots, we may run away, and leave them, without their taking any notice."

"Ah!" cried his wife; "and canst thou thyself have the heart to take thy children out along with thee on purpose to lose them?"

In vain did her husband represent to her their extreme poverty: she would not consent to it; she was indeed poor, but she was their mother. However, having considered what a grief it would be to her to see them perish with hunger, she at last consented, and went to bed all in tears.

Little Thumb heard every word that had been spoken; for observing, as he lay in his bed, that they were talking very busily, he got up softly, and hid himself under his father's stool, that he might hear what they said without being seen. He went to bed again, but did not sleep a wink all the rest of the night, thinking on what he had to do. He got up early in the morning, and went to the river-side, where he filled his pockets full of small white pebbles, and then returned home.

They all went abroad, but Little Thumb never told his brothers one syllable of what he knew. They went into a very thick forest, where they could not another at ten paces distance. The fagot-maker began to cut wood, and the children to gather up the sticks to make fagots. Their father and mother, seeing them busy at their work, got away from them insensibly, and ran away from them all at once, along a by-way through the winding bushes.

When the children saw they were left alone, they began to cry as loud as they could. Little Thumb let them cry on, knowing very well how to get home again, for, as he came, he took care to drop all along the way the little white pebbles he had in his pockets. Then he said to them:

"Be not afraid, brothers; father and mother have left us here, but I will lead you home again, only follow me."

They did so, and he brought them home by the very same way they came into the forest. They dared not go in, but sat themselves down at the door, listening to what their father and mother were saying.

The very moment the fagot-maker and his wife reached home the lord of the manor sent them ten crowns, which he had owed them a long while, and which they never expected. This gave them new life, for the poor people were almost famished. The fagot-maker sent his wife immediately to the butcher's. As it was a long while since they had eaten a bit, she bought thrice as much meat as would sup two people. When they had eaten, the woman said:

"Alas! where are now our poor children? they would make a good feast of what we have left here; but it was you, William, who had a mind to lose them: I told you we should repent of it. What are they now doing in the forest? Alas! dear God, the wolves have perhaps already eaten them up; thou art very inhuman thus to have lost thy children."

The fagot-maker grew at last quite out of patience, for she repeated it above twenty times, that they should repent of it, and that she was in the right of it for so saying. He threatened to beat her if she did not hold her tongue. It was not that the fagot-maker was not, perhaps, more vexed than his wife, but that she teased him, and that he was of the humor of a great many others, who love wives to speak well, but think those very importunate who are continually doing so. She was half-drowned in tears, crying out:

"Alas! where are now my children, my poor children?"

She spoke this so very loud that the children, who were at the gate, began to cry out all together:

"Here we are! Here we are!"

She ran immediately to open the door, and said, hugging them:

"I am glad to see you, my dear children; you are very hungry and weary; and my poor Peter, thou art horribly bemired; come in and let me clean thee."

Now, you must know that Peter was her eldest son, whom she loved above all the rest, because he was somewhat carroty, as she herself was. They sat down to supper, and ate with such a good appetite as pleased both father and mother, whom they acquainted how frightened they were in the forest, speaking almost always all together. The good folks were extremely glad to see their children once more at home, and this joy continued while the ten crowns lasted; but, when the money was all gone, they fell again into their former uneasiness, and resolved to lose them again; and, that they might be the surer of doing it, to carry them to a much greater distance than before.

They could not talk of this so secretly but they were overheard by Little Thumb, who made account to get out of this difficulty as well as the former; but, though he got up very early in the morning to go and pick up some little pebbles, he was disappointed, for he found the house-door double-locked, and was at a stand what to do. When their father had given each of them a piece of bread for their breakfast, Little Thumb fancied he might make use of this instead of the pebbles by throwing it in little bits all along the way they should pass; and so he put the bread in his pocket.

Their father and mother brought them into the thickest and most obscure part of the forest, when, stealing away into a by-path, they there left them. Little Thumb was not very uneasy at it, for he thought he could easily find the way again by means of his bread, which he had scattered all along as he came; but he was very much surprised when he could not find so much as one crumb; the birds had come and had eaten it up, every bit. They were now in great affliction, for the farther they went the more they were out of their way, and were more and more bewildered in the forest.

Night now came on, and there arose a terribly high wind, which made them dreadfully afraid. They fancied they heard on every side of them the howling of wolves coming to eat them up. They scarce dared to speak or turn their heads. After this, it rained very hard, which wetted them to the skin; their feet slipped at every step they took, and they fell into the mire, whence they got up in a very dirty pickle; their hands were quite benumbed.

Little Thumb climbed up to the top of a tree, to see if he could discover anything; and having turned his head about on every side, he saw at last a glimmering light, like that of a candle, but a long way from the forest. He came down, and, when upon the ground, he could see it no more, which grieved him sadly. However, having walked for some time with his brothers toward that side on which he had seen the light, he perceived it again as he came out of the wood.

They came at last to the house where this candle was, not without an abundance of fear: for very often they lost sight of it, which happened every time they came into a bottom. They knocked at the door, and a good woman came and opened it; she asked them what they would have.

Little Thumb told her they were poor children who had been lost in the forest, and desired to lodge there for God's sake.

The woman, seeing them so very pretty, began to weep, and said to them:

"Alas! poor babies; whither are ye come? Do ye know that this house belongs to a cruel ogre who eats up little children?"

"Ah! dear madam," answered Little Thumb (who trembled every joint of him, as well as his brothers), "what shall we do? To be sure the wolves of the forest will devour us to-night if you refuse us to lie here; and so we would rather the gentleman should eat us; and perhaps he may take pity upon us, especially if you please to beg it of him."

The Ogre's wife, who believed she could conceal them from her husband till morning, let them come in, and brought them to warm themselves at a very good fire; for there was a whole sheep upon the spit, roasting for the Ogre's supper.

As they began to be a little warm they heard three or four great raps at the door; this was the Ogre, who had come home. Upon this she hid them under the bed and went to open the door. The Ogre presently asked if supper was ready and the wine drawn, and then sat himself down to table. The sheep was as yet all raw and bloody; but he liked it the better for that. He sniffed about to the right and left, saying:

"I smell fresh meat."

"What you smell so," said his wife, "must be the calf which I have just now killed and flayed."

"I smell fresh meat, I tell thee once more," replied the Ogre, looking crossly at his wife; "and there is something here which I do not understand."

As he spoke these words he got up from the table and went directly to the bed.

"Ah, ah!" said he; "I see then how thou wouldst cheat me, thou cursed woman; I know not why I do not eat thee up too, but it is well for thee that thou art a tough old carrion. Here is good game, which comes very quickly to entertain three ogres of my acquaintance who are to pay me a visit in a day or two."

With that he dragged them out from under the bed one by one. The poor children fell upon their knees, and begged his pardon; but they had to do with one of the most cruel ogres in the world, who, far from having any pity on them, had already devoured them with his eyes, and told his wife they would be delicate eating when tossed up with good savory sauce. He then took a great knife, and, coming up to these poor children, whetted it upon a great whet-stone which he held in his left hand. He had already taken hold of one of them when his wife said to him:

"Why need you do it now? Is it not time enough to-morrow?"

"Hold your prating," said the Ogre; "they will eat the tenderer.

"But you have so much meat already," replied his wife, you have no occasion; here are a calf, two sheep, and half a hog."

"That is true," said the Ogre; "give them their belly full that they may not fall away, and put them to bed."

The good woman was overjoyed at this, and gave them a good supper; but they were so much afraid they could not eat a bit. As for the Ogre, he sat down again to drink, being highly pleased that he had got wherewithal to treat his friends. He drank a dozen glasses more than ordinary, which got up into his head and obliged him to go to bed.

The Ogre had seven daughters, all little children, and these young ogresses had all of them very fine complexions, because they used to eat fresh meat like their father; but they had little gray eyes, quite round, hooked noses, and very long sharp teeth, standing at a good distance from each other. They were not as yet over and above mischievous, but they promised very fair for it, for they had already bitten little children, that they might suck their blood.

They had been put to bed early, with every one a crown of gold upon her head. There was in the same chamber a bed of the like bigness, and it was into this bed the Ogre's wife put the seven little boys, after which she went to bed to her husband.

Little Thumb, who had observed that the Ogre's daughters had crowns of gold upon their heads, and was afraid lest the Ogre should repent his not killing them, got up about midnight, and, taking his brothers' bonnets and his own, went very softly and put them upon the heads of the seven little ogresses, after having taken off their crowns of gold, which he put upon his own head and his brothers', that the Ogre might take them for his daughters, and his daughters for the little boys whom he wanted to kill.

All this succeeded according to his desire; for, the Ogre waking about midnight, and sorry that he deferred to do that till morning which he might have done over-night, threw himself hastily out of bed, and, taking his great knife,

"Let us see," said he, "how our little rogues do, and not make two jobs of the matter."

He then went up, groping all the way, into his daughters' chamber, and, coming to the bed where the little boys lay, and who were every soul of them fast asleep, except Little Thumb, who was terribly afraid when he found the Ogre fumbling about his head, as he had done about his brothers', the Ogre, feeling the golden crowns, said:

"I should have made a fine piece of work of it, truly; I find I drank too much last night."

Then he went to the bed where the girls lay; and, having found the boys' little bonnets,

"Ah!" said he, "my merry lads, are you there? Let us work as we ought."

And saying these words, without more ado, he cut the throats of all his seven daughters.

Well pleased with what he had done, he went to bed again to his wife. So soon as Little Thumb heard the Ogre snore, he waked his brothers, and bade them all put on their clothes presently and follow him. They stole down softly into the garden, and got over the wall. They kept running about all night, and trembled all the while, without knowing which way they went.

The Ogre, when he awoke, said to his wife: "Go upstairs and dress those young rascals who came here last night."

The wife was very much surprised at this goodness of her husband, not dreaming after what manner she should dress them; but, thinking that he had ordered her to go and put on their clothes, she went up, and was strangely astonished when she perceived her seven daughters killed, and weltering in their blood.

She fainted away, for this is the first expedient almost all women find in such cases. The Ogre, fearing his wife would be too long in doing what he had ordered, went up himself to help her. He was no less amazed than his wife at this frightful spectacle.

"Ah! what have I done?" cried he. "The wretches shall pay for it, and that instantly."

He threw a pitcher of water upon his wife's face, and, having brought her to herself, said:

"Give me quickly my boots of seven leagues, that I may go and catch them."

He went out, and, having run over a vast deal of ground, both on this side and that, he came at last into the very road where the poor children were, and not above a hundred paces from their father's house. They espied the Ogre, who went at one step from mountain to mountain, and over rivers as easily as the narrowest kennels. Little Thumb, seeing a hollow rock near the place where they were, made his brothers hide themselves in it, and crowded into it himself, minding always what would become of the Ogre.

The Ogre, who found himself much tired with his long and fruitless journey (for these boots of seven leagues greatly fatigued the wearer), had a great mind to rest himself, and, by chance, went to sit down upon the rock where the little boys had hid themselves. As it was impossible he could be more weary than he was, he fell asleep, and, after reposing himself some time, began to snore so frightfully that the poor children were no less afraid of him than when he held up his great knife and was going to cut their throats. Little Thumb was not so much frightened as his brothers, and told them that they should run away immediately toward home while the Ogre was asleep so soundly, and that they should not be in any pain about him. They took his advice, and got home presently. Little Thumb came up to the Ogre, pulled off his boots gently and put them on his own legs. The boots were very long and large, but, as they were fairies, they had the gift of becoming big and little, according to the legs of those who wore them; so that they fitted his feet and legs as well as if they had been made on purpose for him. He went immediately to the Ogre's house, where he saw his wife crying bitterly for the loss of the Ogre's murdered daughters.

"Your husband," said Little Thumb, "is in very great danger, being taken by a gang of thieves, who have sworn to kill him if he does not give them all his gold and silver. The very moment they held their daggers at his throat he perceived me, and desired me to come and tell you the condition he is in, and that you should give me whatsoever he has of value, without retaining any one thing; for otherwise they will kill him without mercy; and, as his case is very pressing, he desired me to make use (you see I have them on) of his boots, that I might make the more haste and to show you that I do not impose upon you."

The good woman, being sadly frightened, gave him all she had: for this Ogre was a very good husband, though he used to eat up little children. Little Thumb, having thus got all the Ogre's money, came home to his father's house, where he was received with abundance of joy.

There are many people who do not agree in this circumstance, and pretend that Little Thumb never robbed the Ogre at all, and that he only thought he might very justly, and with a safe conscience, take off his boots of seven leagues, because he made no other use of them but to run after little children. These folks affirm that they are very well assured of this, and the more as having drunk and eaten often at the fagot-maker's house. They aver that when Little Thumb had taken off the Ogre's boots he went to Court, where he was informed that they were very much in pain about a certain army, which was two hundred leagues off, and the success of a battle. He went, say they, to the King, and told him that, if he desired it, he would bring him news from the army before night.

The King promised him a great sum of money upon that condition. Little Thumb was as good as his word, and returned that very same night with the news; and, this first expedition causing him to be known, he got whatever he pleased, for the King paid him very well for carrying his orders to the army. After having for some time carried on the business of a messenger, and gained thereby great wealth, he went home to his father, where it was impossible to express the joy they were all in at his return. He made the whole family very easy, bought places for his father and brothers, and, by that means, settled them very handsomely in the world, and, in the meantime, made his court to perfection.[1]

[1] Charles Perrault.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

THE FORTY THIEVES

In a town in Persia there dwelt two brothers, one named Cassim, the other Ali Baba. Cassim was married to a rich wife and lived in plenty, while Ali Baba had to maintain his wife and children by cutting wood in a neighboring forest and selling it in the town. One day, when Ali Baba was in the forest, he saw a troop of men on horseback, coming toward him in a cloud of dust. He was afraid they were robbers, and climbed into a tree for safety. When they came up to him and dismounted, he counted forty of them. They unbridled their horses and tied them to trees. The finest man among them, whom Ali Baba took to be their captain, went a little way among some bushes, and said: "Open, Sesame!"[1] so plainly that Ali Baba heard him. A door opened in the rocks, and having made the troop go in, he followed them, and the door shut again of itself. They stayed some time inside, and Ali Baba, fearing they might come out and catch him, was forced to sit patiently in the tree. At last the door opened again, and the Forty Thieves came out. As the Captain went in last he came out first, and made them all pass by him; he then closed the door, saying: "Shut, Sesame!" Every man bridled his horse and mounted, the Captain put himself at their head, and they returned as they came.

[1] Sesame is a kind of grain.

Then Ali Baba climbed down and went to the door concealed among the bushes, and said: "Open, Sesame!" and it flew open. Ali Baba, who expected a dull, dismal place, was greatly surprised to find it large and well lighted, hollowed by the hand of man in the form of a vault, which received the light from an opening in the ceiling. He saw rich bales of merchandise--silk, stuff-brocades, all piled together, and gold and silver in heaps, and money in leather purses. He went in and the door shut behind him. He did not look at the silver, but brought out as many bags of gold as he thought his asses, which were browsing outside, could carry, loaded them with the bags, and hid it all with fagots. Using the words: "Shut, Sesame!" he closed the door and went home.

Then he drove his asses into the yard, shut the gates, carried the money-bags to his wife, and emptied them out before her. He bade her keep the secret, and he would go and bury the gold. "Let me first measure it," said his wife. "I will go borrow a measure of someone, while you dig the hole." So she ran to the wife of Cassim and borrowed a measure. Knowing Ali Baba's poverty, the sister was curious to find out what sort of grain his wife wished to measure, and artfully put some suet at the bottom of the measure. Ali Baba's wife went home and set the measure on the heap of gold, and filled it and emptied it often, to her great content. She then carried it back to her sister, without noticing that a piece of gold was sticking to it, which Cassim's wife perceived directly her back was turned. She grew very curious, and said to Cassim when he came home: "Cassim, your brother is richer than you. He does not count his money, he measures it." He begged her to explain this riddle, which she did by showing him the piece of money and telling him where she found it. Then Cassim grew so envious that he could not sleep, and went to his brother in the morning before sunrise. "Ali Baba," he said, showing him the gold piece, "you pretend to be poor and yet you measure gold." By this Ali Baba perceived that through his wife's folly Cassim and his wife knew their secret, so he confessed all and offered Cassim a share. "That I expect," said Cassim; "but I must know where to find the treasure, otherwise I will discover all, and you will lose all." Ali Baba, more out of kindness than fear, told him of the cave, and the very words to use. Cassim left Ali Baba, meaning to be beforehand with him and get the treasure for himself. He rose early next morning, and set out with ten mules loaded with great chests. He soon found the place, and the door in the rock. He said: "Open, Sesame!" and the door opened and shut behind him. He could have feasted his eyes all day on the treasures, but he now hastened to gather together as much of it as possible; but when he was ready to go he could not remember what to say for thinking of his great riches. Instead of "Sesame," he said: "Open, Barley!" and the door remained fast. He named several different sorts of grain, all but the right one, and the door still stuck fast. He was so frightened at the danger he was in that he had as much forgotten the word as if he had never heard it.

About noon the robbers returned to their cave, and saw Cassim's mules roving about with great chests on their backs. This gave them the alarm; they drew their sabres, and went to the door, which opened on their Captain's saying: "Open, Sesame!" Cassim, who had heard the trampling of their horses' feet, resolved to sell his life dearly, so when the door opened he leaped out and threw the Captain down. In vain, however, for the robbers with their sabres soon killed him. On entering the cave they saw all the bags laid ready, and could not imagine how anyone had got in without knowing their secret. They cut Cassim's body into four quarters, and nailed them up inside the cave, in order to frighten anyone who should venture in, and went away in search of more treasure.

As night drew on Cassim's wife grew very uneasy, and ran to her brother-in-law, and told him where her husband had gone. Ali Baba did his best to comfort her, and set out to the forest in search of Cassim. The first thing he saw on entering the cave was his dead brother. Full of horror, he put the body on one of his asses, and bags of gold on the other two, and, covering all with some fagots, returned home. He drove the two asses laden with gold into his own yard, and led the other to Cassim's house. The door was opened by the slave Morgiana, whom he knew to be both brave and cunning. Unloading the ass, he said to her: "This is the body of your master, who has been murdered, but whom we must bury as though he had died in his bed. I will speak with you again, but now tell your mistress I am come." The wife of Cassim, on learning the fate of her husband, broke out into cries and tears, but Ali Baba offered to take her to live with him and his wife if she would promise to keep his counsel and leave everything to Morgiana; whereupon she agreed, and dried her eyes.

Morgiana, meanwhile, sought an apothecary and asked him for some lozenges. "My poor master," she said, "can neither eat nor speak, and no one knows what his distemper is." She carried home the lozenges and returned next day weeping, and asked for an essence only given to those just about to die. Thus, in the evening, no one was surprised to hear the wretched shrieks and cries of Cassim's wife and Morgiana, telling everyone that Cassim was dead. The day after Morgiana went to an old cobbler near the gates of the town who opened his stall early, put a piece of gold in his hand, and bade him follow her with his needle and thread. Having bound his eyes with a handkerchief, she took him to the room where the body lay, pulled off the bandage, and bade him sew the quarters together, after which she covered his eyes again and led him home. Then they buried Cassim, and Morgiana his slave followed him to the grave, weeping and tearing her hair, while Cassim's wife stayed at home uttering lamentable cries. Next day she went to live with Ali Baba, who gave Cassim's shop to his eldest son.

The Forty Thieves, on their return to the cave, were much astonished to find Cassim's body gone and some of their money-bags. "We are certainly discovered," said the Captain, "and shall be undone if we cannot find out who it is that knows our secret. Two men must have known it; we have killed one, we must now find the other. To this end one of you who is bold and artful must go into the city dressed as a traveler, and discover whom we have killed, and whether men talk of the strange manner of his death. If the messenger fails he must lose his life, lest we be betrayed." One of the thieves started up and offered to do this, and after the rest had highly commended him for his bravery he disguised himself, and happened to enter the town at daybreak, just by Baba Mustapha's stall. The thief bade him good-day, saying: "Honest man, how can you possibly see to stitch at your age?" "Old as I am," replied the cobbler, "I have very good eyes, and will you believe me when I tell you that I sewed a dead body together in a place where I had less light than I have now." The robber was overjoyed at his good fortune, and, giving him a piece of gold, desired to be shown the house where he stitched up the dead body. At first Mustapha refused, saying that he had been blindfolded; but when the robber gave him another piece of gold he began to think he might remember the turnings if blindfolded as before. This means succeeded; the robber partly led him, and was partly guided by him, right in front of Cassim's house, the door of which the robber marked with a piece of chalk. Then, well pleased, he bade farewell to Baba Mustapha and returned to the forest. By and by Morgiana, going out, saw the mark the robber had made, quickly guessed that some mischief was brewing, and fetching a piece of chalk marked two or three doors on each side, without saying anything to her master or mistress.

The thief, meantime, told his comrades of his discovery. The Captain thanked him, and bade him show him the house he had marked. But when they came to it they saw that five or six of the houses were chalked in the same manner. The guide was so confounded that he knew not what answer to make, and when they returned he was at once beheaded for having failed. Another robber was dispatched, and, having won over Baba Mustapha, marked the house in red chalk; but Morgiana being again too clever for them, the second messenger was put to death also. The Captain now resolved to go himself, but, wiser than the others, he did not mark the house, but looked at it so closely that he could not fail to remember it. He returned, and ordered his men to go into the neighboring villages and buy nineteen mules, and thirty-eight leather jars, all empty except one, which was full of oil. The Captain put one of his men, fully armed, into each, rubbing the outside of the jars with oil from the full vessel. Then the nineteen mules were loaded with thirty-seven robbers in jars, and the jar of oil, and reached the town by dusk. The Captain stopped his mules in front of Ali Baba's house, and said to Ali Baba, who was sitting outside for coolness: "I have brought some oil from a distance to sell at to-morrow's market, but it is now so late that I know not where to pass the night, unless you will do me the favor to take me in." Though Ali Baba had seen the Captain of the robbers in the forest, he did not recognize him in the disguise of an oil merchant. He bade him welcome, opened his gates for the mules to enter, and went to Morgiana to bid her prepare a bed and supper for his guest. He brought the stranger into his hall, and after they had supped went again to speak to Morgiana in the kitchen, while the Captain went into the yard under pretense of seeing after his mules, but really to tell his men what to do. Beginning at the first jar and ending at the last, he said to each man: "As soon as I throw some stones from the window of the chamber where I lie, cut the jars open with your knives and come out, and I will be with you in a trice." He returned to the house, and Morgiana led him to his chamber. She then told Abdallah, her fellow-slave, to set on the pot to make some broth for her master, who had gone to bed. Meanwhile her lamp went out, and she had no more oil in the house. "Do not be uneasy," said Abdallah; "go into the yard and take some out of one of those jars." Morgiana thanked him for his advice, took the oil pot, and went into the yard. When she came to the first jar the robber inside said softly: "Is it time?"

Any other slave but Morgiana, on finding a man in the jar instead of the oil she wanted, would have screamed and made a noise; but she, knowing the danger her master was in, bethought herself of a plan, and answered quietly: "Not yet, but presently." She went to all the jars, giving the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil. She now saw that her master, thinking to entertain an oil merchant, had let thirty-eight robbers into his house. She filled her oil pot, went back to the kitchen, and, having lit her lamp, went again to the oil jar and filled a large kettle full of oil. When it boiled she went and poured enough oil into every jar to stifle and kill the robber inside. When this brave deed was done she went back to the kitchen, put out the fire and the lamp, and waited to see what would happen.

In a quarter of an hour the Captain of the robbers awoke, got up, and opened the window. As all seemed quiet, he threw down some little pebbles which hit the jars. He listened, and as none of his men seemed to stir he grew uneasy, and went down into the yard. On going to the first jar and saying, "Are you asleep?" he smelt the hot boiled oil, and knew at once that his plot to murder Ali Baba and his household had been discovered. He found all the gang was dead, and, missing the oil out of the last jar, became aware of the manner of their death. He then forced the lock of a door leading into a garden, and climbing over several walls made his escape. Morgiana heard and saw all this, and, rejoicing at her success, went to bed and fell asleep.

At daybreak Ali Baba arose, and, seeing the oil jars still there, asked why the merchant had not gone with his mules. Morgiana bade him look in the first jar and see if there was any oil. Seeing a man, he started back in terror. "Have no fear," said Morgiana; "the man cannot harm you: he is dead." Ali Baba, when he had recovered somewhat from his astonishment, asked what had become of the merchant. "Merchant!" said she, "he is no more a merchant than I am!" and she told him the whole story, assuring him that it was a plot of the robbers of the forest, of whom only three were left, and that the white and red chalk marks had something to do with it. Ali Baba at once gave Morgiana her freedom, saying that he owed her his life. They then buried the bodies in Ali Baba's garden, while the mules were sold in the market by his slaves.

The Captain returned to his lonely cave, which seemed frightful to him without his lost companions, and firmly resolved to avenge them by killing Ali Baba. He dressed himself carefully, and went into the town, where he took lodgings in an inn. In the course of a great many journeys to the forest he carried away many rich stuffs and much fine linen, and set up a shop opposite that of Ali Baba's son. He called himself Cogia Hassan, and as he was both civil and well dressed he soon made friends with Ali Baba's son, and through him with Ali Baba, whom he was continually asking to sup with him. Ali Baba, wishing to return his kindness, invited him into his house and received him smiling, thanking him for his kindness to his son. When the merchant was about to take his leave Ali Baba stopped him, saying: "Where are you going, sir, in such haste? Will you not stay and sup with me?" The merchant refused, saying that he had a reason; and, on Ali Baba's asking him what that was, he replied: "It is, sir, that I can eat no victuals that have any salt in them." "If that is all," said Ali Baba, "let me tell you that there shall be no salt in either the meat or the bread that we eat to-night." He went to give this order to Morgiana, who was much surprised. "Who is this man," she said, "who eats no salt with his meat?" "He is an honest man, Morgiana," returned her master; "therefore do as I bid you." But she could not withstand a desire to see this strange man, so she helped Abdallah to carry up the dishes, and saw in a moment that Cogia Hassan was the robber Captain, and carried a dagger under his garment. "I am not surprised," she said to herself, "that this wicked man, who intends to kill my master, will eat no salt with him; but I will hinder his plans."

She sent up the supper by Abdallah, while she made ready for one of the boldest acts that could be thought on. When the dessert had been served, Cogia Hassan was left alone with Ali Baba and his son, whom he thought to make drunk and then to murder them. Morgiana, meanwhile, put on a head-dress like a dancing-girl's, and clasped a girdle round her waist, from which hung a dagger with a silver hilt, and said to Abdallah: "Take your tabor, and let us go and divert our master and his guest." Abdallah took his tabor and played before Morgiana until they came to the door, where Abdallah stopped playing and Morgiana made a low courtesy. "Come in, Morgiana," said Ali Baba, "and let Cogia Hassan see what you can do"; and, turning to Cogia Hassan, he said: "She's my slave and my housekeeper." Cogia Hassan was by no means pleased, for he feared that his chance of killing Ali Baba was gone for the present; but he pretended great eagerness to see Morgiana, and Abdallah began to play and Morgiana to dance. After she had performed several dances she drew her dagger and made passes with it, sometimes pointing it at her own breast, sometimes at her master's, as if it were part of the dance. Suddenly, out of breath, she snatched the tabor from Abdallah with her left hand, and, holding the dagger in her right hand, held out the tabor to her master. Ali Baba and his son put a piece of gold into it, and Cogia Hassan, seeing that she was coming to him, pulled out his purse to make her a present, but while he was putting his hand into it Morgiana plunged the dagger into his heart.

"Unhappy girl!" cried Ali Baba and his son, "what have you done to ruin us?"

"It was to preserve you, master, not to ruin you," answered Morgiana. "See here," opening the false merchant's garment and showing the dagger; "see what an enemy you have entertained! Remember, he would eat no salt with you, and what more would you have? Look at him! he is both the false oil merchant and the Captain of the Forty Thieves."

Ali Baba was so grateful to Morgiana for thus saving his life that he offered her to his son in marriage, who readily consented, and a few days after the wedding was celebrated with greatest splendor.

At the end of a year Ali Baba, hearing nothing of the two remaining robbers, judged they were dead, and set out to the cave. The door opened on his saying: "Open Sesame!" He went in, and saw that nobody had been there since the Captain left it. He brought away as much gold as he could carry, and returned to town. He told his son the secret of the cave, which his son handed down in his turn, so the children and grandchildren of Ali Baba were rich to the end of their lives.[1]

[1] Arabian Nights.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

HANSEL AND GRETTEL

Once upon a time there dwelt on the outskirts of a large forest a poor woodcutter with his wife and two children; the boy was called Hansel and the girl Grettel. He had always little enough to live on, and once, when there was a great famine in the land, he couldn't even provide them with daily bread. One night, as he was tossing about in bed, full of cares and worry, he sighed and said to his wife: "What's to become of us? how are we to support our poor children, now that we have nothing more for ourselves?" "I'll tell you what, husband," answered the woman; "early to-morrow morning we'll take the children out into the thickest part of the wood; there we shall light a fire for them and give them each a piece of bread; then we'll go on to our work and leave them alone. They won't be able to find their way home, and we shall thus be rid of them." "No, wife," said her husband, "that I won't do; how could I find it in my heart to leave my children alone in the wood? The wild beasts would soon come and tear them to pieces." "Oh! you fool," said she, "then we must all four die of hunger, and you may just as well go and plane the boards for our coffins"; and she left him no peace till he consented. "But I can't help feeling sorry for the poor children," added the husband.

The children, too, had not been able to sleep for hunger, and had heard what their step-mother had said to their father. Grettel wept bitterly and spoke to Hansel: "Now it's all up with us." "No, no, Grettel," said Hansel, "don't fret yourself; I'll be able to find a way to escape, no fear." And when the old people had fallen asleep he got up, slipped on his little coat, opened the back door and stole out. The moon was shining clearly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house glittered like bits of silver. Hansel bent down and filled his pocket with as many of them as he could cram in. Then he went back and said to Grettel: "Be comforted, my dear little sister, and go to sleep: God will not desert us"; and he lay down in bed again.

At daybreak, even before the sun was up, the woman came and woke the two children: "Get up, you lie-abeds, we're all going to the forest to fetch wood." She gave them each a bit of bread and said: "There's something for your luncheon, but don't you eat it up before, for it's all you'll get." Grettel took the bread under her apron, as Hansel had the stones in his pocket. Then they all set out together on the way to the forest. After they had walked for a little, Hansel stood still and looked back at the house, and this maneuver he repeated again and again. His father observed him, and said: "Hansel, what are you gazing at there, and why do you always remain behind? Take care, and don't lose your footing." "Oh! father," said Hansel, "I am looking back at my white kitten, which is sitting on the roof, waving me a farewell." The woman exclaimed: "What a donkey you are! that isn't your kitten, that's the morning sun shining on the chimney." But Hansel had not looked back at his kitten, but had always dropped one of the white pebbles out of his pocket on to the path.

When they had reached the middle of the forest the father said: "Now, children, go and fetch a lot of wood, and I'll light a fire that you may not feel cold." Hansel and Grettel heaped up brushwood till they had made a pile nearly the size of a small hill. The brushwood was set fire to, and when the flames leaped high the woman said: "Now lie down at the fire, children, and rest yourselves: we are going into the forest to cut down wood; when we've finished we'll come back and fetch you." Hansel and Grettel sat down beside the fire, and at midday ate their little bits of bread. They heard the strokes of the axe, so they thought their father was quite near. But it was no axe they heard, but a bough he had tied on a dead tree, and that was blown about by the wind. And when they had sat for a long time their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When they awoke at last it was pitch dark. Grettel began to cry, and said: "How are we ever to get out of the wood?" But Hansel comforted her. "Wait a bit," he said, "till the moon is up, and then we'll find our way sure enough." And when the full moon had risen he took his sister by the hand and followed the pebbles, which shone like new threepenny bits, and showed them the path. They walked on through the night, and at daybreak reached their father's house again. They knocked at the door, and when the woman opened it she exclaimed: "You naughty children, what a time you've slept in the wood! we thought you were never going to come back." But the father rejoiced, for his conscience had reproached him for leaving his children behind by themselves.

Not long afterward there was again great dearth in the land, and the children heard their mother address their father thus in bed one night: "Everything is eaten up once more; we have only half a loaf in the house, and when that's done it's all up with us. The children must be got rid of; we'll lead them deeper into the wood this time, so that they won't be able to find their way out again. There is no other way of saving ourselves." The man's heart smote him heavily, and he thought: "Surely it would be better to share the last bite with one's children!" But his wife wouldn't listen to his arguments, and did nothing but scold and reproach him. If a man yields once he's done for, and so, because he had given in the first time, he was forced to do so the second.

But the children were awake, and had heard the conversation. When the old people were asleep Hansel got up, and wanted to go out and pick up pebbles again, as he had done the first time; but the woman had barred the door, and Hansel couldn't get out. But he consoled his little sister, and said: "Don't cry, Grettel, and sleep peacefully, for God is sure to help us."

At early dawn the woman came and made the children get up. They received their bit of bread, but it was even smaller than the time before. On the way to the wood Hansel crumbled it in his pocket, and every few minutes he stood still and dropped a crumb on the ground. "Hansel, what are you stopping and looking about you for?" said the father. "I'm looking back at my little pigeon, which is sitting on the roof waving me a farewell," answered Hansel. "Fool!" said the wife; "that isn't your pigeon, it's the morning sun glittering on the chimney." But Hansel gradually threw all his crumbs on the path. The woman led the children still deeper into the forest farther than they had ever been in their lives before. Then a big fire was lit again, and the mother said: "Just sit down there, children, and if you're tired you can sleep a bit; we're going into the forest to cut down wood, and in the evening when we're finished we'll come back to fetch you." At midday Grettel divided her bread with Hansel, for he had strewn his all along their path. Then they fell asleep, and evening passed away, but nobody came to the poor children. They didn't awake till it was pitch dark, and Hansel comforted his sister, saying: "Only wait, Grettel, till the moon rises, then we shall see the bread-crumbs I scattered along the path; they will show us the way back to the house." When the moon appeared they got up, but they found no crumbs, for the thousands of birds that fly about the woods and fields had picked them all up. "Never mind," said Hansel to Grettel; "you'll see we'll find a way out"; but all the same they did not. They wandered about the whole night, and the next day, from morning till evening, but they could not find a path out of the wood. They were very hungry, too, for they had nothing to eat but a few berries they found growing on the ground. And at last they were so tired that their legs refused to carry them any longer, so they lay down under a tree and fell fast asleep.

On the third morning after they had left their father's house they set about their wandering again, but only got deeper and deeper into the wood, and now they felt that if help did not come to them soon they must perish. At midday they saw a beautiful little snow-white bird sitting on a branch, which sang so sweetly that they stopped still and listened to it. And when its song was finished it flapped its wings and flew on in front of them. They followed it and came to a little house, on the roof of which it perched; and when they came quite near they saw that the cottage was made of bread and roofed with cakes, while the window was made of transparent sugar. "Now we'll set to," said Hansel, "and have a regular blow-out.[1] I'll eat a bit of the roof, and you, Grettel, can eat some of the window, which you'll find a sweet morsel." Hansel stretched up his hand and broke off a little bit of the roof to see what it was like, and Grettel went to the casement and began to nibble at it. Thereupon a shrill voice called out from the room inside:

"Nibble, nibble, little mouse,
 Who's nibbling my house?"

The children answered:

"Tis Heaven's own child,
 The tempest wild,"

and went on eating, without putting themselves about. Hansel, who thoroughly appreciated the roof, tore down a big bit of it, while Grettel pushed out a whole round window-pane, and sat down the better to enjoy it. Suddenly the door opened, and an ancient dame leaning on a staff hobbled out. Hansel and Grettel were so terrified that they let what they had in their hands fall. But the old woman shook her head and said: "Oh, ho! you dear children, who led you here? Just come in and stay with me, no ill shall befall you." She took them both by the hand and let them into the house, and laid a most sumptuous dinner before them--milk and sugared pancakes, with apples and nuts. After they had finished, two beautiful little white beds were prepared for them, and when Hansel and Grettel lay down in them they felt as if they had got into heaven.

[1] He was a vulgar boy!

The old woman had appeared to be most friendly, but she was really an old witch who had waylaid the children, and had only built the little bread house in order to lure them in. When anyone came into her power she killed, cooked, and ate him, and held a regular feast-day for the occasion. Now witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but, like beasts, they have a keen sense of smell, and know when human beings pass by. When Hansel and Grettel fell into her hands she laughed maliciously, and said jeeringly: "I've got them now; they sha'n't escape me." Early in the morning, before the children were awake, she rose up, and when she saw them both sleeping so peacefully, with their round rosy cheeks, she muttered to herself: "That'll be a dainty bite." Then she seized Hansel with her bony hand and carried him into a little stable, and barred the door on him; he might scream as much as he liked, it did him no good. Then she went to Grettel, shook her till she awoke, and cried: "Get up, you lazy-bones, fetch water and cook something for your brother. When he's fat I'll eat him up." Grettel began to cry bitterly, but it was of no use; she had to do what the wicked witch bade her.

So the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Grettel got nothing but crab-shells. Every morning the old woman hobbled out to the stable and cried: "Hansel, put out your finger, that I may feel if you are getting fat." But Hansel always stretched out a bone, and the old dame, whose eyes were dim, couldn't see it, and thinking always it was Hansel's finger, wondered why he fattened so slowly. When four weeks had passed and Hansel still remained thin, she lost patience and determined to wait no longer. "Hi, Grettel," she called to the girl, "be quick and get some water. Hansel may be fat or thin, I'm going to kill him to-morrow and cook him." Oh! how the poor little sister sobbed as she carried the water, and how the tears rolled down her cheeks! "Kind heaven help us now!" she cried; "if only the wild beasts in the wood had eaten us, then at least we should have died together." "Just hold your peace," said the old hag; "it won't help you."

Early in the morning Grettel had to go out and hang up the kettle full of water, and light the fire. "First we'll bake," said the old dame; "I've heated the oven already and kneaded the dough." She pushed Grettel out to the oven, from which fiery flames were already issuing. "Creep in," said the witch, "and see if it's properly heated, so that we can shove in the bread." For when she had got Grettel in she meant to close the oven and let the girl bake, that she might eat her up too. But Grettel perceived her intention, and said: "I don't know how I'm to do it; how do I get in?" "You silly goose!" said the hag, "the opening is big enough; see, I could get in myself," and she crawled toward it, and poked her head into the oven. Then Grettel gave her a shove that sent her right in, shut the iron door, and drew the bolt. Gracious! how she yelled, it was quite horrible; but Grettel fled, and the wretched old woman was left to perish miserably.

Grettel flew straight to Hansel, opened the little stable-door, and cried: "Hansel, we are free; the old witch is dead." Then Hansel sprang like a bird out of a cage when the door is opened. How they rejoiced, and fell on each other's necks, and jumped for joy, and kissed one another! And as they had no longer any cause for fear, they went in the old hag's house, and here they found, in every corner of the room, boxes with pearls and precious stones. "These are even better than pebbles," said Hansel, and crammed his pockets full of them; and Grettel said: "I too will bring something home," and she filled her apron full. "But now," said Hansel, "let's go and get well away from the witch's wood." When they had wandered about for some hours they came to a big lake. "We can't get over," said Hansel; "I see no bridge of any sort or kind." "Yes, and there's no ferry-boat either," answered Grettel; "but look, there swims a white duck; if I ask her she'll help us over," and she called out:

"Here are two children, mournful very,
 Seeing neither bridge nor ferry;
 Take us upon your white back,
 And row us over, quack, quack!"

The duck swam toward them, and Hansel got on her back and bade his little sister sit beside him. "No," answered Grettel, "we should be too heavy a load for the duck: she shall carry us across separately." The good bird did this, and when they were landed safely on the other side, and had gone for a while, the wood became more and more familiar to them, and at length they saw their father's house in the distance. Then they set off to run, and bounding into the room fell on their father's neck. The man had not passed a happy hour since he left them in the wood, but the woman had died. Grettel shook out her apron so that the pearls and precious stones rolled about the room, and Hansel threw down one handful after the other out of his pocket. Thus all their troubles were ended, and they lived happily ever afterward.

My story is done. See! there runs a little mouse; anyone who catches it may make himself a large fur cap out of it.[1]

[1] Grimm.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

A poor widow once lived in a little cottage with a garden in front of it, in which grew two rose trees, one bearing white roses and the other red. She had two children, who were just like the two rose trees; one was called Snow-white and the other Rose-red, and they were the sweetest and best children in the world, always diligent and always cheerful; but Snow-white was quieter and more gentle than Rose-red. Rose-red loved to run about the fields and meadows, and to pick flowers and catch butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home with her mother and helped her in the household, or read aloud to her when there was no work to do. The two children loved each other so dearly that they always walked about hand in hand whenever they went out together, and when Snow-white said, "We will never desert each other," Rose-red answered: "No, not as long as we live"; and the mother added: "Whatever one gets she shall share with the other." They often roamed about in the woods gathering berries and no beast offered to hurt them; on the contrary, they came up to them in the most confiding manner; the little hare would eat a cabbage leaf from their hands, the deer grazed beside them, the stag would bound past them merrily, and the birds remained on the branches and sang to them with all their might.

No evil ever befell them; if they tarried late in the wood and night overtook them, they lay down together on the moss and slept till morning, and their mother knew they were quite safe, and never felt anxious about them. Once, when they had slept all night in the wood and had been wakened by the morning sun, they perceived a beautiful child in a shining white robe sitting close to their resting-place. The figure got up, looked at them kindly, but said nothing, and vanished into the wood. And when they looked round about them they became aware that they had slept quite close to a precipice, over which they would certainly have fallen had they gone on a few steps further in the darkness. And when they told their mother of their adventure, she said what they had seen must have been the angel that guards good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother's cottage so beautifully clean and neat that it was a pleasure to go into it. In summer Rose-red looked after the house, and every morning before her mother awoke she placed a bunch of flowers before the bed, from each tree a rose. In winter Snow-white lit the fire and put on the kettle, which was made of brass, but so beautifully polished that it shone like gold. In the evening when the snowflakes fell their mother said: "Snow-white, go and close the shutters," and they drew round the fire, while the mother put on her spectacles and read aloud from a big book and the two girls listened and sat and span. Beside them on the ground lay a little lamb, and behind them perched a little white dove with its head tucked under its wings.

One evening as they sat thus cosily together someone knocked at the door as though he desired admittance. The mother said: "Rose-red, open the door quickly; it must be some traveler seeking shelter." Rose-red hastened to unbar the door, and thought she saw a poor man standing in the darkness outside; but it was no such thing, only a bear, who poked his thick black head through the door. Rose-red screamed aloud and sprang back in terror, the lamb began to bleat, the dove flapped its wings, and Snow-white ran and hid behind her mother's bed. But the bear began to speak, and said: "Don't be afraid: I won't hurt you. I am half frozen, and only wish to warm myself a little." "My poor bear," said the mother, "lie down by the fire, only take care you don't burn your fur." Then she called out: "Snow-white and Rose-red, come out; the bear will do you no harm; he is a good, honest creature." So they both came out of their hiding-places, and gradually the lamb and dove drew near too, and they all forgot their fear. The bear asked the children to beat the snow a little out of his fur, and they fetched a brush and scrubbed him till he was dry. Then the beast stretched himself in front of the fire, and growled quite happily and comfortably. The children soon grew quite at their ease with him, and led their helpless guest a fearful life. They tugged his fur with their hands, put their small feet on his back, and rolled him about here and there, or took a hazel wand and beat him with it; and if he growled they only laughed. The bear submitted to everything with the best possible good-nature, only when they went too far he cried: "Oh! children, spare my life!

"Snow-white and Rose-red,
 Don't beat your lover dead."

When it was time to retire for the night, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the bear: "You can lie there on the hearth, in heaven's name; it will be shelter for you from the cold and wet." As soon as day dawned the children led him out, and he trotted over the snow into the wood. From this time on the bear came every evening at the same hour, and lay down by the hearth and let the children play what pranks they liked with him; and they got so accustomed to him that the door was never shut till their black friend had made his appearance.

When spring came, and all outside was green, the bear said one morning to Snow-white: "Now I must go away, and not return again the whole summer." "Where are you going to, dear bear?" asked Snow-white. "I must go to the wood and protect my treasure from the wicked dwarfs. In winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged to remain underground, for they can't work their way through; but now, when the sun has thawed and warmed the ground, they break through and come up above to spy the land and steal what they can; what once falls into their hands and into their caves is not easily brought back to light." Snow-white was quite sad over their friend's departure, and when she unbarred the door for him, the bear, stepping out, caught a piece of his fur in the door-knocker, and Snow-white thought she caught sight of glittering gold beneath it, but she couldn't be certain of it; and the bear ran hastily away, and soon disappeared behind the trees.

A short time after this the mother sent the children into the wood to collect fagots. They came in their wanderings upon a big tree which lay felled on the ground, and on the trunk among the long grass they noticed something jumping up and down, but what it was they couldn't distinguish. When they approached nearer they perceived a dwarf with a wizened face and a beard a yard long. The end of the beard was jammed into a cleft of the tree, and the little man sprang about like a dog on a chain, and didn't seem to know what he was to do. He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes, and screamed out: "What are you standing there for? Can't you come and help me?" "What were you doing, little man?" asked Rose-red. "You stupid, inquisitive goose!" replied the dwarf; "I wanted to split the tree, in order to get little chips of wood for our kitchen fire; those thick logs that serve to make fires for coarse, greedy people like yourselves quite burn up all the little food we need. I had successfully driven in the wedge, and all was going well, but the cursed wood was so slippery that it suddenly sprang out, and the tree closed up so rapidly that I had no time to take my beautiful white beard out, so here I am stuck fast, and I can't get away; and you silly, smooth-faced, milk-and-water girls just stand and laugh! Ugh! what wretches you are!"

The children did all in their power, but they couldn't get the beard out; it was wedged in far too firmly. "I will run and fetch somebody," said Rose-red. "Crazy blockheads!" snapped the dwarf; "what's the good of calling anyone else? You're already two too many for me. Does nothing better occur to you than that?" "Don't be so impatient," said Snow-white, "I'll see you get help," and taking her scissors out of her pocket she cut off the end of his beard. As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he seized a bag full of gold which was hidden among the roots of the tree, lifted it up, and muttered aloud: "Curse these rude wretches, cutting off a piece of my splendid beard!" With these words he swung the bag over his back, and disappeared without as much as looking at the children again.

Shortly after this Snow-white and Rose-red went out to get a dish of fish. As they approached the stream they saw something which looked like an enormous grasshopper springing toward the water as if it were going to jump in. They ran forward and recognized their old friend the dwarf. "Where are you going to?" asked Rose-red; "you're surely not going to jump into the water?" "I'm not such a fool," screamed the dwarf. "Don't you see that cursed fish is trying to drag me in?" The little man had been sitting on the bank fishing, when unfortunately the wind had entangled his beard in the line; and when immediately afterward a big fish bit, the feeble little creature had no strength to pull it out; the fish had the upper fin, and dragged the dwarf toward him. He clung on with all his might to every rush and blade of grass, but it didn't help him much; he had to follow every movement of the fish, and was in great danger of being drawn into the water. The girls came up just at the right moment, held him firm, and did all they could to disentangle his beard from the line; but in vain, beard and line were in a hopeless muddle. Nothing remained but to produce the scissors and cut the beard, by which a small part of it was sacrificed.

When the dwarf perceived what they were about he yelled to them: "Do you call that manners, you toad-stools! to disfigure a fellow's face? It wasn't enough that you shortened my beard before, but you must now needs cut off the best bit of it. I can't appear like this before my own people. I wish you'd been in Jericho first." Then he fetched a sack of pearls that lay among the rushes, and without saying another word he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon after this the mother sent the two girls to the town to buy needles, thread, laces, and ribbons. Their road led over a heath where huge boulders of rock lay scattered here and there. While trudging along they saw a big bird hovering in the air, circling slowly above them, but always descending lower, till at last it settled on a rock not far from them. Immediately afterward they heard a sharp, piercing cry. They ran forward, and saw with horror that the eagle had pounced on their old friend the dwarf, and was about to carry him off. The tender-hearted children seized hold of the little man, and struggled so long with the bird that at last he let go his prey. When the dwarf had recovered from the first shock he screamed in his screeching voice: "Couldn't you have treated me more carefully? You have torn my thin little coat all to shreds, useless, awkward hussies that you are!" Then he took a bag of precious stones and vanished under the rocks into his cave. The girls were accustomed to his ingratitude, and went on their way and did their business in town. On their way home, as they were again passing the heath, they surprised the dwarf pouring out his precious stones on an open space, for he had thought no one would pass by at so late an hour. The evening sun shone on the glittering stones, and they glanced and gleamed so beautifully that the children stood still and gazed on them. "What are you standing there gaping for?" screamed the dwarf, and his ashen-gray face became scarlet with rage. He was about to go off with these angry words when a sudden growl was heard, and a black bear trotted out of the wood. The dwarf jumped up in great fright, but he hadn't time to reach his place of retreat, for the bear was already close to him. Then he cried in terror: "Dear Mr. Bear, spare me! I'll give you all my treasure. Look at those beautiful precious stones lying there. Spare my life! what pleasure would you get from a poor feeble little fellow like me? You won't feel me between your teeth. There, lay hold of these two wicked girls, they will be a tender morsel for you, as fat as young quails; eat them up, for heaven's sake." But the bear, paying no attention to his words, gave the evil little creature one blow with his paw, and he never moved again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called after them: "Snow-white and Rose-red, don't be afraid; wait, and I'll come with you." Then they recognized his voice and stood still, and when the bear was quite close to them his skin suddenly fell off, and a beautiful man stood beside them, all dressed in gold. "I am a king's son," he said, "and have been doomed by that unholy little dwarf, who had stolen my treasure, to roam about the woods as a wild bear till his death should set me free. Now he has got his well-merited punishment."

Snow-white married him, and Rose-red his brother, and they divided the great treasure the dwarf had collected in his cave between them. The old mother lived for many years peacefully with her children; and she carried the two rose trees with her, and they stood in front of her window, and every year they bore the finest red and white roses.[1]

[1] Grimm.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

THE GOOSE-GIRL

Once upon a time an old queen, whose husband had been dead for many years, had a beautiful daughter. When she grew up she was betrothed to a prince who lived a great way off. Now, when the time drew near for her to be married and to depart into a foreign kingdom, her old mother gave her much costly baggage, and many ornaments, gold and silver, trinkets and knicknacks, and, in fact, everything that belonged to a royal trousseau, for she loved her daughter very dearly. She gave her a waiting-maid also, who was to ride with her and hand her over to the bridegroom, and she provided each of them with a horse for the journey. Now the Princess's horse was called Falada, and could speak.

When the hour for departure drew near the old mother went to her bedroom, and taking a small knife she cut her fingers till they bled; then she held a white rag under them, and letting three drops of blood fall into it, she gave it to her daughter, and said: "Dear child, take great care of this rag: it may be of use to you on the journey."

So they took a sad farewell of each other, and the Princess stuck the rag in front of her dress, mounted her horse, and set forth on the journey to her bridegroom's kingdom. After they had ridden for about an hour the Princess began to feel very thirsty, and said to her waiting-maid: "Pray get down and fetch me some water in my golden cup out of yonder stream: I would like a drink." "If you're thirsty," said the maid, "dismount yourself, and lie down by the water and drink; I don't mean to be your servant any longer." The Princess was so thirsty that she got down, bent over the stream, and drank, for she wasn't allowed to drink out of the golden goblet. As she drank she murmured: "Oh! heaven, what am I to do?" and the three drops of blood replied:

"If your mother only knew,
 Her heart would surely break in two."

But the Princess was meek, and said nothing about her maid's rude behavior, and quietly mounted her horse again. They rode on their way for several miles, but the day was hot, and the sun's rays smote fiercely on them, so that the Princess was soon overcome by thirst again. And as they passed a brook she called once more to her waiting-maid: "Pray get down and give me a drink from my golden cup," for she had long ago forgotten her maid's rude words. But the waiting-maid replied, more haughtily even than before: "If you want a drink, you can dismount and get it; I don't mean to be your servant." Then the Princess was compelled by her thirst to get down, and bending over the flowing water she cried and said: "Oh! heaven, what am I to do?" and the three drops of blood replied:

"If your mother only knew,
 Her heart would surely break in two."

And as she drank thus, and leaned right over the water, the rag containing the three drops of blood fell from her bosom and floated down the stream, and she in her anxiety never even noticed her loss. But the waiting-maid had observed it with delight, as she knew it gave her power over the bride, for in losing the drops of blood the Princess had become weak and powerless. When she wished to get on her horse Falada again, the waiting-maid called out: "I mean to ride Falada: you must mount my beast"; and this too she had to submit to. Then the waiting-maid commanded her harshly to take off her royal robes, and to put on her common ones, and finally she made her swear by heaven not to say a word about the matter when they reached the palace; and if she hadn't taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot. But Falada observed everything, and laid it all to heart.

The waiting-maid now mounted Falada, and the real bride the worse horse, and so they continued their journey till at length they arrived at the palace yard. There was great rejoicing over the arrival, and the Prince sprang forward to meet them, and taking the waiting-maid for his bride, he lifted her down from her horse and led her upstairs to the royal chamber. In the meantime the real Princess was left standing below in the courtyard. The old King, who was looking out of his window, beheld her in this plight, and it struck him how sweet and gentle, even beautiful, she looked. He went at once to the royal chamber, and asked the bride who it was she had brought with her and had left thus standing in the court below. "Oh!" replied the bride, "I brought her with me to keep me company on the journey; give the girl something to do, that she may not be idle." But the old King had no work for her, and couldn't think of anything; so he said, "I've a small boy who looks after the geese, she'd better help him." The youth's name was Curdken, and the real bride was made to assist him in herding geese.

Soon after this the false bride said to the Prince: "Dearest husband, I pray you grant me a favor." He answered: "That I will." "Then let the slaughterer cut off the head of the horse I rode here upon, because it behaved very badly on the journey." But the truth was she was afraid lest the horse should speak and tell how she had treated the Princess. She carried her point, and the faithful Falada was doomed to die. When the news came to the ears of the real Princess she went to the slaughterer, and secretly promised him a piece of gold if he would do something for her. There was in the town a large dark gate, through which she had to pass night and morning with the geese; would he "kindly hang up Falada's head there, that she might see it once again?" The slaughterer said he would do as she desired, chopped off the head, and nailed it firmly over the gateway.

Early next morning, as she and Curdken were driving their flock through the gate, she said as she passed under:

"Oh! Falada, 'tis you hang there";

and the head replied:

"'Tis you; pass under, Princess fair:
 If your mother only knew,
 Her heart would surely break in two."

Then she left the tower and drove the geese into a field. And when they had reached the common where the geese fed she sat down and unloosed her hair, which was of pure gold. Curdken loved to see it glitter in the sun, and wanted much to pull some hair out. Then she spoke:

"Wind, wind, gently sway,
 Blow Curdken's hat away;
 Let him chase o'er field and wold
 Till my locks of ruddy gold,
 Now astray and hanging down,
 Be combed and plaited in a crown."

Then a gust of wind blew Curdken's hat away, and he had to chase it over hill and dale. When he returned from the pursuit she had finished her combing and curling, and his chance of getting any hair was gone. Curdken was very angry, and wouldn't speak to her. So they herded the geese till evening and then went home.

The next morning, as they passed under the gate, the girl said:

"Oh! Falada, 'tis you hang there";

and the head replied:

"'Tis you; pass under, Princess fair:
 If your mother only knew,
 Her heart would surely break in two."

Then she went on her way till she came to the common, where she sat down and began to comb out her hair; then Curdken ran up to her and wanted to grasp some of the hair from her head, but she called out hastily:

"Wind, wind, gently sway,
 Blow Curdken's hat away;
 Let him chase o'er field and wold
 Till my locks of ruddy gold,
 Now astray and hanging down,
 Be combed and plaited in a crown."

Then a puff of wind came and blew Curdken's hat far away, so that he had to run after it; and when he returned she had long finished putting up her golden locks, and he couldn't get any hair; so they watched the geese till it was dark.

But that evening when they got home Curdken went to the old King, and said: "I refuse to herd geese any longer with that girl." "For what reason?" asked the old King. "Because she does nothing but annoy me all day long," replied Curdken; and he proceeded to relate all her iniquities, and said: "Every morning as we drive the flock through the dark gate she says to a horse's head that hangs on the wall:

"'Oh! Falada, 'tis you hang there';

and the head replies:

"''Tis you; pass under, Princess fair:
 If your mother only knew,
 Her heart would surely break in two.'"

And Curdken went on to tell what passed on the common where the geese fed, and how he had always to chase his hat.

The old King bade him go and drive forth his flock as usual next day; and when morning came he himself took up his position behind the dark gate, and heard how the goose-girl greeted Falada. Then he followed her through the field, and hid himself behind a bush on the common. He soon saw with his own eyes how the goose-boy and the goose-girl looked after the geese, and how after a time the maiden sat down and loosed her hair, that glittered like gold, and repeated:

"Wind, wind, gently sway,
 Blow Curdken's hat away;
 Let him chase o'er field and wold
 Till my locks of ruddy gold
 Now astray and hanging down,
 Be combed and plaited in a crown."

Then a gust of wind came and blew Curdken's hat away, so that he had to fly over hill and dale after it, and the girl in the meantime quietly combed and plaited her hair: all this the old King observed, and returned to the palace without anyone having noticed him. In the evening when the goose-girl came home he called her aside, and asked her why she behaved as she did. "I may not tell you why; how dare I confide my woes to anyone? for I swore not to by heaven, otherwise I should have lost my life." The old King begged her to tell him all, and left her no peace, but he could get nothing out of her. At last he said: "Well, if you won't tell me, confide your trouble to the iron stove there," and he went away. Then she crept to the stove, and began to sob and cry and to pour out her poor little heart, and said: "Here I sit, deserted by all the world, I who am a king's daughter, and a false waiting-maid has forced me to take off my own clothes, and has taken my place with my bridegroom, while I have to fulfill the lowly office of goose-girl.

"If my mother only knew
 Her heart would surely break in two."

But the old King stood outside at the stove chimney, and listened to her words. Then he entered the room again, and bidding her leave the stove, he ordered royal apparel to be put on her, in which she looked amazingly lovely. Then he summoned his son, and revealed to him that he had got the false bride, who was nothing but a waiting-maid, while the real one, in the guise of the ex-goose-girl, was standing at his side. The young King rejoiced from his heart when he saw her beauty and learned how good she was, and a great banquet was prepared, to which everyone was bidden. The bridegroom sat at the head of the table, the Princess on one side of him and the waiting-maid on the other; but she was so dazzled that she did not recognize the Princess in her glittering garments. Now when they had eaten and drunk, and were merry, the old King asked the waiting-maid to solve a knotty point for him. "What," said he, "should be done to a certain person who has deceived everyone?" and he proceeded to relate the whole story, ending up with, "Now what sentence should be passed?" Then the false bride answered: "She deserves to be put stark naked into a barrel lined with sharp nails, which should be dragged by two white horses up and down the street till she is dead."

"You are the person," said the King, "and you have passed sentence on yourself; and even so it shall be done to you." And when the sentence had been carried out the young King was married to his real bride, and both reigned over the kingdom in peace and happiness.[1]

[1] Grimm.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

TOADS AND DIAMONDS

THERE was once upon a time a widow who had two daughters. The eldest was so much like her in the face and humor that whoever looked upon the daughter saw the mother. They were both so disagreeable and so proud that there was no living with them.

The youngest, who was the very picture of her father for courtesy and sweetness of temper, was withal one of the most beautiful girls ever seen. As people naturally love their own likeness, this mother even doted on her eldest daughter and at the same time had a horrible aversion for the youngest--she made her eat in the kitchen and work continually.

Among other things, this poor child was forced twice a day to draw water above a mile and a-half off the house, and bring home a pitcher full of it. One day, as she was at this fountain, there came to her a poor woman, who begged of her to let her drink.

"Oh! ay, with all my heart, Goody," said this pretty little girl; and rinsing immediately the pitcher, she took up some water from the clearest place of the fountain, and gave it to her, holding up the pitcher all the while, that she might drink the easier.

The good woman, having drunk, said to her:

"You are so very pretty, my dear, so good and so mannerly, that I cannot help giving you a gift." For this was a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor country woman, to see how far the civility and good manners of this pretty girl would go. "I will give you for a gift," continued the Fairy, "that, at every word you speak, there shall come out of your mouth either a flower or a jewel."

When this pretty girl came home her mother scolded her for staying so long at the fountain.

"I beg your pardon, mamma," said the poor girl, "for not making more haste."

And in speaking these words there came out of her mouth two roses, two pearls, and two diamonds.

"What is it I see there?" said the mother, quite astonished. "I think I see pearls and diamonds come out of the girl's mouth! How happens this, child?"

This was the first time she had ever called her child.

The poor creature told her frankly all the matter, not without dropping out infinite numbers of diamonds.

"In good faith," cried the mother, "I must send my child thither. Come hither, Fanny; look what comes out of thy sister's mouth when she speaks. Wouldst not thou be glad, my dear, to have the same gift given thee? Thou hast nothing else to do but go and draw water out of the fountain, and when a certain poor woman asks you to let her drink, to give it to her very civilly."

"It would be a very fine sight indeed," said this ill-bred minx, "to see me go draw water."

"You shall go, hussy!" said the mother; "and this minute."

So away she went, but grumbling all the way, taking with her the best silver tankard in the house.

She was no sooner at the fountain than she saw coming out of the wood a lady most gloriously dressed, who came up to her, and asked to drink. This was, you must know, the very fairy who appeared to her sister, but now had taken the air and dress of a princess, to see how far this girl's rudeness would go.

"Am I come hither," said the proud, saucy one, "to serve you with water, pray? I suppose the silver tankard was brought purely for your ladyship, was it? However, you may drink out of it, if you have a fancy."

"You are not over and above mannerly," answered the Fairy, without putting herself in a passion. "Well, then, since you have so little breeding, and are so disobliging, I give you for a gift that at every word you speak there shall come out of your mouth a snake or a toad."

So soon as her mother saw her coming she cried out:

"Well, daughter?"

"Well, mother?" answered the pert hussy, throwing out of her mouth two vipers and two toads.

"Oh! mercy," cried the mother; "what is it I see? Oh! it is that wretch her sister who has occasioned all this; but she shall pay for it"; and immediately she ran to beat her. The poor child fled away from her, and went to hide herself in the forest, not far from thence.

The King's son, then on his return from hunting, met her, and seeing her so very pretty, asked her what she did there alone and why she cried.

"Alas! sir, my mamma has turned me out of doors."

The King's son, who saw five or six pearls and as many diamonds come out of her mouth, desired her to tell him how that happened. She thereupon told him the whole story; and so the King's son fell in love with her, and, considering himself that such a gift was worth more than any marriage portion, conducted her to the palace of the King his father, and there married her.

As for the sister, she made herself so much hated that her own mother turned her off; and the miserable wretch, having wandered about a good while without finding anybody to take her in, went to a corner of the wood, and there died.[1]

[1] Charles Perrault.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

PRINCE DARLING

ONCE upon a time there lived a king who was so just and kind that his subjects called him "the Good King." It happened one day, when he was out hunting, that a little white rabbit, which his dogs were chasing, sprang into his arms for shelter. The King stroked it gently, and said to it:

"Well, bunny, as you have come to me for protection I will see that nobody hurts you."

And he took it home to his palace and had it put in a pretty little house, with all sorts of nice things to eat.

That night, when he was alone in his room, a beautiful lady suddenly appeared before him; her long dress was as white as snow, and she had a crown of white roses upon her head. The good King was very much surprised to see her, for he knew his door had been tightly shut, and he could not think how she had got in. But she said to him:

"I am the Fairy Truth. I was passing through the wood when you were out hunting, and I wished to find out if you were really good, as everybody said you were, so I took the shape of a little rabbit and came to your arms for shelter, for I know that those who are merciful to animals will be still kinder to their fellow-men. If you had refused to help me I should have been certain that you were wicked. I thank you for the kindness you have shown me, which has made me your friend for ever. You have only to ask me for anything you want and I promise that I will give it to you."

"Madam," said the good King, "since you are a fairy you no doubt know all my wishes. I have but one son whom I love very dearly, that is why he is called Prince Darling. If you are really good enough to wish to do me a favor, I beg that you will become his friend."

"With all my heart," answered the Fairy. "I can make your son the handsomest prince in the world, or the richest, or the most powerful; choose whichever you like for him."

"I do not ask either of these things for my son," replied the good King; "but if you will make him the best of princes, I shall indeed be grateful to you. What good would it do him to be rich, or handsome, or to possess all the kingdoms of the world if he were wicked? You know well he would still be unhappy. Only a good man can be really contented."

"You are quite right," answered the Fairy; "but it is not in my power to make Prince Darling a good man unless he will help me; he must himself try hard to become good, I can only promise to give him good advice, to scold him for his faults, and to punish him if he will not correct and punish himself."

The good King was quite satisfied with this promise; and very soon afterward he died.

Prince Darling was very sorry, for he loved his father with all his heart, and he would willingly have given all his kingdoms and all his treasures of gold and silver if they could have kept the good King with him.  Two days afterward, when the Prince had gone to bed, the Fairy suddenly appeared to him and said:

"I promised your father that I would be your friend, and to keep my word I have come to bring you a present." At the same time she put a little gold ring upon his finger.

"Take great care of this ring," she said: "it is more precious than diamonds; every time you do a bad deed it will prick your finger, but if, in spite of its pricking, you go on in your own evil way, you will lose my friendship, and I shall become your enemy."

So saying, the Fairy disappeared, leaving Prince Darling very much astonished.

For some time he behaved so well that the ring never pricked him, and that made him so contented that his subjects called him Prince Darling the Happy.

One day, however, he went out hunting, but could get no sport, which put him in a very bad temper; it seemed to him as he rode along that his ring was pressing into his finger, but as it did not prick him he did not heed it. When he got home and went to his own room, his little dog Bibi ran to meet him, jumping round him with pleasure. "Get away!" said the Prince, quite gruffly. "I don't want you, you are in the way."

The poor little dog, who didn't understand this at all, pulled at his coat to make him at least look at her, and this made Prince Darling so cross that he gave her quite a hard kick.

Instantly his ring pricked him sharply, as if it had been a pin. He was very much surprised, and sat down in a corner of his room feeling quite ashamed of himself.

"I believe the Fairy is laughing at me," he thought. "Surely I can have done no great wrong in just kicking a tiresome animal! What is the good of my being ruler of a great kingdom if I am not even allowed to beat my own dog?"

"I am not making fun of you," said a voice, answering Prince Darling's thoughts. "You have committed three faults. First of all, you were out of temper because you could not have what you wanted, and you thought all men and animals were only made to do your pleasure; then you were really angry, which is very naughty indeed; and lastly, you were cruel to a poor little animal who did not in the least deserve to be ill-treated.

"I know you are far above a little dog, but if it were right and allowable that great people should ill-treat all who are beneath them, I might at this moment beat you, or kill you, for a fairy is greater than a man. The advantage of possessing a great empire is not to be able to do the evil that one desires, but to do all the good that one possibly can."

The Prince saw how naughty he had been, and promised to try and do better in future, but he did not keep his word. The fact was he had been brought up by a foolish nurse, who had spoiled him when he was little. If he wanted anything he only had to cry and fret and stamp his feet and she would give him whatever he asked for, which had made him self-willed; also she had told him from morning to night that he would one day be a king, and that kings were very happy, because everyone was bound to obey and respect them, and no one could prevent them from doing just as they liked.

When the Prince grew old enough to understand, he soon learned that there could be nothing worse than to be proud, obstinate, and conceited, and he had really tried to cure himself of these defects, but by that time all his faults had become habits; and a bad habit is very hard to get rid of. Not that he was naturally of a bad disposition; he was truly sorry when he had been naughty, and said:

"I am very unhappy to have to struggle against my anger and pride every day; if I had been punished for them when I was little they would not be such a trouble to me now."

His ring pricked him very often, and sometimes he left off what he was doing at once; but at other times he would not attend to it. Strangely enough, it gave him only a slight prick for a trifling fault, but when he was really naughty it made his finger actually bleed. At last he got tired of being constantly reminded, and wanted to be able to do as he liked, so he threw his ring aside, and thought himself the happiest of men to have got rid of its teasing pricks. He gave himself up to doing every foolish thing that occurred to him, until he became quite wicked and nobody could like him any longer.

One day, when the Prince was walking about, he saw a young girl who was so very pretty that he made up his mind at once that he would marry her. Her name was Celia, and she was as good as she was beautiful.

Prince Darling fancied that Celia would think herself only too happy if he offered to make her a great queen, but she said fearlessly:

"Sire, I am only a shepherdess, and a poor girl, but, nevertheless, I will not marry you."

"Do you dislike me?" asked the Prince, who was very much vexed at this answer.

"No, my Prince," replied Celia; "I cannot help thinking you very handsome; but what good would riches be to me, and all the grand dresses and splendid carriages that you would give me, if the bad deeds which I should see you do every day made me hate and despise you?"

The Prince was very angry at this speech, and commanded his officers to make Celia a prisoner and carry her off to his palace. All day long the remembrance of what she had said annoyed him, but as he loved her he could not make up his mind to have her punished.

One of the Prince's favorite companions was his foster-brother, whom he trusted entirely; but he was not at all a good man, and gave Prince Darling very bad advice, and encouraged him in all his evil ways. When he saw the Prince so downcast he asked what was the matter, and when he explained that he could not bear Celia's bad opinion of him, and was resolved to be a better man in order to please her, this evil adviser said to him:

"You are very kind to trouble yourself about this little girl; if I were you I would soon make her obey me. Remember that you are a king, and that it would be laughable to see you trying to please a shepherdess, who ought to be only too glad to be one of your slaves. Keep her in prison, and feed her on bread and water for a little while, and then, if she still says she will not marry you, have her head cut off, to teach other people that you mean to be obeyed. Why, if you cannot make a girl like that do as you wish, your subjects will soon forget that they are only put into this world for our pleasure."

"But," said Prince Darling, "would it not be a shame if I had an innocent girl put to death? For Celia has done nothing to deserve punishment."

"If people will not do as you tell them they ought to suffer for it," answered his foster-brother; "but even if it were unjust, you had better be accused of that by your subjects than that they should find out that they may insult and thwart you as often as they please."

In saying this he was touching a weak point in his brother's character; for the Prince's fear of losing any of his power made him at once abandon his first idea of trying to be good, and resolve to try and frighten the shepherdess into consenting to marry him.

His foster-brother, who wanted him to keep this resolution, invited three young courtiers, as wicked as himself to sup with the Prince, and they persuaded him to drink a great deal of wine, and continued to excite his anger against Celia by telling him that she had laughed at his love for her; until at last, in quite a furious rage, he rushed off to find her, declaring that if she still refused to marry him she should be sold as a slave the very next day.

But when he reached the room in which Celia had been locked up, he was greatly surprised to find that she was not in it, though he had the key in his own pocket all the time. His anger was terrible, and he vowed vengeance against whoever had helped her to escape. His bad friends, when they heard him, resolved to turn his wrath upon an old nobleman who had formerly been his tutor; and who still dared sometimes to tell the Prince of his faults, for he loved him as if he had been his own son. At first Prince Darling had thanked him, but after a time he grew impatient and thought it must be just mere love of fault-finding that made his old tutor blame him when everyone else was praising and flattering him. So he ordered him to retire from his Court, though he still, from time to time, spoke of him as a worthy man whom he respected, even if he no longer loved him. His unworthy friends feared that he might some day take it into his head to recall his old tutor, so they thought they now had a good opportunity of getting him banished for ever.

They reported to the Prince that Suilman, for that was the tutor's name, had boasted of having helped Celia to escape, and they bribed three men to say that Suilman himself had told them about it. The Prince, in great anger, sent his foster-brother with a number of soldiers to bring his tutor before him, in chains, like a criminal. After giving this order he went to his own room, but he had scarcely got into it when there was a clap of thunder which made the ground shake, and the Fairy Truth appeared suddenly before him.

"I promised your father," said she sternly, "to give you good advice, and to punish you if you refused to follow it. You have despised my counsel, and have gone your own evil way until you are only outwardly a man; really you are a monster--the horror of everyone who knows you. It is time that I should fulfil my promise, and begin your punishment. I condemn you to resemble the animals whose ways you have imitated. You have made yourself like the lion by your anger, and like the wolf by your greediness. Like a snake, you have ungratefully turned upon one who was a second father to you; your churlishness has made you like a bull. Therefore, in your new form, take the appearance of all these animals."

The Fairy had scarcely finished speaking when Prince Darling saw to his horror that her words were fulfilled. He had a lion's head, a bull's horns, a wolf's feet, and a snake's body. At the same instant he found himself in a great forest, beside a clear lake, in which he could see plainly the horrible creature he had become, and a voice said to him:

"Look carefully at the state to which your wickedness has brought you; believe me, your soul is a thousand times more hideous than your body."

Prince Darling recognized the voice of the Fairy Truth and turned in a fury to catch her and eat her up if he possibly could; but he saw no one, and the same voice went on:  "I laugh at your powerlessness and anger, and I intend to punish your pride by letting you fall into the hands of your own subjects."

The Prince began to think that the best thing he could do would be to get as far away from the lake as he could, then at least he would not be continually reminded of his terrible ugliness. So he ran toward the wood, but before he had gone many yards he fell into a deep pit which had been made to trap bears, and the hunters, who were hiding in a tree, leaped down, and secured him with several chains, and led him into the chief city of his own kingdom.

On the way, instead of recognizing that his own faults had brought this punishment upon him, he accused the Fairy of being the cause of all his misfortunes, and bit and tore at his chains furiously.

As they approached the town he saw that some great rejoicing was being held, and when the hunters asked what had happened they were told that the Prince, whose only pleasure it was to torment his people, had been found in his room, killed by a thunder-bolt (for that was what was supposed to have become of him). Four of his courtiers, those who had encouraged him in his wicked doings, had tried to seize the kingdom and divide it between them, but the people, who knew it was their bad counsels which had so changed the Prince, had cut off their heads, and had offered the crown to Suilman, whom the Prince had left in prison. This noble lord had just been crowned, and the deliverance of the kingdom was the cause of the rejoicing "For," they said, "he is a good and just man, and we shall once more enjoy peace and prosperity."

Prince Darling roared with anger when he heard this; but it was still worse for him when he reached the great square before his own palace. He saw Suilman seated upon a magnificent throne, and all the people crowded round, wishing him a long life that he might undo all the mischief done by his predecessor.

Presently Suilman made a sign with his hand that the people should be silent, and said: "I have accepted the crown you have offered me, but only that I may keep it for Prince Darling, who is not dead as you suppose; the Fairy has assured me that there is still hope that you may some day see him again, good and virtuous as he was when he first came to the throne. Alas!" he continued, "he was led away by flatterers. I knew his heart, and am certain that if it had not been for the bad influence of those who surrounded him he would have been a good king and a father to his people. We may hate his faults, but let us pity him and hope for his restoration. As for me, I would die gladly if that could bring back our Prince to reign justly and worthily once more."

These words went to Prince Darling's heart; he realized the true affection and faithfulness of his old tutor, and for the first time reproached himself for all his evil deeds; at the same instant he felt all his anger melting away, and he began quickly to think over his past life, and to admit that his punishment was not more than he had deserved. He left off tearing at the iron bars of the cage in which he was shut up, and became as gentle as a lamb.

The hunters who had caught him took him to a great menagerie, where he was chained up among all the other wild beasts, and he determined to show his sorrow for his past bad behavior by being gentle and obedient to the man who had to take care of him. Unfortunately, this man was very rough and unkind, and though the poor monster was quite quiet, he often beat him without rhyme or reason when he happened to be in a bad temper. One day when this keeper was asleep a tiger broke its chain, and flew at him to eat him up. Prince Darling, who saw what was going on, at first felt quite pleased to think that he should be delivered from his persecutor, but soon thought better of it and wished that he were free.

"I would return good for evil," he said to himself, "and save the unhappy man's life." He had hardly wished this when his iron cage flew open, and he rushed to the side of the keeper, who was awake and was defending himself against the tiger. When he saw the monster had got out he gave himself up for lost, but his fear was soon changed into joy, for the kind monster threw itself upon the tiger and very soon killed it, and then came and crouched at the feet of the man it had saved.

Overcome with gratitude, the keeper stooped to caress the strange creature which had done him such a great service; but suddenly a voice said in his ear:

"A good action should never go unrewarded," and at the same instant the monster disappeared, and he saw at his feet only a pretty little dog!

Prince Darling, delighted by the change, frisked about the keeper, showing his joy in every way he could, and the man, taking him up in his arms, carried him to the King, to whom he told the whole story.

The Queen said she would like to have this wonderful little dog, and the Prince would have been very happy in his new home if he could have forgotten that he was a man and a king. The Queen petted and took care of him, but she was so afraid that he would get too fat that she consulted the court physician, who said that he was to be fed only upon bread, and was not to have much even of that. So poor Prince Darling was terribly hungry all day long, but he was very patient about it.

One day, when they gave him his little loaf for breakfast, he thought he would like to eat it out in the garden; so he took it up in his mouth and trotted away toward a brook that he knew of a long way from the palace. But he was surprised to find that the brook was gone, and where it had been stood a great house that seemed to be built of gold and precious stones. Numbers of people splendidly dressed were going into it, and sounds of music and dancing and feasting could be heard from the windows.

But what seemed very strange was that those people who came out of the house were pale and thin, and their clothes were torn, and hanging in rags about them. Some fell down dead as they came out before they had time to get away; others crawled farther with great difficulty; while others again lay on the ground, fainting with hunger, and begged a morsel of bread from those who were going into the house, but they would not so much as look at the poor creatures.

Prince Darling went up to a young girl who was trying to eat a few blades of grass, she was so hungry. Touched with compassion, he said to himself:

"I am very hungry, but I shall not die of starvation before I get my dinner; if I give my breakfast to this poor creature perhaps I may save her life."

So he laid his piece of bread in the girl's hand, and saw her eat it up eagerly.

She soon seemed to be quite well again, and the Prince, delighted to have been able to help her, was thinking of going home to the palace, when he heard a great outcry, and, turning round, saw Celia, who was being carried against her will into the great house.

For the first time the Prince regretted that he was no longer the monster, then he would have been able to rescue Celia; now he could only bark feebly at the people who were carrying her off, and try to follow them, but they chased and kicked him away.

He determined not to quit the place till he knew what had become of Celia, and blamed himself for what had befallen her.

"Alas!" he said to himself, "I am furious with the people who are carrying Celia off, but isn't that exactly what I did myself, and if I had not been prevented did I not intend to be still more cruel to her?"

Here he was interrupted by a noise above his head--someone was opening a window, and he saw with delight that it was Celia herself, who came forward and threw out a plate of most delicious-looking food, then the window was shut again, and Prince Darling, who had not had anything to eat all day, thought he might as well take the opportunity of getting something. He ran forward to begin, but the young girl to whom he had given his bread gave a cry of terror and took him up in her arms, saying:

"Don't touch it, my poor little dog--that house is the palace of pleasure, and everything that comes out of it is poisoned!"

At the same moment a voice said:

"You see a good action always brings its reward," and the Prince found himself changed into a beautiful white dove. He remembered that white was the favorite color of the Fairy Truth, and began to hope that he might at last win back her favor. But just now his first care was for Celia, and rising into the air he flew round and round the house, until he saw an open window; but he searched through every room in vain. No trace of Celia was to be seen, and the Prince, in despair, determined to search through the world till he found her. He flew on and on for several days, till he came to a great desert, where he saw a cavern, and, to his delight, there sat Celia, sharing the simple breakfast of an old hermit.

Overjoyed to have found her, Prince Darling perched upon her shoulder, trying to express by his caresses how glad he was to see her again, and Celia, surprised and delighted by the tameness of this pretty white dove, stroked it softly, and said, though she never thought of its understanding her:

"I accept the gift that you make me of yourself, and I will love you always."

"Take care what you are saying, Celia," said the old hermit; "are you prepared to keep that promise?"

"Indeed, I hope so, my sweet shepherdess," cried the Prince, who was at that moment restored to his natural shape. "You promised to love me always; tell me that you really mean what you said, or I shall have to ask the Fairy to give me back the form of the dove which pleased you so much."

"You need not be afraid that she will change her mind," said the Fairy, throwing off the hermit's robe in which she had been disguised and appearing before them.

"Celia has loved you ever since she first saw you, only she would not tell you while you were so obstinate and naughty. Now you have repented and mean to be good you deserve to be happy, and so she may love you as much as she likes."

Celia and Prince Darling threw themselves at the Fairy's feet, and the Prince was never tired of thanking her for her kindness. Celia was delighted to hear how sorry he was for all his past follies and misdeeds, and promised to love him as long as she lived.

"Rise, my children," said the Fairy, "and I will transport you to the palace, and Prince Darling shall have back again the crown he forfeited by his bad behavior."

While she was speaking, they found themselves in Suilman's hall, and his delight was great at seeing his dear master once more. He gave up the throne joyfully to the Prince, and remained always the most faithful of his subjects.

Celia and Prince Darling reigned for many years, but he was so determined to govern worthily and to do his duty that his ring, which he took to wearing again, never once pricked him severely.[1]

[1] Cabinet des Fees.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

BLUE BEARD

There was a man who had fine houses, both in town and country, a deal of silver and gold plate, embroidered furniture, and coaches gilded all over with gold. But this man was so unlucky as to have a blue beard, which made him so frightfully ugly that all the women and girls ran away from him.

One of his neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were perfect beauties. He desired of her one of them in marriage, leaving to her choice which of the two she would bestow on him. They would neither of them have him, and sent him backward and forward from one another, not being able to bear the thoughts of marrying a man who had a blue beard, and what besides gave them disgust and aversion was his having already been married to several wives, and nobody ever knew what became of them.

Blue Beard, to engage their affection, took them, with the lady their mother and three or four ladies of their acquaintance, with other young people of the neighborhood, to one of his country seats, where they stayed a whole week.

There was nothing then to be seen but parties of pleasure, hunting, fishing, dancing, mirth, and feasting. Nobody went to bed, but all passed the night in rallying and joking with each other. In short, everything succeeded so well that the youngest daughter began to think the master of the house not to have a beard so very blue, and that he was a mighty civil gentleman.

As soon as they returned home, the marriage was concluded. About a month afterward, Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to take a country journey for six weeks at least, about affairs of very great consequence, desiring her to divert herself in his absence, to send for her friends and acquaintances, to carry them into the country, if she pleased, and to make good cheer wherever she was.

"Here," said he, "are the keys of the two great wardrobes, wherein I have my best furniture; these are of my silver and gold plate, which is not every day in use; these open my strong boxes, which hold my money, both gold and silver; these my caskets of jewels; and this is the master-key to all my apartments. But for this little one here, it is the key of the closet at the end of the great gallery on the ground floor. Open them all; go into all and every one of them, except that little closet, which I forbid you, and forbid it in such a manner that, if you happen to open it, there's nothing but what you may expect from my just anger and resentment."

She promised to observe, very exactly, whatever he had ordered; when he, after having embraced her, got into his coach and proceeded on his journey.

Her neighbors and good friends did not stay to be sent for by the new married lady, so great was their impatience to see all the rich furniture of her house, not daring to come while her husband was there, because of his blue beard, which frightened them. They ran through all the rooms, closets, and wardrobes, which were all so fine and rich that they seemed to surpass one another.

After that they went up into the two great rooms, where was the best and richest furniture; they could not sufficiently admire the number and beauty of the tapestry, beds, couches, cabinets, stands, tables, and looking-glasses, in which you might see yourself from head to foot; some of them were framed with glass, others with silver, plain and gilded, the finest and most magnificent ever were seen.

They ceased not to extol and envy the happiness of their friend, who in the meantime in no way diverted herself in looking upon all these rich things, because of the impatience she had to go and open the closet on the ground floor. She was so much pressed by her curiosity that, without considering that it was very uncivil to leave her company, she went down a little back staircase, and with such excessive haste that she had twice or thrice like to have broken her neck.

Coming to the closet-door, she made a stop for some time, thinking upon her husband's orders, and considering what unhappiness might attend her if she was disobedient; but the temptation was so strong she could not overcome it. She then took the little key, and opened it, trembling, but could not at first see anything plainly, because the windows were shut. After some moments she began to perceive that the floor was all covered over with clotted blood, on which lay the bodies of several dead women, ranged against the walls. (These were all the wives whom Blue Beard had married and murdered, one after another.) She thought she should have died for fear, and the key, which she pulled out of the lock, fell out of her hand.

After having somewhat recovered her surprise, she took up the key, locked the door, and went upstairs into her chamber to recover herself; but she could not, she was so much frightened. Having observed that the key of the closet was stained with blood, she tried two or three times to wipe it off, but the blood would not come out; in vain did she wash it, and even rub it with soap and sand; the blood still remained, for the key was magical and she could never make it quite clean; when the blood was gone off from one side, it came again on the other.

Blue Beard returned from his journey the same evening, and said he had received letters upon the road, informing him that the affair he went about was ended to his advantage. His wife did all she could to convince him she was extremely glad of his speedy return.

Next morning he asked her for the keys, which she gave him, but with such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened.

"What!" said he, "is not the key of my closet among the rest?"

"I must certainly have left it above upon the table," said she.

"Fail not to bring it to me presently," said Blue Beard.

After several goings backward and forward she was forced to bring him the key. Blue Beard, having very attentively considered it, said to his wife,

"How comes this blood upon the key?"

"I do not know," cried the poor woman, paler than death.

"You do not know!" replied Blue Beard. "I very well know. You were resolved to go into the closet, were you not? Mighty well, madam; you shall go in, and take your place among the ladies you saw there."

Upon this she threw herself at her husband's feet, and begged his pardon with all the signs of true repentance, vowing that she would never more be disobedient. She would have melted a rock, so beautiful and sorrowful was she; but Blue Beard had a heart harder than any rock!

"You must die, madam," said he, "and that presently."

"Since I must die," answered she (looking upon him with her eyes all bathed in tears), "give me some little time to say my prayers."

"I give you," replied Blue Beard, "half a quarter of an hour, but not one moment more."

When she was alone she called out to her sister, and said to her:

"Sister Anne" (for that was her name), "go up, I beg you, upon the top of the tower, and look if my brothers are not coming over; they promised me that they would come to-day, and if you see them, give them a sign to make haste."

Her sister Anne went up upon the top of the tower, and the poor afflicted wife cried out from time to time:

"Anne, sister Anne, do you see anyone coming?"

And sister Anne said:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which looks green."

In the meanwhile Blue Beard, holding a great sabre in his hand, cried out as loud as he could bawl to his wife:

"Come down instantly, or I shall come up to you."

"One moment longer, if you please," said his wife, and then she cried out very softly, "Anne, sister Anne, dost thou see anybody coming?"

And sister Anne answered:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which is green."

"Come down quickly," cried Blue Beard, "or I will come up to you."

"I am coming," answered his wife; and then she cried, "Anne, sister Anne, dost thou not see anyone coming?"

"I see," replied sister Anne, "a great dust, which comes on this side here."

"Are they my brothers?"

"Alas! no, my dear sister, I see a flock of sheep."

"Will you not come down?" cried Blue Beard

"One moment longer," said his wife, and then she cried out: "Anne, sister Anne, dost thou see nobody coming?"

"I see," said she, "two horsemen, but they are yet a great way off."

"God be praised," replied the poor wife joyfully; "they are my brothers; I will make them a sign, as well as I can, for them to make haste."

Then Blue Beard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house tremble. The distressed wife came down, and threw herself at his feet, all in tears, with her hair about her shoulders.

"This signifies nothing," says Blue Beard; "you must die"; then, taking hold of her hair with one hand, and lifting up the sword with the other, he was going to take off her head. The poor lady, turning about to him, and looking at him with dying eyes, desired him to afford her one little moment to recollect herself.

"No, no," said he, "recommend thyself to God," and was just ready to strike . . .

At this very instant there was such a loud knocking at the gate that Blue Beard made a sudden stop. The gate was opened, and presently entered two horsemen, who, drawing their swords, ran directly to Blue Beard. He knew them to be his wife's brothers, one a dragoon, the other a musketeer, so that he ran away immediately to save himself; but the two brothers pursued so close that they overtook him before he could get to the steps of the porch, when they ran their swords through his body and left him dead. The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and had not strength enough to rise and welcome her brothers.

Blue Beard had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his estate. She made use of one part of it to marry her sister Anne to a young gentleman who had loved her a long while; another part to buy captains commissions for her brothers, and the rest to marry herself to a very worthy gentleman, who made her forget the ill time she had passed with Blue Beard.[1]

[1] Charles Perrault.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

TRUSTY JOHN

Once upon a time there was an old king who was so ill that he thought to himself, "I am most likely on my death-bed." Then he said, "Send Trusty John to me." Now Trusty John was his favorite servant, and was so called because all his life he had served him so faithfully. When he approached the bed the King spake to him: "Most trusty John, I feel my end is drawing near, and I could face it without a care were it not for my son. He is still too young to decide everything for himself, and unless you promise me to instruct him in all he should know, and to be to him as a father, I shall not close my eyes in peace." Then Trusty John answered: "I will never desert him, and will serve him faithfully, even though it should cost me my life." Then the old King said: "Now I die comforted and in peace"; and then he went on: "After my death you must show him the whole castle, all the rooms and apartments and vaults, and all the treasures that lie in them; but you must not show him the last room in the long passage, where the picture of the Princess of the Golden Roof is hidden. When he beholds that picture he will fall violently in love with it and go off into a dead faint, and for her sake he will encounter many dangers; you must guard him from this." And when Trusty John had again given the King his hand upon it the old man became silent, laid his head on the pillow, and died.

When the old King had been carried to his grave Trusty John told the young King what he had promised his father on his death-bed, and added: "And I shall assuredly keep my word, and shall be faithful to you as I have been to him, even though it should cost me my life."

Now when the time of mourning was over, Trusty John said to him: "It is time you should see your inheritance. I will show you your ancestral castle." So he took him over everything, and let him see all the riches and splendid apartments, only the one room where the picture was he did not open. But the picture was placed so that if the door opened you gazed straight upon it, and it was so beautifully painted that you imagined it lived and moved, and that it was the most lovable and beautiful thing in the whole world. But the young King noticed that Trusty John always missed one door, and said: "Why do you never open this one for me?" "There is something inside that would appall you," he answered. But the King replied: "I have seen the whole castle, and shall find out what is in there"; and with these words he approached the door and wanted to force it open. But Trusty John held him back, and said: "I promised your father before his death that you shouldn't see what that room contains. It might bring both you and me to great grief." "Ah! no," answered the young King; "if I don't get in, it will be my certain destruction; I should have no peace night or day till I had seen what was in the room with my own eyes. Now I don't budge from the spot till you have opened the door."

Then Trusty John saw there was no way out of it, so with a heavy heart and many sighs he took the key from the big bunch. When he had opened the door he stepped in first, and thought to cover the likeness so that the King might not perceive it; but it was hopeless: the King stood on tiptoe and looked over his shoulder. And when he saw the picture of the maid, so beautiful and glittering with gold and precious stones, he fell swooning to the ground. Trusty John lifted him up, carried him to bed, and thought sorrowfully: "The curse has come upon us; gracious heaven! what will be the end of it all?" Then he poured wine down his throat till he came to himself again. The first words he spoke were: "Oh! who is the original of the beautiful picture?" "She is the Princess of the Golden Roof," answered Trusty John. Then the King continued: "My love for her is so great that if all the leaves on the trees had tongues they could not express it; my very life depends on my winning her. You are my most trusty John: you must stand by me."

The faithful servant pondered long how they were to set about the matter, for it was said to be difficult even to get into the presence of the Princess. At length he hit upon a plan, and spoke to the King: "All the things she has about her--tables, chairs, dishes, goblets, bowls, and all her household furniture--are made of gold. You have in your treasure five tons of gold; let the goldsmiths of your kingdom manufacture them into all manner of vases and vessels, into all sorts of birds and game and wonderful beasts; that will please her. We shall go to her with them and try our luck." The King summoned all his goldsmiths, and they had to work hard day and night, till at length the most magnificent things were completed. When a ship had been laden with them the faithful John disguised himself as a merchant, and the King had to do the same, so that they should be quite unrecognizable. And so they crossed the seas and journeyed till they reached the town where the Princess of the Golden Roof dwelt.

Trusty John made the King remain behind on the ship and await his return. "Perhaps," he said, "I may bring the Princess back with me, so see that everything is in order; let the gold ornaments be arranged and the whole ship decorated." Then he took a few of the gold things in his apron, went ashore, and proceeded straight to the palace. When he came to the courtyard he found a beautiful maiden standing at the well, drawing water with two golden pails. And as she was about to carry away the glittering water she turned round and saw the stranger, and asked him who he was. Then he replied: "I am a merchant," and opening his apron, he let her peep in. "Oh! my," she cried; "what beautiful gold wares!" she set down her pails, and examined one thing after the other. Then she said: "The Princess must see this, she has such a fancy for gold things that she will buy up all you have." She took him by the hand and let him into the palace, for she was the lady's maid.

When the Princess had seen the wares she was quite enchanted, and said: "They are all so beautifully made that I shall buy everything you have." But Trusty John said: "I am only the servant of a rich merchant, what I have here is nothing compared to what my master has on his ship; his merchandise is more artistic and costly than anything that has ever been made in gold before." She desired to have everything brought up to her, but he said: "There is such a quantity of things that it would take many days to bring them up, and they would take up so many rooms that you would have no space for them in your house." Thus her desire and curiosity were excited to such an extent that at last she said: "Take me to your ship; I shall go there myself and view your master's treasures."

Then Trusty John was quite delighted, and brought her to the ship; and the King, when he beheld her, saw that she was even more beautiful than her picture, and thought every moment that his heart would burst. She stepped on to the ship, and the King led her inside. But Trusty John remained behind with the steersman, and ordered the ship to push off. "Spread all sail, that we may fly on the ocean like a bird in the air." Meanwhile the King showed the Princess inside all his gold wares, every single bit of it--dishes, goblets, bowls, the birds and game, and all the wonderful beasts. Many hours passed thus, and she was so happy that she did not notice that the ship was sailing away. After she had seen the last thing she thanked the merchant and prepared to go home; but when she came to the ship's side she saw that they were on the high seas, far from land, and that the ship was speeding on its way under full canvas. "Oh!" she cried in terror, "I am deceived, carried away and betrayed into the power of a merchant; I would rather have died!" But the King seized her hand and spake: "I am no merchant, but a king of as high birth as yourself; and it was my great love for you that made me carry you off by stratagem. The first time I saw your likeness I fell to the ground in a swoon." When the Princess of the Golden Roof heard this she was comforted, and her heart went out to him, so that she willingly consented to become his wife.

Now it happened one day, while they were sailing on the high seas, that Trusty John, sitting on the forepart of the ship, fiddling away to himself, observed three ravens in the air flying toward him. He ceased playing, and listened to what they were saying, for he understood their language. The one croaked: "Ah, ha! so he's bringing the Princess of the Golden Roof home." "Yes," answered the second, "but he's not got her yet." "Yes, he has," spake the third, "for she's sitting beside him on the ship." Then number one began again and cried: "That'll not help him! When they reach the land a chestnut horse will dash forward to greet them: the King will wish to mount it, and if he does it will gallop away with him, and disappear into the air, and he will never see his bride again." "Is there no escape for him?" asked number two. "Oh! yes, if someone else mounts quickly and shoots the horse dead with the pistol that is sticking in the holster, then the young King is saved. But who's to do that? And anyone who knows it and tells him will be turned into stone from his feet to his knees." Then spake number two: "I know more than that: even if the horse is slain, the young King will still not keep his bride: when they enter the palace together they will find a ready-made wedding shirt in a cupboard, which looks as though it were woven of gold and silver, but is really made of nothing but sulphur and tar: when the King puts it on it will burn him to his marrow and bones." Number three asked: "Is there no way of escape, then?" "Oh! yes," answered number two: "If someone seizes the shirt with gloved hands and throws it into the fire, and lets it burn, then the young King is saved. But what's the good? Anyone knowing this and telling it will have half his body turned into stone, from his knees to his heart." Then number three spake: "I know yet more: though the bridal shirt too be burnt, the King hasn't even then secured his bride: when the dance is held after the wedding, and the young Queen is dancing, she will suddenly grow deadly white, and drop down like one dead, and unless some one lifts her up and draws three drops of blood from her right side, and spits them out again, she will die. But if anyone who knows this betrays it, he will be turned into stone from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet." When the ravens had thus conversed they fled onward, but Trusty John had taken it all in, and was sad and depressed from that time forward; for if he were silent to his master concerning what he had heard, he would involve him in misfortune; but if he took him into his confidence, then he himself would forfeit his life. At last he said: "I will stand by my master, though it should be my ruin."

Now when they drew near the land it came to pass just as the ravens had predicted, and a splendid chestnut horse bounded forward. "Capital!" said the King; "this animal shall carry me to my palace," and was about to mount, but Trusty John was too sharp for him, and, springing up quickly, seized the pistol out of the holster and shot the horse dead. Then the other servants of the King, who at no time looked favorably on Trusty John, cried out: "What a sin to kill the beautiful beast that was to bear the King to his palace!" But the King spake: "Silence! let him alone; he is ever my most trusty John. Who knows for what good end he may have done this thing?" So they went on their way and entered the palace, and there in the hall stood a cupboard in which lay the ready-made bridal shirt, looking for all the world as though it were made of gold and silver. The young King went toward it and was about to take hold of it, but Trusty John, pushing him aside, seized it with his gloved hands, threw it hastily into the fire, and let it burn The other servants commenced grumbling again, and said: "See, he's actually burning the King's bridal shirt." But the young King spoke: "Who knows for what good purpose he does it? Let him alone, he is my most trusty John." Then the wedding was celebrated, the dance began, and the bride joined in, but Trusty John watched her countenance carefully. Of a sudden she grew deadly white, and fell to the ground as if she were dead. He at once sprang hastily toward her, lifted her up, and bore her to a room, where he laid her down, and kneeling beside her he drew three drops of blood from her right side, and spat them out. She soon breathed again and came to herself; but the young King had watched the proceeding, and not knowing why Trusty John had acted as he did, he flew into a passion, and cried: "Throw him into prison." On the following morning sentence was passed on Trusty John, and he was condemned to be hanged. As he stood on the gallows he said: "Every one doomed to death has the right to speak once before he dies; and I too have that privilege?" "Yes," said the King, "it shall be granted to you." So Trusty John spoke: "I am unjustly condemned, for I have always been faithful to you"; and he proceeded to relate how he had heard the ravens' conversation on the sea, and how he had to do all he did in order to save his master. Then the King cried: "Oh! my most trusty John, pardon! pardon! Take him down." But as he uttered the last word Trusty John had fallen lifeless to the ground, and was a stone.

The King and Queen were in despair, and the King spake: "Ah! how ill have I rewarded such great fidelity!" and made them lift up the stone image and place it in his bedroom near his bed. As often as he looked at it he wept and said: "Oh! if I could only restore you to life, my most trusty John!" After a time the Queen gave birth to twins, two small sons, who throve and grew, and were a constant joy to her. One day when the Queen was at church, and the two children sat and played with their father, he gazed again full of grief on the stone statue, and sighing, wailed: "Oh, if I could only restore you to life, my most trusty John!" Suddenly the stone began to speak, and said: "Yes, you can restore me to life again if you are prepared to sacrifice what you hold most dear." And the King cried out: "All I have in the world will I give up for your sake." The stone continued: "If you cut off with your own hand the heads of your two children, and smear me with their blood, I shall come back to life." The King was aghast when he heard that he had himself to put his children to death; but when he thought of Trusty John's fidelity, and how he had even died for him, he drew his sword, and with his own hand cut the heads off his children. And when he had smeared the stone with their blood, life came back, and Trusty John stood once more safe and sound before him. He spake to the King: "Your loyalty shall be rewarded," and taking up the heads of the children, he placed them on their bodies, smeared the wounds with their blood, and in a minute they were all right again and jumping about as if nothing had happened. Then the King was full of joy, and when he saw the Queen coming, he hid Trusty John and the two children in a big cupboard. As she entered he said to her: "Did you pray in church?" "Yes," she answered, "but my thoughts dwelt constantly on Trusty John, and of what he has suffered for us." Then he spake: "Dear wife, we can restore him to life, but the price asked is our two little sons; we must sacrifice them." The Queen grew white and her heart sank, but she replied: "We owe it to him on account of his great fidelity." Then he rejoiced that she was of the same mind as he had been, and going forward he opened the cupboard, and fetched the two children and Trusty John out, saying: "God be praised! Trusty John is free once more, and we have our two small sons again." Then he related to her all that had passed, and they lived together happily ever afterward.[1]

[1] Grimm.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

THE BRAVE LITTLE TAILOR

One summer's day a little tailor sat on his table by the window in the best of spirits, and sewed for dear life. As he was sitting thus a peasant woman came down the street, calling out: "Good jam to sell, good jam to sell." This sounded sweetly in the tailor's ears; he put his frail little head out of the window, and shouted: "up here, my good woman, and you'll find a willing customer." The woman climbed up the three flights of stairs with her heavy basket to the tailor's room, and he made her spread out all the pots in a row before him. He examined them all, lifted them up and smelled them, and said at last: "This jam seems good, weigh me four ounces of it, my good woman; and even if it's a quarter of a pound I won't stick at it." The woman, who had hoped to find a good market, gave him what he wanted, but went away grumbling wrathfully. "Now heaven shall bless this jam for my use," cried the little tailor, "and it shall sustain and strengthen me." He fetched some bread out of a cupboard, cut a round off the loaf, and spread the jam on it. "That won't taste amiss," he said; "but I'll finish that waistcoat first before I take a bite." He placed the bread beside him, went on sewing, and out of the lightness of his heart kept on making his stitches bigger and bigger. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam rose to the ceiling, where heaps of flies were sitting, and attracted them to such an extent that they swarmed on to it in masses. "Ha! who invited you?" said the tailor, and chased the unwelcome guests away. But the flies, who didn't understand English, refused to let themselves be warned off, and returned again in even greater numbers. At last the little tailor, losing all patience, reached out of his chimney corner for a duster, and exclaiming: "Wait, and I'll give it to you," he beat them mercilessly with it. When he left off he counted the slain, and no fewer than seven lay dead before him with outstretched legs. "What a desperate fellow I am!" said he, and was filled with admiration at his own courage. "The whole town must know about this"; and in great haste the little tailor cut out a girdle, hemmed it, and embroidered on it in big letters, "Seven at a blow." "What did I say, the town? no, the whole world shall hear of it," he said; and his heart beat for joy as a lamb wags his tail.

The tailor strapped the girdle round his waist and set out into the wide world, for he considered his workroom too small a field for his prowess. Before he set forth he looked round about him, to see if there was anything in the house he could take with him on his journey; but he found nothing except an old cheese, which he took possession of. In front of the house he observed a bird that had been caught in some bushes, and this he put into his wallet beside the cheese. Then he went on his way merrily, and being light and agile he never felt tired. His way led up a hill, on the top of which sat a powerful giant, who was calmly surveying the landscape. The little tailor went up to him, and greeting him cheerfully said: "Good-day, friend; there you sit at your ease viewing the whole wide world. I'm just on my way there. What do you say to accompanying me?" The giant looked contemptuously at the tailor, and said: "What a poor wretched little creature you are!" "That's a good joke," answered the little tailor, and unbuttoning his coat he showed the giant the girdle. "There now, you can read what sort of a fellow I am." The giant read: "Seven at a blow"; and thinking they were human beings the tailor had slain, he conceived a certain respect for the little man. But first he thought he'd test him, so taking up a stone in his hand, he squeezed it till some drops of water ran out. "Now you do the same," said the giant, "if you really wish to be thought strong." "Is that all?" said the little tailor; "that's child's play to me," so he dived into his wallet, brought out the cheese, and pressed it till the whey ran out. "My squeeze was in sooth better than yours," said he. The giant didn't know what to say, for he couldn't have believed it of the little fellow. To prove him again, the giant lifted a stone and threw it so high that the eye could hardly follow it. "Now, my little pigmy, let me see you do that." "Well thrown," said the tailor; "but, after all, your stone fell to the ground; I'll throw one that won't come down at all." He dived into his wallet again, and grasping the bird in his hand, he threw it up into the air. The bird, enchanted to be free, soared up into the sky, and flew away never to return. "Well, what do you think of that little piece of business, friend?" asked the tailor. "You can certainly throw," said the giant; "but now let's see if you can carry a proper weight." With these words he led the tailor to a huge oak tree which had been felled to the ground, and said: "If you are strong enough, help me to carry the tree out of the wood." "Most certainly," said the little tailor: "just you take the trunk on your shoulder; I'll bear the top and branches, which is certainly the heaviest part." The giant laid the trunk on his shoulder, but the tailor sat at his ease among the branches; and the giant, who couldn't see what was going on behind him, had to carry the whole tree, and the little tailor into the bargain. There he sat behind in the best of spirits, lustily whistling a tune, as if carrying the tree were mere sport. The giant, after dragging the heavy weight for some time, could get on no further, and shouted out: "Hi! I must let the tree fall." The tailor sprang nimbly down, seized the tree with both hands as if he had carried it the whole way and said to the giant: "Fancy a big lout like you not being able to carry a tree!"

They continued to go on their way together, and as they passed by a cherry tree the giant grasped the top of it, where the ripest fruit hung, gave the branches into the tailor's hand, and bade him eat. But the little tailor was far too weak to hold the tree down, and when the giant let go the tree swung back into the air, bearing the little tailor with it. When he had fallen to the ground again without hurting himself, the giant said: "What! do you mean to tell me you haven't the strength to hold down a feeble twig?" "It wasn't strength that was wanting," replied the tailor; "do you think that would have been anything for a man who has killed seven at a blow? I jumped over the tree because the huntsmen are shooting among the branches near us. Do you do the like if you dare." The giant made an attempt, but couldn't get over the tree, and stuck fast in the branches, so that here too the little tailor had the better of him.

"Well, you're a fine fellow, after all," said the giant; "come and spend the night with us in our cave." The little tailor willingly consented to do this, and following his friend they went on till they reached a cave where several other giants were sitting round a fire, each holding a roast sheep in his hand, of which he was eating. The little tailor looked about him, and thought: "Yes, there's certainly more room to turn round in here than in my workshop." The giant showed him a bed and bade him lie down and have a good sleep. But the bed was too big for the little tailor, so he didn't get into it, but crept away into the corner. At midnight, when the giant thought the little tailor was fast asleep, he rose up, and taking his big iron walking-stick, he broke the bed in two with a blow, and thought he had made an end of the little grasshopper. At early dawn the giants went off to the wood, and quite forgot about the little tailor, till all of a sudden they met him trudging along in the most cheerful manner. The giants were terrified at the apparition, and, fearful lest he should slay them, they all took to their heels as fast as they could.

The little tailor continued to follow his nose, and after he had wandered about for a long time he came to the courtyard of a royal palace, and feeling tired he lay down on the grass and fell asleep. While he lay there the people came, and looking him all over read on his girdle: "Seven at a blow." "Oh!" they said, "what can this great hero of a hundred fights want in our peaceful land? He must indeed be a mighty man of valor." They went and told the King about him, and said what a weighty and useful man he'd be in time of war, and that it would be well to secure him at any price. This counsel pleased the King, and he sent one of his courtiers down to the little tailor, to offer him, when he awoke, a commission in their army. The messenger remained standing by the sleeper, and waited till he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes, when he tendered his proposal. "That's the very thing I came here for," he answered; "I am quite ready to enter the King's service." So he was received with all honor, and given a special house of his own to live in.

But the other officers resented the success of the little tailor, and wished him a thousand miles away. "What's to come of it all?" they asked each other; "if we quarrel with him, he'll let out at us, and at every blow seven will fall. There'll soon be an end of us." So they resolved to go in a body to the King, and all to send in their papers. "We are not made," they said, "to hold out against a man who kills seven at a blow." The King was grieved at the thought of losing all his faithful servants for the sake of one man, and he wished heartily that he had never set eyes on him, or that he could get rid of him. But he didn't dare to send him away, for he feared he might kill him along with his people, and place himself on the throne. He pondered long and deeply over the matter, and finally came to a conclusion. He sent to the tailor and told him that, seeing what a great and warlike hero he was, he was about to make him an offer. In a certain wood of his kingdom there dwelled two giants who did much harm; by the way they robbed, murdered, burned, and plundered everything about them; "no one could approach them without endangering his life. But if he could overcome and kill these two giants he should have his only daughter for a wife, and half his kingdom into the bargain; he might have a hundred horsemen, too, to back him up." "That's the very thing for a man like me," thought the little tailor; "one doesn't get the offer of a beautiful princess and half a kingdom every day." "Done with you," he answered; "I'll soon put an end to the giants. But I haven't the smallest need of your hundred horsemen; a fellow who can slay seven men at a blow need not be afraid of two."

The little tailor set out, and the hundred horsemen followed him. When he came to the outskirts of the wood he said to his followers: "You wait here, I'll manage the giants by myself"; and he went on into the wood, casting his sharp little eyes right and left about him. After a while he spied the two giants lying asleep under a tree, and snoring till the very boughs bent with the breeze. The little tailor lost no time in filling his wallet with stones, and then climbed up the tree under which they lay. When he got to about the middle of it he slipped along a branch till he sat just above the sleepers, when he threw down one stone after the other on the nearest giant. The giant felt nothing for a long time, but at last he woke up, and pinching his companion said: "What did you strike me for?" "I didn't strike you," said the other, "you must be dreaming." They both lay down to sleep again, and the tailor threw down a stone on the second giant, who sprang up and cried: "What's that for? Why did you throw something at me?" "I didn't throw anything," growled the first one. They wrangled on for a time, till, as both were tired, they made up the matter and fell asleep again. The little tailor began his game once more, and flung the largest stone he could find in his wallet with all his force, and hit the first giant on the chest. "This is too much of a good thing!" he yelled, and springing up like a madman, he knocked his companion against the tree till he trembled. He gave, however, as good as he got, and they became so enraged that they tore up trees and beat each other with them, till they both fell dead at once on the ground. Then the little tailor jumped down. "It's a mercy," he said, "that they didn't root up the tree on which I was perched, or I should have had to jump like a squirrel on to another, which, nimble though I am, would have been no easy job." He drew his sword and gave each of the giants a very fine thrust or two on the breast, and then went to the horsemen and said: "The deed is done, I've put an end to the two of them; but I assure you it has been no easy matter, for they even tore up trees in their struggle to defend themselves; but all that's of no use against one who slays seven men at a blow." "Weren't you wounded?" asked the horsemen.

"No fear," answered the tailor; "they haven't touched a hair of my head." But the horsemen wouldn't believe him till they rode into the wood and found the giants weltering in their blood, and the trees lying around, torn up by the roots.

The little tailor now demanded the promised reward from the King, but he repented his promise, and pondered once more how he could rid himself of the hero. "Before you obtain the hand of my daughter and half my kingdom," he said to him, "you must do another deed of valor. A unicorn is running about loose in the wood, and doing much mischief; you must first catch it." "I'm even less afraid of one unicorn than of two giants; seven at a blow, that's my motto." He took a piece of cord and an axe with him, went out to the wood, and again told the men who had been sent with him to remain outside. He hadn't to search long, for the unicorn soon passed by, and, on perceiving the tailor, dashed straight at him as though it were going to spike him on the spot. "Gently, gently," said he, "not so fast, my friend"; and standing still he waited till the beast was quite near, when he sprang lightly behind a tree; the unicorn ran with all its force against the tree, and rammed its horn so firmly into the trunk that it had no strength left to pull it out again, and was thus successfully captured. "Now I've caught my bird," said the tailor, and he came out from behind the tree, placed the cord round its neck first, then struck the horn out of the tree with his axe, and when everything was in order led the beast before the King.

Still the King didn't want to give him the promised reward and made a third demand. The tailor was to catch a wild boar for him that did a great deal of harm in the wood; and he might have the huntsmen to help him. "Willingly," said the tailor; "that's mere child's play." But he didn't take the huntsmen into the wood with him, and they were well enough pleased to remain behind, for the wild boar had often received them in a manner which did not make them desire its further acquaintance. As soon as the boar perceived the tailor it ran at him with foaming mouth and gleaming teeth, and tried to knock him down; but our alert little friend ran into a chapel that stood near, and got out of the window again with a jump. The boar pursued him into the church, but the tailor skipped round to the door, and closed it securely. So the raging beast was caught, for it was far too heavy and unwieldy to spring out of the window. The little tailor summoned the huntsmen together, that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes. Then the hero betook himself to the King, who was obliged now, whether he liked it or not, to keep his promise, and hand him over his daughter and half his kingdom. Had he known that no hero-warrior, but only a little tailor stood before him, it would have gone even more to his heart. So the wedding was celebrated with much splendor and little joy, and the tailor became a king.

After a time the Queen heard her husband saying one night in his sleep: "My lad, make that waistcoat and patch these trousers, or I'll box your ears." Thus she learned in what rank the young gentleman had been born, and next day she poured forth her woes to her father, and begged him to help her to get rid of a husband who was nothing more nor less than a tailor. The King comforted her, and said: "Leave your bedroom door open to-night, my servants shall stand outside, and when your husband is fast asleep they shall enter, bind him fast, and carry him on to a ship, which shall sail away out into the wide ocean." The Queen was well satisfied with the idea, but the armor-bearer, who had overheard everything, being much attached to his young master, went straight to him and revealed the whole plot. "I'll soon put a stop to the business," said the tailor. That night he and his wife went to bed at the usual time; and when she thought he had fallen asleep she got up, opened the door, and then lay down again. The little tailor, who had only pretended to be asleep, began to call out in a clear voice: "My lad, make that waistcoat and patch those trousers, or I'll box your ears. I have killed seven at a blow, slain two giants, led a unicorn captive, and caught a wild boar, then why should I be afraid of those men standing outside my door?" The men, when they heard the tailor saying these words, were so terrified that they fled as if pursued by a wild army, and didn't dare go near him again. So the little tailor was and remained a king all the days of his life.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f32]

A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT

CHAPTER I

My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire, and I was the third of four sons. He sent me to Cambridge at fourteen years old, and after studying there three years I was bound apprentice to Mr. Bates, a famous surgeon in London. There, as my father now and then sent me small sums of money, I spent them in learning navigation, and other arts useful to those who travel, as I always believed it would be some time or other my fortune to do.

Three years after my leaving him my good master, Mr. Bates, recommended me as ship's surgeon to the "Swallow," on which I voyaged three years. When I came back I settled in London, and, having taken part of a small house, I married Miss Mary Burton, daughter of Mr. Edmund Burton, hosier.

But my good master Bates died two years after; and as I had few friends my business began to fail, and I determined to go again to sea. After several voyages, I accepted an offer from Captain W. Pritchard, master of the "Antelope," who was making a voyage to the South Sea. We set sail from Bristol, May 4, 1699; and our voyage at first was very prosperous.

But in our passage to the East Indies we were driven by a violent storm to the north-west of Van Diemen's Land. Twelve of our crew died from hard labor and bad food, and the rest were in a very weak condition. On the 5th of November, the weather being very hazy, the seamen spied a rock within 120 yards of the ship; but the wind was so strong that we were driven straight upon it, and immediately split. Six of the crew, of whom I was one, letting down the boat, got clear of the ship, and we rowed about three leagues, till we could work no longer. We therefore trusted ourselves to the mercy of the waves; and in about half an hour the boat was upset by a sudden squall. What became of my companions in the boat, or those who escaped on the rock or were left in the vessel, I cannot tell; but I conclude they were all lost. For my part, I swam as fortune directed me, and was pushed forward by wind and tide; but when I was able to struggle no longer I found myself within my depth. By this time the storm was much abated. I reached the shore at last, about eight o'clock in the evening, and advanced nearly half a mile inland, but could not discover any sign of inhabitants. I was extremely tired, and with the heat of the weather I found myself much inclined to sleep. I lay down on the grass, which was very short and soft, and slept sounder than ever I did in my life for about nine hours. When I woke, it was just daylight. I attempted to rise, but could not; for as I happened to be lying on my back, I found my arms and legs were fastened on each side to the ground; and my hair, which was long and thick, tied down in the same manner. I could only look upward. The sun began to grow hot, and the light hurt my eyes. I heard a confused noise about me, but could see nothing except the sky. In a little time I felt something alive and moving on my left leg, which, advancing gently over my breast, came almost up to my chin, when, bending my eyes downward, I perceived it to be a human creature, not six inches high, with a bow and arrow in his hands, and a quiver at his back. In the meantime I felt at least forty more following the first. I was in the utmost astonishment, and roared so loud that they all ran back in a fright; and some of them were hurt with the falls they got by leaping from my sides upon the ground. However, they soon returned, and one of them, who ventured so far as to get a full sight of my face, lifted up his hands in admiration. I lay all this while in great uneasiness; but at length, struggling to get loose, I succeeded in breaking the strings that fastened my left arm to the ground; and at the same time, with a violent pull that gave me extreme pain, I a little loosened the strings that tied down my hair, so that I was just able to turn my head about two inches. But the creatures ran off a second time before I could seize them, whereupon there was a great shout, and in an instant I felt above a hundred arrows discharged on my left hand, which pricked me like so many needles. Moreover, they shot another flight into the air, of which some fell on my face, which I immediately covered with my left hand. When this shower of arrows was over I groaned with grief and pain, and then, striving again to get loose, they discharged another flight of arrows larger than the first, and some of them tried to stab me with their spears; but by good luck I had on a leather jacket, which they could not pierce. By this time I thought it most prudent to lie still till night, when, my left hand being already loose, I could easily free myself; and as for the inhabitants, I thought I might be a match for the greatest army they could bring against me if they were all of the same size as him I saw. When the people observed that I was quiet they discharged no more arrows, but by the noise I heard I knew that their number was increased; and about four yards from me, for more than an hour, there was a knocking, like people at work. Then, turning my head that way as well as the pegs and strings would let me, I saw a stage set up, about a foot and a half from the ground, with two or three ladders to mount it. From this, one of them, who seemed to be a person of quality, made me a long speech, of which I could not understand a word, though I could tell from his manner that he sometimes threatened me, and sometimes spoke with pity and kindness. I answered in few words, but in the most submissive manner; and, being almost famished with hunger, I could not help showing my impatience by putting my finger frequently to my mouth, to signify that I wanted food. He understood me very well, and, descending from the stage, commanded that several ladders should be set against my sides, on which more than a hundred of the inhabitants mounted, and walked toward my mouth with baskets full of food, which had been sent by the King's orders when he first received tidings of me. There were legs and shoulders like mutton but smaller than the wings of a lark. I ate them two or three at a mouthful, and took three loaves at a time. They supplied me as fast as they could, with a thousand marks of wonder at my appetite. I then made a sign that I wanted something to drink. They guessed that a small quantity would not suffice me, and, being a most ingenious people, they slung up one of their largest hogsheads, then rolled it toward my hand, and beat out the top. I drank it off at a draught, which I might well do, for it did not hold half a pint. They brought me a second hogshead, which I drank, and made signs for more; but they had none to give me. However, I could not wonder enough at the daring of these tiny mortals, who ventured to mount and walk upon my body, while one of my hands was free, without trembling at the very sight of so huge a creature as I must have seemed to them. After some time there appeared before me a person of high rank from his Imperial Majesty. His Excellency, having mounted my right leg, advanced to my face, with about a dozen of his retinue, and spoke about ten minutes, often pointing forward, which, as I afterward found, was toward the capital city, about half a mile distant, whither it was commanded by his Majesty that I should be conveyed. I made a sign with my hand that was loose, putting it to the other (but over his Excellency's head, for fear of hurting him or his train), to show that I desired my liberty. He seemed to understand me well enough, for he shook his head, though he made other signs to let me know that I should have meat and drink enough, and very good treatment. Then I once more thought of attempting to escape; but when I felt the smart of their arrows on my face and hands, which were all in blisters and observed likewise that the number of my enemies increased, I gave tokens to let them know that they might do with me what they pleased. Then they daubed my face and hands with a sweet-smelling ointment, which in a few minutes removed all the smarts of the arrows. The relief from pain and hunger made me drowsy, and presently I fell asleep. I slept about eight hours, as I was told afterward; and it was no wonder, for the physicians, by the Emperor's orders, had mingled a sleeping draught in the hogsheads of wine.

It seems that, when I was discovered sleeping on the ground after my landing, the Emperor had early notice of it, and determined that I should be tied in the manner I have related (which was done in the night, while I slept), that plenty of meat and drink should be sent me, and a machine prepared to carry me to the capital city. Five hundred carpenters and engineers were immediately set to work to prepare the engine. It was a frame of wood, raised three inches from the ground, about seven feet long and four wide, moving upon twenty-two wheels. But the difficulty was to place me on it. Eighty poles were erected for this purpose, and very strong cords fastened to bandages which the workmen had tied round my neck, hands, body, and legs. Nine hundred of the strongest men were employed to draw up these cords by pulleys fastened on the poles, and in less than three hours I was raised and slung into the engine, and there tied fast. Fifteen hundred of the Emperor's largest horses, each about four inches and a half high, were then employed to draw me toward the capital. But while all this was done I still lay in a deep sleep, and I did not wake till four hours after we began our journey.

The Emperor and all his Court came out to meet us when we reached the capital; but his great officials would not suffer his Majesty to risk his person by mounting on my body. Where the carriage stopped there stood an ancient temple, supposed to be the largest in the whole kingdom, and here it was determined that I should lodge. Near the great gate, through which I could easily creep, they fixed ninety-one chains, like those which hang to a lady's watch, which were locked to my left leg with thirty-six padlocks; and when the workmen found it was impossible for me to break loose, they cut all the strings that bound me. Then I rose up, feeling as melancholy as ever I did in my life. But the noise and astonishment of the people on seeing me rise and walk were inexpressible. The chains that held my left leg were about two yards long, and gave me not only freedom to walk backward and forward in a semicircle, but to creep in and lie at full length inside the temple. The Emperor, advancing toward me from among his courtiers, all most magnificently clad, surveyed me with great admiration, but kept beyond the length of my chain. He was taller by about the breadth of my nail than any of his Court, which alone was enough to strike awe into the beholders, and graceful and majestic. The better to behold him, I lay down on my side, so that my face was level with his, and he stood three yards off. However, I have had him since many times in my hand, and therefore cannot be deceived. His dress was very simple; but he wore a light helmet of gold, adorned with jewels and a plume. He held his sword drawn in his hand, to defend himself if I should break loose; it was almost three inches long, and the hilt was of gold, enriched with diamonds. His voice was shrill, but very clear. His Imperial Majesty spoke often to me, and I answered; but neither of us could understand a word.

CHAPTER II

After about two hours the Court retired, and I was left with a strong guard to keep away the crowd, some of whom had had the impudence to shoot their arrows at me as I sat by the door of my house. But the colonel ordered six of them to be seized and delivered bound into my hands. I put five of them into my coat pocket; and as to the sixth, I made a face as if I would eat him alive. The poor man screamed terribly, and the colonel and his officers were much distressed, especially when they saw me take out my penknife. But I soon set them at ease, for, cutting the strings he was bound with, I put him gently on the ground, and away he ran. I treated the rest in the same manner, taking them one by one out of my pocket; and I saw that both the soldiers and people were delighted at this mark of my kindness.

Toward night I got with some difficulty into my house, where I lay on the ground, as I had to do for a fortnight, till a bed was prepared for me out of six hundred beds of the ordinary measure.

Six hundred servants were appointed me, and three hundred tailors made me a suit of clothes. Moreover, six of his Majesty's greatest scholars were employed to teach me their language, so that soon I was able to converse after a fashion with the Emperor, who often honored me with his visits. The first words I learned were to desire that he would please to give me my liberty, which I every day repeated on my knees; but he answered that this must be a work of time, and that first I must swear a peace with him and his kingdom. He told me also that by the laws of the nation I must be searched by two of his officers, and that as this could not be done without my help, he trusted them in my hands, and whatever they took from me should be returned when I left the country. I took up the two officers, and put them into my coat pockets. These gentlemen, having pen, ink, and paper about them, made an exact list of everything they saw, which I afterward translated into English, and which ran as follows:

"In the right coat pocket of the great Man-Mountain we found only one great piece of coarse cloth, large enough to cover the carpet of your Majesty's chief room of state. In the left pocket we saw a huge silver chest, with a silver cover, which we could not lift. We desired that it should be opened, and one of us stepping into it found himself up to the mid-leg in a sort of dust, some of which flying into our faces sent us both into a fit of sneezing. In his right waistcoat pocket we found a number of white thin substances, folded one over another, about the size of three men, tied with a strong cable, and marked with black figures, which we humbly conceive to be writings. In the left there was a sort of engine, from the back of which extended twenty long poles, with which, we conjecture, the Man-Mountain combs his head. In the smaller pocket on the right side were several round flat pieces of white and red metal, of different sizes. Some of the white, which appeared to be silver, were so large and heavy that my comrade and I could hardly lift them. From another pocket hung a huge silver chain, with a wonderful kind of engine fastened to it, a globe half silver and half of some transparent metal; for on the transparent side we saw certain strange figures, and thought we could touch them till we found our fingers stopped by the shining substance. This engine made an incessant noise, like a water-mill, and we conjecture it is either some unknown animal, or the god he worships, but probably the latter, for he told us that he seldom did anything without consulting it.

"This is a list of what we found about the body of the Man-Mountain, who treated us with great civility."

I had one private pocket which escaped their search, containing a pair of spectacles and a small spy-glass, which, being of no consequence to the Emperor, I did not think myself bound in honor to discover.

CHAPTER III

My gentleness and good behavior gained so far on the Emperor and his Court, and, indeed, on the people in general, that I began to have hopes of getting my liberty in a short time. The natives came by degrees to be less fearful of danger from me. I would sometimes lie down and let five or six of them dance on my hand; and at last the boys and girls ventured to come and play at hide-and-seek in my hair.

The horses of the army and of the royal stables were no longer shy, having been daily led before me; and one of the Emperor's huntsmen, on a large courser, took my foot, shoe and all, which was indeed a prodigious leap. I amused the Emperor one day in a very extraordinary manner. I took nine sticks, and fixed them firmly in the ground in a square. Then I took four other sticks, and tied them parallel at each corner, about two feet from the ground. I fastened my handkerchief to the nine sticks that stood erect, and extended it on all sides till it was as tight as the top of a drum; and I desired the Emperor to let a troop of his best horse, twenty-four in number, come and exercise upon this plain. His majesty approved of the proposal, and I took them up one by one, with the proper officers to exercise them. As soon as they got into order they divided into two parties, discharged blunt arrows, drew their swords, fled and pursued, and, in short, showed the best military discipline I ever beheld. The parallel sticks secured them and their horses from falling off the stage, and the Emperor was so much delighted that he ordered this entertainment to be repeated several days, and persuaded the Empress herself to let me hold her in her chair within two yards of the stage, whence she could view the whole performance. Fortunately no accident happened, only once a fiery horse, pawing with his hoof, struck a hole in my handkerchief, and overthrew his rider and himself. But I immediately relieved them both, and covering the hole with one hand, I set down the troop with the other as I had taken them up. The horse that fell was strained in the shoulder; but the rider was not hurt, and I repaired my handkerchief as well as I could. However, I would not trust to the strength of it any more in such dangerous enterprises.

I had sent so many petitions for my liberty that his Majesty at length mentioned the matter in a full council, where it was opposed by none except Skyresh Bolgolam, admiral of the realm, who was pleased without any provocation to be my mortal enemy. However, he agreed at length, though he succeeded in himself drawing up the conditions on which I should be set free. After they were read I was requested to swear to perform them in the method prescribed by their laws, which was to hold my right foot in my left hand, and to place the middle finger of my right hand on the crown of my head, and my thumb on the top of my right ear. But I have made a translation of the conditions, which I here offer to the public:

"Golbaste Mamarem Evlame Gurdile Shefin Mully Ully Gue, Most Mighty Emperor of Lilliput, delight and terror of the universe, whose dominions extend to the ends of the globe, monarch of all monarchs, taller than the sons of men, whose feet press down to the center, and whose head strikes against the sun, at whose nod the princes of the earth shake their knees, pleasant as the spring, comfortable as the summer, fruitful as autumn, dreadful as winter: His Most Sublime Majesty proposeth to the Man-Mountain, lately arrived at our celestial dominions, the following articles, which by a solemn oath he shall be obliged to perform:

"First. The Man-Mountain shall not depart from our dominions without our license under the great seal.

"Second. He shall not presume to come into our metropolis without our express order, at which time the inhabitants shall have two hours' warning to keep within doors.

"Third. The said Man-Mountain shall confine his walks to our principal high roads, and not offer to walk or lie down in a meadow or field of corn.

"Fourth. As he walks the said roads he shall take the utmost care not to trample upon the bodies of any of our loving subjects, their horses or carriages, nor take any of our subjects into his hands without their own consent.

"Fifth. If an express requires extraordinary speed the Man-Mountain shall be obliged to carry in his pocket the messenger and horse a six days' journey, and return the said messenger (if so required) safe to our imperial presence.

"Sixth. He shall be our ally against our enemies in the island of Blefuscu, and do his utmost to destroy their fleet, which is now preparing to invade us.

"Lastly. Upon his solemn oath to observe all the above articles, the said Man-Mountain shall have a daily allowance of meat and drink sufficient for the support of 1,724 of our subjects, with free access to our royal person, and other marks of our favor. Given at our palace at Belfaburac, the twelfth day of the ninety-first moon of our reign."

I swore to these articles with great cheerfulness, whereupon my chains were immediately unlocked, and I was at full liberty.

One morning, about a fortnight after I had obtained my freedom, Reldresal, the Emperor's secretary for private affairs, came to my house, attended only by one servant. He ordered his coach to wait at a distance, and desired that I would give him an hour's audience. I offered to lie down that he might the more conveniently reach my ear; but he chose rather to let me hold him in my hand during our conversation. He began with compliments on my liberty, but he added that, save for the present state of things at Court, perhaps I might not have obtained it so soon. "For," he said, "however flourishing we may seem to foreigners, we are in danger of an invasion from the island of Blefuscu, which is the other great empire of the universe, almost as large and as powerful as this of his Majesty. For as to what we have heard you say, that there are other kingdoms in the world, inhabited by human creatures as large as yourself, our philosophers are very doubtful, and rather conjecture that you dropped from the moon, or one of the stars, because a hundred mortals of your size would soon destroy all the fruit and cattle of his Majesty's dominions. Besides, our histories of six thousand moons make no mention of any other regions than the two mighty empires of Lilliput and Blefuscu, which, as I was going to tell you, are engaged in a most obstinate war, which began in the following manner: It is allowed on all hands that the primitive way of breaking eggs was upon the larger end; but his present Majesty's grandfather, while he was a boy, going to eat an egg, and breaking it according to the ancient practice, happened to cut one of his fingers. Whereupon the Emperor, his father, made a law commanding all his subjects to break the smaller end of their eggs. The people so highly resented this law that there have been six rebellions raised on that account, wherein one emperor lost his life, and another his crown. It is calculated that eleven hundred persons have at different times suffered rather than break their eggs at the smaller end. But these rebels, the Bigendians, have found so much encouragement at the Emperor of Blefuscu's Court, to which they always fled for refuge, that a bloody war, as I said, has been carried on between the two empires for six-and-thirty moons; and now the Blefuscudians have equipped a large fleet, and are preparing to descend upon us. Therefore his Imperial Majesty, placing great confidence in your valor and strength, has commanded me to set the case before you."

I desired the secretary to present my humble duty to the Emperor, and to let him know that I was ready, at the risk of my life, to defend him against all invaders.

CHAPTER IV

It was not long before I communicated to his Majesty the plan I formed for seizing the enemy's whole fleet. The Empire of Blefuscu is an island parted from Lilliput only by a channel eight hundred yards wide. I consulted the most experienced seamen on the depth of the channel, and they told me that in the middle, at high water, it was seventy glumguffs (about six feet of European measure). I walked toward the coast, where, lying down behind a hillock, I took out my spy-glass, and viewed the enemy's fleet at anchor--about fifty men-of-war, and other vessels. I then came back to my house and gave orders for a great quantity of the strongest cables and bars of iron. The cable was about as thick as packthread, and the bars of the length and size of a knitting-needle. I trebled the cable to make it stronger, and for the same reason twisted three of the iron bars together, bending the ends into a hook. Having thus fixed fifty hooks to as many cables, I went back to the coast, and taking off my coat, shoes, and stockings, walked into the sea in my leather jacket about half an hour before high water. I waded with what haste I could, swimming in the middle about thirty yards, till I felt ground, and thus arrived at the fleet in less than half an hour. The enemy was so frightened when they saw me that they leaped out of their ships and swam ashore, where there could not be fewer than thirty thousand. Then, fastening a hook to the hole at the prow of each ship, I tied all the cords together at the end. Meanwhile the enemy discharged several thousand arrows, many of which stuck in my hands and face. My greatest fear was for my eyes, which I should have lost if I had not suddenly thought of the pair of spectacles which had escaped the Emperor's searchers. These I took out and fastened upon my nose, and thus armed went on with my work in spite of the arrows, many of which struck against the glasses of my spectacles, but without any other effect than slightly disturbing them. Then, taking the knot in my hand, I began to pull; but not a ship would stir, for they were too fast held by their anchors. Thus the boldest part of my enterprise remained. Letting go the cord, I resolutely cut with my knife the cables that fastened the anchors, receiving more than two hundred shots in my face and hands. Then I took up again the knotted end of the cables to which my hooks were tied, and with great ease drew fifty of the enemy's largest men-of-war after me.

When the Blefuscudians saw the fleet moving in order, and me pulling at the end, they set up a scream of grief and despair that it is impossible to describe. When I had got out of danger I stopped awhile to pick out the arrows that stuck in my hands and face, and rubbed on some of the same ointment that was given me at my arrival. I then took off my spectacles, and after waiting about an hour, till the tide was a little fallen, I waded on to the royal port of Lilliput.

The Emperor and his whole Court stood on the shore awaiting me. They saw the ships move forward in a large half-moon, but could not discern me, who, in the middle of the channel, was under water up to my neck. The Emperor concluded that I was drowned, and that the enemy's fleet was approaching in a hostile manner. But he was soon set at ease, for, the channel growing shallower every step I made, I came in a short time within hearing, and holding up the end of the cable by which the fleet was fastened, I cried in a loud voice: "Long live the most puissant Emperor of Lilliput!" The Prince received me at my landing with all possible joy, and made me a Nardal on the spot, which is the highest title of honor among them.

His Majesty desired that I would take some opportunity to bring all the rest of his enemy's ships into his ports, and seemed to think of nothing less than conquering the whole Empire of Blefuscu, and becoming the sole monarch of the world. But I plainly protested that I would never be the means of bringing a free and brave people into slavery; and though the wisest of the Ministers were of my opinion, my open refusal was so opposed to his Majesty's ambition that he could never forgive me. And from this time a plot began between himself and those of his Ministers who were my enemies, that nearly ended in my utter destruction.

About three weeks after this exploit there arrived an embassy from Blefuscu, with humble offers of peace, which was soon concluded, on terms very advantageous to our Emperor. There were six ambassadors, with a train of about five hundred persons, all very magnificent. Having been privately told that I had befriended them, they made me a visit, and paying me many compliments on my valor and generosity, invited me to their kingdom in the Emperor their master's name. I asked them to present my most humble respects to the Emperor their master, whose royal person I resolved to attend before I returned to my own country. Accordingly, the next time I had the honor to see our Emperor I desired his general permission to visit the Blefuscudian monarch. This he granted me, but in a very cold manner, of which I afterward learned the reason.

When I was just preparing to pay my respects to the Emperor of Blefuscu, a distinguished person at Court, to whom I had once done a great service, came to my house very privately at night, and without sending his name desired admission. I put his lordship into my coat pocket, and, giving orders to a trusty servant to admit no one, I fastened the door, placed my visitor on the table, and sat down by it. His lordship's face was full of trouble; and he asked me to hear him with patience, in a matter that highly concerned my honor and my life.

"You are aware," he said, "that Skyresh Bolgolam has been your mortal enemy ever since your arrival, and his hatred is increased since your great success against Blefuscu, by which his glory as admiral is obscured. This lord and others have accused you of treason, and several councils have been called in the most private manner on your account. Out of gratitude for your favors I procured information of the whole proceedings, venturing my head for your service, and this was the charge against you:

"First, that you, having brought the imperial fleet of Blefuscu into the royal port, were commanded by his Majesty to seize all the other ships, and put to death all the Bigendian exiles, and also all the people of the empire who would not immediately consent to break their eggs at the smaller end. And that, like a false traitor to his Most Serene Majesty, you excused yourself from the service on pretence of unwillingness to force the consciences and destroy the liberties and lives of an innocent people.

"Again, when ambassadors arrived from the Court of Blefuscu, like a false traitor, you aided and entertained them, though you knew them to be servants of a prince lately in open war against his Imperial Majesty.

"Moreover, you are now preparing, contrary to the duty of a faithful subject, to voyage to the Court of Blefuscu.

"In the debate on this charge," my friend continued, "his Majesty often urged the services you had done him, while the admiral and treasurer insisted that you should be put to a shameful death. But Reldresal, secretary for private affairs, who has always proved himself your friend suggested that if his Majesty would please to spare your life and only give orders to put out both your eyes, justice might in some measure be satisfied. At this Bolgolam rose up in fury, wondering how the secretary dared desire to preserve the life of a traitor; and the treasurer, pointing out the expense of keeping you, also urged your death. But his Majesty was graciously pleased to say that since the council thought the loss of your eyes too easy a punishment, some other might afterward be inflicted. And the secretary, humbly desiring to be heard again, said that as to expense your allowance might be gradually lessened, so that, for want of sufficient food you should grow weak and faint, and die in a few months, when his Majesty's subjects might cut your flesh from your bones and bury it, leaving the skeleton for the admiration of posterity.

"Thus, through the great friendship of the secretary the affair was arranged. It was commanded that the plan of starving you by degrees should be kept a secret; but the sentence of putting out your eyes was entered on the books. In three days your friend the secretary will come to your house and read the accusation before you, and point out the great mercy of his Majesty, that only condemns you to the loss of your eyes--which, he does not doubt, you will submit to humbly and gratefully. Twenty of his Majesty's surgeons will attend, to see the operation well performed, by discharging very sharp-pointed arrows into the balls of your eyes as you lie on the ground.

"I leave you," said my friend, "to consider what measures you will take; and, to escape suspicion, I must immediately return, as secretly as I came."

His lordship did so; and I remained alone, in great perplexity. At first I was bent on resistance; for while I had liberty I could easily with stones pelt the metropolis to pieces; but I soon rejected that idea with horror, remembering the oath I had made to the Emperor, and the favors I had received from him. At last, having his Majesty's leave to pay my respects to the Emperor of Blefuscu, I resolved to take this opportunity. Before the three days had passed I wrote a letter to my friend the secretary telling him of my resolution; and, without waiting for an answer, went to the coast, and entering the channel, between wading and swimming reached the port of Blefuscu, where the people, who had long expected me, led me to the capital.

His Majesty, with the royal family and great officers of the Court, came out to receive me, and they entertained me in a manner suited to the generosity of so great a prince. I did not, however, mention my disgrace with the Emperor of Lilliput, since I did not suppose that prince would disclose the secret while I was out of his power. But in this, it soon appeared, I was deceived.

CHAPTER V

Three days after my arrival, walking out of curiosity to the northeast coast of the island, I observed at some distance in the sea something that looked like a boat overturned. I pulled off my shoes and stockings, and wading two or three hundred yards, I plainly saw it to be a real boat, which I supposed might by some tempest have been driven from a ship. I returned immediately to the city for help, and after a huge amount of labor I managed to get my boat to the royal port of Blefuscu, where a great crowd of people appeared, full of wonder at sight of so prodigious a vessel. I told the Emperor that my good fortune had thrown this boat in my way to carry me to some place whence I might return to my native country, and begged his orders for materials to fit it up, and leave to depart--which, after many kindly speeches, he was pleased to grant.

Meanwhile the Emperor of Lilliput, uneasy at my long absence (but never imagining that I had the least notice of his designs), sent a person of rank to inform the Emperor of Blefuscu of my disgrace; this messenger had orders to represent the great mercy of his master, who was content to punish me with the loss of my eyes, and who expected that his brother of Blefuscu would have me sent back to Lilliput, bound hand and foot, to be punished as a traitor. The Emperor of Blefuscu answered with many civil excuses. He said that as for sending me bound, his brother knew it was impossible. Moreover, though I had taken away his fleet he was grateful to me for many good offices I had done him in making the peace. But that both their Majesties would soon be made easy; for I had found a prodigious vessel on the shore, able to carry me on the sea, which he had given orders to fit up; and he hoped in a few weeks both empires would be free from me.

With this answer the messenger returned to Lilliput; and I (though the monarch of Blefuscu secretly offered me his gracious protection if I would continue in his service) hastened my departure, resolving never more to put confidence in princes.

In about a month I was ready to take leave. The Emperor of Blefuscu, with the Empress and the royal family, came out of the palace; and I lay down on my face to kiss their hands, which they graciously gave me. His Majesty presented me with fifty purses of sprugs (their greatest gold coin) and his picture at full length, which I put immediately into one of my gloves, to keep it from being hurt. Many other ceremonies took place at my departure.

I stored the boat with meat and drink, and took six cows and two bulls alive, with as many ewes and rams, intending to carry them into my own country; and to feed them on board, I had a good bundle of hay and a bag of corn. I would gladly have taken a dozen of the natives; but this was a thing the Emperor would by no means permit, and besides a diligent search into my pockets, his Majesty pledged my honor not to carry away any of his subjects, though with their own consent and desire.

Having thus prepared all things as well as I was able, I set sail. When I had made twenty-four leagues, by my reckoning, from the island of Blefuscu, I saw a sail steering to the northeast. I hailed her, but could get no answer; yet I found I gained upon her, for the wind slackened; and in half an hour she spied me, and discharged a gun. I came up with her between five and six in the evening, Sept. 26, 1701; but my heart leaped within me to see her English colors. I put my cows and sheep into my coat pockets, and got on board with all my little cargo. The captain received me with kindness, and asked me to tell him what place I came from last; but at my answer he thought I was raving. However, I took my black cattle and sheep out of my pocket, which, after great astonishment, clearly convinced him.

We arrived in England on the 13th of April, 1702. I stayed two months with my wife and family; but my eager desire to see foreign countries would suffer me to remain no longer. However, while in England I made great profit by showing my cattle to persons of quality and others; and before I began my second voyage I sold them for 600L. I left 1500L. with my wife, and fixed her in a good house; then taking leave of her and my boy and girl, with tears on both sides, I sailed on board the "Adventure."[1]

[1] Swift.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f33]

THE PRINCESS ON THE GLASS HILL

Once upon a time there was a man who had a meadow which lay on the side of a mountain, and in the meadow there was a barn in which he stored hay. But there had not been much hay in the barn for the last two years, for every St. John's eve, when the grass was in the height of its vigor, it was all eaten clean up, just as if a whole flock of sheep had gnawed it down to the ground during the night. This happened once, and it happened twice, but then the man got tired of losing his crop, and said to his sons--he had three of them, and the third was called Cinderlad--that one of them must go and sleep in the barn on St. John's night, for it was absurd to let the grass be eaten up again, blade and stalk, as it had been the last two years, and the one who went to watch must keep a sharp look-out, the man said.

The eldest was quite willing to go to the meadow; he would watch the grass, he said, and he would do it so well that neither man, nor beast, nor even the devil himself should have any of it. So when evening came he went to the barn, and lay down to sleep, but when night was drawing near there was such a rumbling and such an earthquake that the walls and roof shook again, and the lad jumped up and took to his heels as fast as he could, and never even looked back, and the barn remained empty that year just as it had been for the last two.

Next St. John's eve the man again said that he could not go on in this way, losing all the grass in the outlying field year after year, and that one of his sons must just go there and watch it, and watch well too. So the next oldest son was willing to show what he could do. He went to the barn and lay down to sleep, as his brother had done; but when night was drawing near there was a great rumbling, and then an earthquake, which was even worse than that on the former St. John's night, and when the youth heard it he was terrified, and went off, running as if for a wager.

The year after, it was Cinderlad's turn, but when he made ready to go the others laughed at him, and mocked him. "Well, you are just the right one to watch the hay, you who have never learned anything but how to sit among the ashes and bake yourself!" said they. Cinderlad, however, did not trouble himself about what they said, but when evening drew near rambled away to the outlying field. When he got there he went into the barn and lay down, but in about an hour's time the rumbling and creaking began, and it was frightful to hear it. "Well, if it gets no worse than that, I can manage to stand it," thought Cinderlad. In a little time the creaking began again, and the earth quaked so that all the hay flew about the boy. "Oh! if it gets no worse than that I can manage to stand it," thought Cinderlad. But then came a third rumbling, and a third earthquake, so violent that the boy thought the walls and roof had fallen down, but when that was over everything suddenly grew as still as death around him. "I am pretty sure that it will come again," thought Cinderlad; but no, it did not. Everything was quiet, and everything stayed quiet, and when he had lain still a short time he heard something that sounded as if a horse were standing chewing just outside the barn door. He stole away to the door, which was ajar, to see what was there, and a horse was standing eating. It was so big, and fat, and fine a horse that Cinderlad had never seen one like it before, and a saddle and bridle lay upon it, and a complete suit of armor for a knight, and everything was of copper, and so bright that it shone again. "Ha, ha! it is thou who eatest up our hay then," thought the boy; "but I will stop that." So he made haste, and took out his steel for striking fire, and threw it over the horse, and then it had no power to stir from the spot, and became so tame that the boy could do what he liked with it. So he mounted it and rode away to a place which no one knew of but himself, and there he tied it up. When he went home again his brothers laughed and asked how he had got on.

"You didn't lie long in the barn, if even you have been so far as the field!" said they.

"I lay in the barn till the sun rose, but I saw nothing and heard nothing, not I," said the boy. "God knows what there was to make you two so frightened."

"Well, we shall soon see whether you have watched the meadow or not," answered the brothers, but when they got there the grass was all standing just as long and as thick as it had been the night before.

The next St. John's eve it was the same thing, once again: neither of the two brothers dared to go to the outlying field to watch the crop, but Cinderlad went, and everything happened exactly the same as on the previous St. John's eve: first there was a rumbling and an earthquake, and then there was another, and then a third: but all three earthquakes were much, very much more violent than they had been the year before. Then everything became still as death again, and the boy heard something chewing outside the barn door, so he stole as softly as he could to the door, which was slightly ajar, and again there was a horse standing close by the wall of the house, eating and chewing, and it was far larger and fatter than the first horse, and it had a saddle on its back, and a bridle was on it too, and a full suit of armor for a knight, all of bright silver, and as beautiful as anyone could wish to see. "Ho, ho!" thought the boy, "is it thou who eatest up our hay in the night? but I will put a stop to that." So he took out his steel for striking fire, and threw it over the horse's mane, and the beast stood there as quiet as a lamb. Then the boy rode this horse, too, away to the place where he kept the other, and then went home again.

"I suppose you will tell us that you have watched well again this time," said the brothers.

"Well, so I have," said Cinderlad. So they went there again, and there the grass was, standing as high and as thick as it had been before, but that did not make them any kinder to Cinderlad.

When the third St. John's night came neither of the two elder brothers dared to lie in the outlying barn to watch the grass, for they had been so heartily frightened the night that they had slept there that they could not get over it, but Cinderlad dared to go, and everything happened just the same as on the two former nights. There were three earthquakes, each worse than the other, and the last flung the boy from one wall of the barn to the other, but then everything suddenly became still as death. When he had lain quietly a short time, he heard something chewing outside the barn door; then he once more stole to the door, which was slightly ajar, and behold, a horse was standing just outside it, which was much larger and fatter than the two others he had caught. "Ho, ho! it is thou, then, who art eating up our hay this time," thought the boy; "but I will put a stop to that." So he pulled out his steel for striking fire, and threw it over the horse, and it stood as still as if it had been nailed to the field, and the boy could do just what he liked with it. Then he mounted it and rode away to the place where he had the two others, and then he went home again. Then the two brothers mocked him just as they had done before, and told him that they could see that he must have watched the grass very carefully that night, for he looked just as if he were walking in his sleep; but Cinderlad did not trouble himself about that, but just bade them go to the field and see. They did go, and this time too the grass was standing, looking as fine and as thick as ever.

The King of the country in which Cinderlad's father dwelt had a daughter whom he would give to no one who could not ride up to the top of the glass hill, for there was a high, high hill of glass, slippery as ice, and it was close to the King's palace. Upon the very top of this the King's daughter was to sit with three gold apples in her lap, and the man who could ride up and take the three golden apples should marry her, and have half the kingdom. The King had this proclaimed in every church in the whole kingdom, and in many other kingdoms too. The Princess was very beautiful, and all who saw her fell violently in love with her, even in spite of themselves. So it is needless to say that all the princes and knights were eager to win her, and half the kingdom besides, and that for this cause they came riding thither from the very end of the world, dressed so splendidly that their raiments gleamed in the sunshine, and riding on horses which seemed to dance as they went, and there was not one of these princes who did not think that he was sure to win the Princess.

When the day appointed by the King had come, there was such a host of knights and princes under the glass hill that they seemed to swarm, and everyone who could walk or even creep was there too, to see who won the King's daughter. Cinderlad's two brothers were there too, but they would not hear of letting him go with them, for he was so dirty and black with sleeping and grubbing among the ashes that they said everyone would laugh at them if they were seen in the company of such an oaf.

"Well, then, I will go all alone by myself," said Cinderlad.

When the two brothers got to the glass hill, all the princes and knights were trying to ride up it, and their horses were in a foam; but it was all in vain, for no sooner did the horses set foot upon the hill than down they slipped, and there was not one which could get even so much as a couple of yards up. Nor was that strange, for the hill was as smooth as a glass window-pane, and as steep as the side of a house. But they were all eager to win the King's daughter and half the kingdom, so they rode and they slipped, and thus it went on. At length all the horses were so tired that they could do no more, and so hot that the foam dropped from them and the riders were forced to give up the attempt. The King was just thinking that he would cause it to be proclaimed that the riding should begin afresh on the following day, when perhaps it might go better, when suddenly a knight came riding up on so fine a horse that no one had ever seen the like of it before, and the knight had armor of copper, and his bridle was of copper too, and all his accoutrements were so bright that they shone again. The other knights all called out to him that he might just as well spare himself the trouble of trying to ride up the glass hill, for it was of no use to try; but he did not heed them, and rode straight off to it, and went up as if it were nothing at all. Thus he rode for a long way--it may have been a third part of the way up--but when he had got so far he turned his horse round and rode down again. But the Princess thought that she had never yet seen so handsome a knight, and while he was riding up she was sitting thinking, "Oh! how I hope he may be able to come up to the top!" And when she saw that he was turning his horse back she threw one of the golden apples down after him, and it rolled into his shoe. But when he had come down from off the hill he rode away, and that so fast that no one knew what had become of him.

So all the princes and knights were bidden to present themselves before the King that night, so that he who had ridden so far up the glass hill might show the golden apple which the King's daughter had thrown down. But no one had anything to show. One knight presented himself after the other, and none could show the apple.

At night, too, Cinderlad's brothers came home again and had a long story to tell about riding up the glass hill. At first, they said, there was not one who was able to get even 50 much as one step up, but then came a knight who had armor of copper, and a bridle of copper, and his armor and trappings were so bright that they shone to a great distance, and it was something like a sight to see him riding. He rode one-third of the way up the glass hill, and he could easily have ridden the whole of it if he had liked; but he had turned back, for he had made up his mind that that was enough for once. "Oh! I should have liked to see him too, that I should," said Cinderlad, who was as usual sitting by the chimney among the cinders. "You, indeed!" said the brothers, "you look as if you were fit to be among such great lords, nasty beast that you are to sit there!"

Next day the brothers were for setting out again, and this time too Cinderlad begged them to let him go with them and see who rode; but no, they said he was not fit to do that, for he was much too ugly and dirty. "Well, well, then I will go all alone by myself," said Cinderlad. So the brothers went to the glass hill, and all the princes and knights began to ride again, and this time they had taken care to roughen the shoes of their horses; but that did not help them: they rode and they slipped as they had done the day before, and not one of them could get even so far as a yard up the hill. When they had tired out their horses, so that they could do no more, they again had to stop altogether. But just as the King was thinking that it would be well to proclaim that the riding should take place next day for the last time, so that they might have one more chance, he suddenly bethought himself that it would be well to wait a little longer to see if the knight in copper armor would come on this day too. But nothing was to be seen of him. Just as they were still looking for him, however, came a knight riding on a steed that was much, much finer than that which the knight in copper armor had ridden, and this knight had silver armor and a silver saddle and bridle, and all were so bright that they shone and glistened when he was a long way off. Again the other knights called to him, and said that he might just as well give up the attempt to ride up the glass hill, for it was useless to try; but the knight paid no heed to that, but rode straight away to the glass hill, and went still farther up than the knight in copper armor had gone; but when he had ridden two-thirds of the way up he turned his horse around, and rode down again. The Princess liked this knight still better than she had liked the other, and sat longing that he might be able to get up above, and when she saw him turning back she threw the second apple after him, and it rolled into his shoe, and as soon as he had got down the glass hill he rode away so fast that no one could see what had become of him.

In the evening, when everyone was to appear before the King and Princess, in order that he who had the golden apple might show it, one knight went in after the other, but none of them had a golden apple to show.

At night the two brothers went home as they had done the night before, and told how things had gone, and how everyone had ridden, but no one had been able to get up the hill. "But last of all," they said, "came one in silver armor, and he had a silver bridle on his horse, and a silver saddle, and oh, but he could ride! He took his horse two-thirds of the way up the hill, but then he turned back. He was a fine fellow," said the brothers, "and the Princess threw the second golden apple to him!"

"Oh, how I should have liked to see him too!" said Cinderlad.

"Oh, indeed! He was a little brighter than the ashes that you sit grubbing among, you dirty black creature!" said the brothers.

On the third day everything went just as on the former days. Cinderlad wanted to go with them to look at the riding, but the two brothers would not have him in their company, and when they got to the glass hill there was no one who could ride even so far as a yard up it, and everyone waited for the knight in silver armor, but he was neither to be seen nor heard of. At last, after a long time, came a knight riding upon a horse that was such a fine one, its equal had never yet been seen. The knight had golden armor, and the horse a golden saddle and bridle, and these were all so bright that they shone and dazzled everyone, even while the knight was still at a great distance. The other princes and knights were not able even to call to tell him how useless it was to try to ascend the hill, so amazed were they at sight of his magnificence. He rode straight away to the glass hill, and galloped up it as if it were no hill at all, so that the Princess had not even time to wish that he might get up the whole way. As soon as he had ridden to the top, he took the third golden apple from the lap of the Princess and then turned his horse about and rode down again, and vanished from their sight before anyone was able to say a word to him.

When the two brothers came home again at night they had much to tell of how the riding had gone off that day, and at last they told about the knight in the golden armor too. "He was a fine fellow, that was! Such another splendid knight is not to be found on earth!" said the brothers.

"Oh, how I should have liked to see him too!" said Cinderlad.

"Well, he shone nearly as brightly as the coal-heaps that thou art always lying raking among, dirty black creature that thou art!" said the brothers.

Next day all the knights and princes were to appear before the King and Princess--it had been too late for them to do it the night before--in order that he who had the golden apple might produce it. They all went in turn, first princes, and then knights, but none of them had a golden apple.

"But somebody must have it," said the King, "for with our own eyes we all saw a man ride up and take it." So he commanded that everyone in the kingdom should come to the palace, and see if he could show the apple. And one after the other they all came, but no one had the golden apple, and after a long, long time Cinderlad's two brothers came likewise. They were the last of all, so the King inquired of them if there was no one else in the kingdom left to come.

"Oh! yes, we have a brother," said the two, "but he never got the golden apple! He never left the cinder-heap on any of the three days."

"Never mind that," said the King; "as everyone else has come to the palace, let him come too."

So Cinderlad was forced to go to the King's palace.

"Hast thou the golden apple?" asked the King.

"Yes, here is the first, and here is the second, and here is the third, too," said Cinderlad, and he took all three apples out of his pocket, and with that drew off his sooty rags, and appeared there before them in his bright golden armor, which gleamed as he stood.

"Thou shalt have my daughter, and the half of my kingdom, and thou hast well earned both!" said the King. So there was a wedding, and Cinderlad got the King's daughter, and everyone made merry at the wedding, for all of them could make merry, though they could not ride up the glass hill, and if they have not left off their merry-making they must be at it still.[1]

[1] Asbjornsen and Moe.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f34]

THE STORY OF PRINCE AHMED AND THE FAIRY PARIBANOU

There was a sultan, who had three sons and a niece. The eldest of the Princes was called Houssain, the second Ali, the youngest Ahmed, and the Princess, his niece, Nouronnihar.  The Princess Nouronnihar was the daughter of the younger brother of the Sultan, who died, and left the Princess very young. The Sultan took upon himself the care of his daughter's education, and brought her up in his palace with the three Princes, proposing to marry her when she arrived at a proper age, and to contract an alliance with some neighboring prince by that means. But when he perceived that the three Princes, his sons, loved her passionately, he thought more seriously on that affair. He was very much concerned; the difficulty he foresaw was to make them agree, and that the two youngest should consent to yield her up to their elder brother. As he found them positively obstinate, he sent for them all together, and said to them: "Children, since for your good and quiet I have not been able to persuade you no longer to aspire to the Princess, your cousin, I think it would not be amiss if every one traveled separately into different countries, so that you might not meet each other. And, as you know I am very curious, and delight in everything that's singular, I promise my niece in marriage to him that shall bring me the most extraordinary rarity; and for the purchase of the rarity you shall go in search after, and the expense of traveling, I will give you every one a sum of money."

As the three Princes were always submissive and obedient to the Sultan's will, and each flattered himself fortune might prove favorable to him, they all consented to it. The Sultan paid them the money he promised them; and that very day they gave orders for the preparations for their travels, and took their leave of the Sultan, that they might be the more ready to go the next morning. Accordingly they all set out at the same gate of the city, each dressed like a merchant, attended by an officer of confidence dressed like a slave, and all well mounted and equipped. They went the first day's journey together, and lay all at an inn, where the road was divided into three different tracts. At night, when they were at supper together, they all agreed to travel for a year, and to meet at that inn; and that the first that came should wait for the rest; that, as they had all three taken their leave together of the Sultan, they might all return together. The next morning by break of day, after they had embraced and wished each other good success, they mounted their horses and took each a different road.

Prince Houssain, the eldest brother, arrived at Bisnagar, the capital of the kingdom of that name, and the residence of its king. He went and lodged at a khan appointed for foreign merchants; and, having learned that there were four principal divisions where merchants of all sorts sold their commodities, and kept shops, and in the midst of which stood the castle, or rather the King's palace, he went to one of these divisions the next day.

Prince Houssain could not view this division without admiration. It was large, and divided into several streets, all vaulted and shaded from the sun, and yet very light too. The shops were all of a size, and all that dealt in the same sort of goods lived in one street; as also the handicrafts-men, who kept their shops in the smaller streets.

The multitude of shops, stocked with all sorts of merchandise, as the finest linens from several parts of India, some painted in the most lively colors, and representing beasts, trees, and flowers; silks and brocades from Persia, China, and other places, porcelain both from Japan and China, and tapestries, surprised him so much that he knew not how to believe his own eyes; but when he came to the goldsmiths and jewelers he was in a kind of ecstacy to behold such prodigious quantities of wrought gold and silver, and was dazzled by the lustre of the pearls, diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and other jewels exposed to sale.

Another thing Prince Houssain particularly admired was the great number of rose-sellers who crowded the streets; for the Indians are so great lovers of that flower that no one will stir without a nosegay in his hand or a garland on his head; and the merchants keep them in pots in their shops, that the air is perfectly perfumed.

After Prince Houssain had run through that division, street by street, his thoughts fully employed on the riches he had seen, he was very much tired, which a merchant perceiving, civilly invited him to sit down in his shop, and he accepted; but had not been sat down long before he saw a crier pass by with a piece of tapestry on his arm, about six feet square, and cried at thirty purses. The Prince called to the crier, and asked to see the tapestry, which seemed to him to be valued at an exorbitant price, not only for the size of it, but the meanness of the stuff; when he had examined it well, he told the crier that he could not comprehend how so small a piece of tapestry, and of so indifferent appearance, could be set at so high a price.

The crier, who took him for a merchant, replied: "If this price seems so extravagant to you, your amazement will be greater when I tell you I have orders to raise it to forty purses, and not to part with it under." "Certainly," answered Prince Houssain, "it must have something very extraordinary in it, which I know nothing of." "You have guessed it, sir," replied the crier, "and will own it when you come to know that whoever sits on this piece of tapestry may be transported in an instant wherever he desires to be, without being stopped by any obstacle."

At this discourse of the crier the Prince of the Indies, considering that the principal motive of his travel was to carry the Sultan, his father, home some singular rarity, thought that he could not meet with any which could give him more satisfaction. "If the tapestry," said he to the crier, "has the virtue you assign it, I shall not think forty purses too much, but shall make you a present besides." "Sir," replied the crier, "I have told you the truth; and it is an easy matter to convince you of it, as soon as you have made the bargain for forty purses, on condition I show you the experiment. But, as I suppose you have not so much about you, and to receive them I must go with you to your khan, where you lodge, with the leave of the master of the shop, we will go into the back shop, and I will spread the tapestry; and when we have both sat down, and you have formed the wish to be transported into your apartment of the khan, if we are not transported thither it shall be no bargain, and you shall be at your liberty. As to your present, though I am paid for my trouble by the seller, I shall receive it as a favor, and be very much obliged to you, and thankful."

On the credit of the crier, the Prince accepted the conditions, and concluded the bargain; and, having got the master's leave, they went into his back shop; they both sat down on it, and as soon as the Prince formed his wish to be transported into his apartment at the khan he presently found himself and the crier there; and, as he wanted not a more sufficient proof of the virtue of the tapestry, he counted the crier out forty pieces of gold, and gave him twenty pieces for himself.

In this manner Prince Houssain became the possessor of the tapestry, and was overjoyed that at his arrival at Bisnagar he had found so rare a piece, which he never disputed would gain him the hand of Nouronnihar. In short, he looked upon it as an impossible thing for the Princes his younger brothers to meet with anything to be compared with it. It was in his power, by sitting on his tapestry, to be at the place of meeting that very day; but, as he was obliged to stay there for his brothers, as they had agreed, and as he was curious to see the King of Bisnagar and his Court, and to inform himself of the strength, laws, customs, and religion of the kingdom, he chose to make a longer abode there, and to spend some months in satisfying his curiosity.

Prince Houssain might have made a longer abode in the kingdom and Court of Bisnagar, but he was so eager to be nearer the Princess that, spreading the tapestry, he and the officer he had brought with him sat down, and as soon as he had formed his wish were transported to the inn at which he and his brothers were to meet, and where he passed for a merchant till they came.

Prince Ali, Prince Houssain's second brother, who designed to travel into Persia, took the road, having three days after he parted with his brothers joined a caravan, and after four days' travel arrived at Schiraz, which was the capital of the kingdom of Persia. Here he passed for a jeweler.

The next morning Prince Ali, who traveled only for his pleasure, and had brought nothing but just necessaries along with him, after he had dressed himself, took a walk into that part of the town which they at Schiraz called the bezestein.

Among all the criers who passed backward and forward with several sorts of goods, offering to sell them, he was not a little surprised to see one who held an ivory telescope in his hand of about a foot in length and the thickness of a man's thumb, and cried it at thirty purses. At first he thought the crier mad, and to inform himself went to a shop, and said to the merchant, who stood at the door: "Pray, sir, is not that man" (pointing to the crier who cried the ivory perspective glass at thirty purses) "mad? If he is not, I am very much deceived."

"Indeed, sir," answered the merchant, "he was in his right senses yesterday; I can assure you he is one of the ablest criers we have, and the most employed of any when anything valuable is to be sold. And if he cries the ivory perspective glass at thirty purses it must be worth as much or more, on some account or other. He will come by presently, and we will call him, and you shall be satisfied; in the meantime sit down on my sofa, and rest yourself."

Prince Ali accepted the merchant's obliging offer, and presently afterward the crier passed by. The merchant called him by his name, and, pointing to the Prince, said to him: "Tell that gentleman, who asked me if you were in your right senses, what you mean by crying that ivory perspective glass, which seems not to be worth much, at thirty purses. I should be very much amazed myself if I did not know you." The crier, addressing himself to Prince Ali, said: "Sir, you are not the only person that takes me for a madman on account of this perspective glass. You shall judge yourself whether I am or no, when I have told you its property and I hope you will value it at as high a price as those I have showed it to already, who had as bad an opinion of me as you.

"First, sir," pursued the crier, presenting the ivory pipe to the Prince, "observe that this pipe is furnished with a glass at both ends; and consider that by looking through one of them you see whatever object you wish to behold." "I am," said the Prince, "ready to make you all imaginable reparation for the scandal I have thrown on you if you will make the truth of what you advance appear," and as he had the ivory pipe in his hand, after he had looked at the two glasses he said: "Show me at which of these ends I must look that I may be satisfied." The crier presently showed him, and he looked through, wishing at the same time to see the Sultan his father, whom he immediately beheld in perfect health, set on his throne, in the midst of his council. Afterward, as there was nothing in the world so dear to him, after the Sultan, as the Princess Nouronnihar, he wished to see her; and saw her at her toilet laughing, and in a pleasant humor, with her women about her.

Prince Ali wanted no other proof to be persuaded that this perspective glass was the most valuable thing in the world, and believed that if he should neglect to purchase it he should never meet again with such another rarity. He therefore took the crier with him to the khan where he lodged, and counted him out the money, and received the perspective glass.

Prince Ali was overjoyed at his bargain, and persuaded himself that, as his brothers would not be able to meet with anything so rare and admirable, the Princess Nouronnihar would be the recompense of his fatigue and trouble; that he thought of nothing but visiting the Court of Persia incognito, and seeing whatever was curious in Schiraz and thereabouts, till the caravan with which he came returned back to the Indies. As soon as the caravan was ready to set out, the Prince joined them, and arrived happily without any accident or trouble, otherwise than the length of the journey and fatigue of traveling, at the place of rendezvous, where he found Prince Houssain, and both waited for Prince Ahmed.

Prince Ahmed, who took the road of Samarcand, the next day after his arrival there went, as his brothers had done, into the bezestein, where he had not walked long but heard a crier, who had an artificial apple in his hand, cry it at five and thirty purses; upon which he stopped the crier, and said to him: "Let me see that apple, and tell me what virtue and extraordinary properties it has, to be valued at so high a rate." "Sir," said the crier, giving it into his hand, "if you look at the outside of this apple, it is very worthless, but if you consider its properties, virtues, and the great use and benefit it is to mankind, you will say it is no price for it, and that he who possesses it is master of a great treasure. In short, it cures all sick persons of the most mortal diseases; and if the patient is dying it will recover him immediately and restore him to perfect health; and this is done after the easiest manner in the world, which is by the patient's smelling the apple."

"If I may believe you," replied Prince Ahmed, "the virtues of this apple are wonderful, and it is invaluable; but what ground have I, for all you tell me, to be persuaded of the truth of this matter?" "Sir," replied the crier, "the thing is known and averred by the whole city of Samarcand; but, without going any further, ask all these merchants you see here, and hear what they say. You will find several of them will tell you they had not been alive this day if they had not made use of this excellent remedy. And, that you may better comprehend what it is, I must tell you it is the fruit of the study and experiments of a celebrated philosopher of this city, who applied himself all his lifetime to the study and knowledge of the virtues of plants and minerals, and at last attained to this composition, by which he performed such surprising cures in this town as will never be forgot, but died suddenly himself, before he could apply his sovereign remedy, and left his wife and a great many young children behind him, in very indifferent circumstances, who, to support her family and provide for her children, is resolved to sell it."

While the crier informed Prince Ahmed of the virtues of the artificial apple, a great many persons came about them and confirmed what he said; and one among the rest said he had a friend dangerously ill, whose life was despaired of; and that was a favorable opportunity to show Prince Ahmed the experiment. Upon which Prince Ahmed told the crier he would give him forty purses if he cured the sick person.

The crier, who had orders to sell it at that price, said to Prince Ahmed: "Come, sir, let us go and make the experiment, and the apple shall be yours; and I can assure you that it will always have the desired effect." In short, the experiment succeeded, and the Prince, after he had counted out to the crier forty purses, and he had delivered the apple to him, waited patiently for the first caravan that should return to the Indies, and arrived in perfect health at the inn where the Princes Houssain and Ali waited for him.

When the Princes met they showed each other their treasures, and immediately saw through the glass that the Princess was dying. They then sat down on the carpet, wished themselves with her, and were there in a moment.

Prince Ahmed no sooner perceived himself in Nouronnihar's chamber than he rose off the tapestry, as did also the other two Princes, and went to the bedside, and put the apple under her nose; some moments after the Princess opened her eyes, and turned her head from one side to another, looking at the persons who stood about her; and then rose up in the bed, and asked to be dressed, just as if she had waked out of a sound sleep. Her women having presently informed her, in a manner that showed their joy, that she was obliged to the three Princes for the sudden recovery of her health, and particularly to Prince Ahmed, she immediately expressed her joy to see them, and thanked them all together, and afterward Prince Ahmed in particular.

While the Princess was dressing the Princes went to throw themselves at the Sultan their father's feet, and pay their respects to him. But when they came before him they found he had been informed of their arrival by the chief of the Princess's eunuchs, and by what means the Princess had been perfectly cured. The Sultan received and embraced them with the greatest joy, both for their return and the recovery of the Princess his niece, whom he loved as well as if she had been his own daughter, and who had been given over by the physicians. After the usual ceremonies and compliments the Princes presented each his rarity: Prince Houssain his tapestry, which he had taken care not to leave behind him in the Princess's chamber; Prince Ali his ivory perspective glass, and Prince Ahmed his artificial apple; and after each had commended their present, when they put it into the Sultan's hands, they begged of him to pronounce their fate, and declare to which of them he would give the Princess Nouronnihar for a wife, according to his promise.

The Sultan of the Indies, having heard, without interrupting them, all that the Princes could represent further about their rarities, and being well informed of what had happened in relation to the Princess Nouronnihar's cure, remained some time silent, as if he were thinking on what answer he should make. At last he broke the silence, and said to them: "I would declare for one of you children with a great deal of pleasure if I could do it with justice; but consider whether I can do it or no. 'Tis true, Prince Ahmed, the Princess my niece is obliged to your artificial apple for her cure; but I must ask you whether or no you could have been so serviceable to her if you had not known by Prince Ali's perspective glass the danger she was in, and if Prince Houssain's tapestry had not brought you so soon. Your perspective glass, Prince Ali, informed you and your brothers that you were like to lose the Princess your cousin, and there you must own a great obligation.

"You must also grant that that knowledge would have been of no service without the artificial apple and the tapestry. And lastly, Prince Houssain, the Princess would be very ungrateful if she should not show her acknowledgment of the service of your tapestry, which was so necessary a means toward her cure. But consider, it would have been of little use if you had not been acquainted with the Princess's illness by Prince Ali's glass, and Prince Ahmed had not applied his artificial apple. Therefore, as neither tapestry, ivory perspective glass, nor artificial apple have the least preference one before the other, but, on the contrary, there's a perfect equality, I cannot grant the Princess to ally one of you; and the only fruit you have reaped from your travels is the glory of having equally contributed to restore her health.

"If all this be true," added the Sultan, "you see that I must have recourse to other means to determine certainly in the choice I ought to make among you; and that, as there is time enough between this and night, I'll do it to-day. Go and get each of you a bow and arrow, and repair to the great plain, where they exercise horses. I'll soon come to you, and declare I will give the Princess Nouronnihar to him that shoots the farthest."

The three Princes had nothing to say against the decision of the Sultan. When they were out of his presence they each provided themselves with a bow and arrow, which they delivered to one of their officers, and went to the plain appointed, followed by a great concourse of people.

The Sultan did not make them wait long for him, and as soon as he arrived Prince Houssain, as the eldest, took his bow and arrow and shot first; Prince Ali shot next, and much beyond him; and Prince Ahmed last of all, but it so happened that nobody could see where his arrow fell; and, notwithstanding all the diligence that was used by himself and everybody else, it was not to be found far or near. And though it was believed that he shot the farthest, and that he therefore deserved the Princess Nouronnihar, it was, however, necessary that his arrow should be found to make the matter more evident and certain; and, notwithstanding his remonstrance, the Sultan judged in favor of Prince Ali, and gave orders for preparations to be made for the wedding, which was celebrated a few days after with great magnificence.

Prince Houssain would not honor the feast with his presence. In short, his grief was so violent and insupportable that he left the Court, and renounced all right of succession to the crown, to turn hermit.

Prince Ahmed, too, did not come to Prince Ali's and the Princess Nouronnihar's wedding any more than his brother Houssain, but did not renounce the world as he had done. But, as he could not imagine what had become of his arrow, he stole away from his attendants and resolved to search after it, that he might not have anything to reproach himself with. With this intent he went to the place where the Princes Houssain's and Ali's were gathered up, and, going straight forward from there, looking carefully on both sides of him, he went so far that at last he began to think his labor was all in vain; but yet he could not help going forward till he came to some steep craggy rocks, which were bounds to his journey, and were situated in a barren country, about four leagues distant from where he set out.

II

When Prince Ahmed came pretty nigh to these rocks he perceived an arrow, which he gathered up, looked earnestly at it, and was in the greatest astonishment to find it was the same he shot away. "Certainly," said he to himself, "neither I nor any man living could shoot an arrow so far," and, finding it laid flat, not sticking into the ground, he judged that it rebounded against the rock. "There must be some mystery in this," said he to himself again, "and it may be advantageous to me. Perhaps fortune, to make me amends for depriving me of what I thought the greatest happiness, may have reserved a greater blessing for my comfort."

As these rocks were full of caves and some of those caves were deep, the Prince entered into one, and, looking about, cast his eyes on an iron door, which seemed to have no lock, but he feared it was fastened. However, thrusting against it, it opened, and discovered an easy descent, but no steps, which he walked down with his arrow in his hand. At first he thought he was going into a dark, obscure place, but presently a quite different light succeeded that which he came out of, and, entering into a large, spacious place, at about fifty or sixty paces distant, he perceived a magnificent palace, which he had not then time enough to look at. At the same time a lady of majestic port and air advanced as far as the porch, attended by a large troop of ladies, so finely dressed and beautiful that it was difficult to distinguish which was the mistress.

As soon as Prince Ahmed perceived the lady, he made all imaginable haste to go and pay his respects; and the lady, on her part, seeing him coming, prevented him from addressing his discourse to her first, but said to him: "Come nearer, Prince Ahmed, you are welcome."

It was no small surprise to the Prince to hear himself named in a place he had never heard of, though so nigh to his father's capital, and he could not comprehend how he should be known to a lady who was a stranger to him. At last he returned the lady's compliment by throwing himself at her feet, and, rising up again, said to her:

"Madam, I return you a thousand thanks for the assurance you give me of a welcome to a place where I believed my imprudent curiosity had made me penetrate too far. But, madam, may I, without being guilty of ill manners, dare to ask you by what adventure you know me? and how you, who live in the same neighborhood with me, should be so great a stranger to me?"

"Prince," said the lady, "let us go into the hall, there I will gratify you in your request."

After these words the lady led Prince Ahmed into the hall. Then she sat down on a sofa, and when the Prince by her entreaty had done the same she said: "You are surprised, you say, that I should know you and not be known by you, but you will be no longer surprised when I inform you who I am. You are undoubtedly sensible that your religion teaches you to believe that the world is inhabited by genies as well as men. I am the daughter of one of the most powerful and distinguished genies, and my name is Paribanou. The only thing that I have to add is, that you seemed to me worthy of a more happy fate than that of possessing the Princess Nouronnihar; and, that you might attain to it, I was present when you drew your arrow, and foresaw it would not go beyond Prince Houssain's. I took it in the air, and gave it the necessary motion to strike against the rocks near which you found it, and I tell you that it lies in your power to make use of the favorable opportunity which presents itself to make you happy."

As the Fairy Paribanou pronounced these last words with a different tone, and looked, at the same time, tenderly upon Prince Ahmed, with a modest blush on her cheeks, it was no hard matter for the Prince to comprehend what happiness she meant. He presently considered that the Princess Nouronnihar could never be his and that the Fairy Paribanou excelled her infinitely in beauty, agreeableness, wit, and, as much as he could conjecture by the magnificence of the palace, in immense riches. He blessed the moment that he thought of seeking after his arrow a second time, and, yielding to his love, "Madam," replied he, "should I all my life have the happiness of being your slave, and the admirer of the many charms which ravish my soul, I should think myself the most blessed of men. Pardon in me the boldness which inspires me to ask this favor, and don't refuse to admit me into your Court, a prince who is entirely devoted to you."

"Prince," answered the Fairy, "will you not pledge your faith to me, as well as I give mine to you?" "Yes, madam," replied the Prince, in an ecstacy of joy; "what can I do better, and with greater pleasure? Yes, my sultaness, my queen, I'll give you my heart without the least reserve." "Then," answered the Fairy, "you are my husband, and I am your wife. But, as I suppose," pursued she, "that you have eaten nothing to-day, a slight repast shall be served up for you, while preparations are making for our wedding feast at night, and then I will show you the apartments of my palace, and you shall judge if this hall is not the meanest part of it."

Some of the Fairy's women, who came into the hall with them, and guessed her intentions, went immediately out, and returned presently with some excellent meats and wines.

When Prince Ahmed had ate and drunk as much as he cared for, the Fairy Paribanou carried him through all the apartments, where he saw diamonds, rubies, emeralds and all sorts of fine jewels, intermixed with pearls, agate, jasper, porphyry, and all sorts of the most precious marbles. But, not to mention the richness of the furniture, which was inestimable, there was such a profuseness throughout that the Prince, instead of ever having seen anything like it, owned that he could not have imagined that there was anything in the world that could come up to it. "Prince," said the Fairy, "if you admire my palace so much, which, indeed, is very beautiful, what would you say to the palaces of the chief of our genies, which are much more beautiful, spacious, and magnificent? I could also charm you with my gardens, but we will let that alone till another time. Night draws near, and it will be time to go to supper."

The next hall which the Fairy led the Prince into, and where the cloth was laid for the feast, was the last apartment the Prince had not seen, and not in the least inferior to the others. At his entrance into it he admired the infinite number of sconces of wax candles perfumed with amber, the multitude of which, instead of being confused, were placed with so just a symmetry as formed an agreeable and pleasant sight. A large side table was set out with all sorts of gold plate, so finely wrought that the workmanship was much more valuable than the weight of the gold. Several choruses of beautiful women richly dressed, and whose voices were ravishing, began a concert, accompanied with all sorts of the most harmonious instruments; and when they were set down at table the Fairy Paribanou took care to help Prince Ahmed to the most delicate meats, which she named as she invited him to eat of them, and which the Prince found to be so exquisitely nice that he commended them with exaggeration, and said that the entertainment far surpassed those of man. He found also the same excellence in the wines, which neither he nor the Fairy tasted of till the dessert was served up, which consisted of the choicest sweetmeats and fruits.

The wedding feast was continued the next day, or, rather, the days following the celebration were a continual feast.

At the end of six months Prince Ahmed, who always loved and honored the Sultan his father, conceived a great desire to know how he was, and that desire could not be satisfied without his going to see; he told the Fairy of it, and desired she would give him leave.

"Prince," said she, "go when you please. But first, don't take it amiss that I give you some advice how you shall behave yourself where you are going. First, I don't think it proper for you to tell the Sultan your father of our marriage, nor of my quality, nor the place where you have been. Beg of him to be satisfied in knowing you are happy, and desire no more; and let him know that the sole end of your visit is to make him easy, and inform him of your fate."

She appointed twenty gentlemen, well mounted and equipped, to attend him. When all was ready Prince Ahmed took his leave of the Fairy, embraced her, and renewed his promise to return soon. Then his horse, which was most finely caparisoned, and was as beautiful a creature as any in the Sultan of Indies' stables, was led to him, and he mounted him with an extraordinary grace; and, after he had bid her a last adieu, set forward on his journey.

As it was not a great way to his father's capital, Prince Ahmed soon arrived there. The people, glad to see him again, received him with acclamations of joy, and followed him in crowds to the Sultan's apartment. The Sultan received and embraced him with great joy, complaining at the same time, with a fatherly tenderness, of the affliction his long absence had been to him, which he said was the more grievous for that, fortune having decided in favor of Prince Ali his brother, he was afraid he might have committed some rash action.

The Prince told a story of his adventures without speaking of the Fairy, whom he said that he must not mention, and ended: "The only favor I ask of your Majesty is to give me leave to come often and pay you my respects, and to know how you do."

"Son," answered the Sultan of the Indies, "I cannot refuse you the leave you ask me; but I should much rather you would resolve to stay with me; at least tell me where I may send to you if you should fail to come, or when I may think your presence necessary." "Sir," replied Prince Ahmed, "what your Majesty asks of me is part of the mystery I spoke to your Majesty of. I beg of you to give me leave to remain silent on this head, for I shall come so frequently that I am afraid that I shall sooner be thought troublesome than be accused of negligence in my duty."

The Sultan of the Indies pressed Prince Ahmed no more, but said to him: "Son, I penetrate no farther into your secrets, but leave you at your liberty; but can tell you that you could not do me a greater pleasure than to come, and by your presence restore to me the joy I have not felt this long time, and that you shall always be welcome when you come, without interrupting your business or pleasure."

Prince Ahmed stayed but three days at the Sultan his father's Court, and the fourth returned to the Fairy Paribanou, who did not expect him so soon.

A month after Prince Ahmed's return from paying a visit to his father, as the Fairy Paribanou had observed that the Prince, since the time that he gave her an account of his journey, his discourse with his father, and the leave he asked to go and see him often, had never talked of the Sultan, as if there had been no such person in the world, whereas before he was always speaking of him, she thought he forebore on her account; therefore she took an opportunity to say to him one day: "Prince, tell me, have you forgot the Sultan your father? Don't you remember the promise you made to go and see him often? For my part I have not forgot what you told me at your return, and so put you in mind of it, that you may not be long before you acquit yourself of your promise."

So Prince Ahmed went the next morning with the same attendance as before, but much finer, and himself more magnificently mounted, equipped, and dressed, and was received by the Sultan with the same joy and satisfaction. For several months he constantly paid his visits, always in a richer and finer equipage.

At last some viziers, the Sultan's favorites, who judged of Prince Ahmed's grandeur and power by the figure he cut, made the Sultan jealous of his son, saying it was to be feared he might inveigle himself into the people's favor and dethrone him.

The Sultan of the Indies was so far from thinking that Prince Ahmed could be capable of so pernicious a design as his favorites would make him believe that he said to them: "You are mistaken; my son loves me, and I am certain of his tenderness and fidelity, as I have given him no reason to be disgusted."

But the favorites went on abusing Prince Ahmed till the Sultan said: "Be it as it will, I don't believe my son Ahmed is so wicked as you would persuade me he is; how ever, I am obliged to you for your good advice, and don't dispute but that it proceeds from your good intentions."

The Sultan of the Indies said this that his favorites might not know the impressions their discourse had made on his mind; which had so alarmed him that he resolved to have Prince Ahmed watched unknown to his grand vizier. So he sent for a female magician, who was introduced by a back door into his apartment. "Go immediately," he said, "and follow my son, and watch him so well as to find out where he retires, and bring me word."

The magician left the Sultan, and, knowing the place where Prince Ahmed found his arrow, went immediately thither, and hid herself near the rocks, so that nobody could see her.

The next morning Prince Ahmed set out by daybreak, without taking leave either of the Sultan or any of his Court, according to custom. The magician, seeing him coming, followed him with her eyes, till on a sudden she lost sight of him and his attendants.

As the rocks were very steep and craggy, they were an insurmountable barrier, so that the magician judged that there were but two things for it: either that the Prince retired into some cavern, or an abode of genies or fairies. Thereupon she came out of the place where she was hid and went directly to the hollow way, which she traced till she came to the farther end, looking carefully about on all sides; but, notwithstanding all her diligence, could perceive no opening, not so much as the iron gate which Prince Ahmed discovered, which was to be seen and opened to none but men, and only to such whose presence was agreeable to the Fairy Paribanou.

The magician, who saw it was in vain for her to search any farther, was obliged to be satisfied with the discovery she had made, and returned to give the Sultan an account.

The Sultan was very well pleased with the magician's conduct, and said to her: "Do you as you think fit; I'll wait patiently the event of your promises," and to encourage her made her a present of a diamond of great value.

As Prince Ahmed had obtained the Fairy Paribanou's leave to go to the Sultan of the Indies' Court once a month, he never failed, and the magician, knowing the time, went a day or two before to the foot of the rock where she lost sight of the Prince and his attendants, and waited there.

The next morning Prince Ahmed went out, as usual, at the iron gate, with the same attendants as before, and passed by the magician, whom he knew not to be such, and, seeing her lie with her head against the rock, and complaining as if she were in great pain, he pitied her, turned his horse about, went to her, and asked her what was the matter with her, and what he could do to ease her.

The artful sorceress looked at the Prince in a pitiful manner, without ever lifting up her head, and answered in broken words and sighs, as if she could hardly fetch her breath, that she was going to the capital city, but on the way thither she was taken with so violent a fever that her strength failed her, and she was forced to lie down where he saw her, far from any habitation, and without any hopes of assistance.

"Good woman," replied Prince Ahmed, "you are not so far from help as you imagine. I am ready to assist you, and convey you where you will meet with a speedy cure; only get up, and let one of my people take you behind him."

At these words the magician, who pretended sickness only to know where the Prince lived and what he did, refused not the charitable offer he made her, and that her actions might correspond with her words she made many pretended vain endeavors to get up. At the same time two of the Prince's attendants, alighting off their horses, helped her up, and set her behind another, and mounted their horses again, and followed the Prince, who turned back to the iron gate, which was opened by one of his retinue who rode before. And when he came into the outward court of the Fairy, without dismounting himself, he sent to tell her he wanted to speak with her.

The Fairy Paribanou came with all imaginable haste, not knowing what made Prince Ahmed return so soon, who, not giving her time to ask him the reason, said: "Princess, I desire you would have compassion on this good woman," pointing to the magician, who was held up by two of his retinue. "I found her in the condition you see her in, and promised her the assistance she stands in need of, and am persuaded that you, out of your own goodness, as well as upon my entreaty, will not abandon her."

The Fairy Paribanou, who had her eyes fixed upon the pretended sick woman all the time that the Prince was talking to her, ordered two of her women who followed her to take her from the two men that held her, and carry her into an apartment of the palace, and take as much care of her as she would herself.

While the two women executed the Fairy's commands, she went up to Prince Ahmed, and, whispering in his ear, said: "Prince, this woman is not so sick as she pretends to be; and I am very much mistaken if she is not an impostor, who will be the cause of a great trouble to you. But don't be concerned, let what will be devised against you; be persuaded that I will deliver you out of all the snares that shall be laid for you. Go and pursue your journey."

This discourse of the Fairy's did not in the least frighten Prince Ahmed. "My Princess," said he, "as I do not remember I ever did or designed anybody an injury, I cannot believe anybody can have a thought of doing me one, but if they have I shall not, nevertheless, forbear doing good whenever I have an opportunity." Then he went back to his father's palace.

In the meantime the two women carried the magician into a very fine apartment, richly furnished. First they sat her down upon a sofa, with her back supported with a cushion of gold brocade, while they made a bed on the same sofa before her, the quilt of which was finely embroidered with silk, the sheets of the finest linen, and the coverlet cloth-of-gold. When they had put her into bed (for the old sorceress pretended that her fever was so violent she could not help herself in the least) one of the women went out, and returned soon again with a china dish in her hand, full of a certain liquor, which she presented to the magician, while the other helped her to sit up. "Drink this liquor," said she; "it is the Water of the Fountain of Lions, and a sovereign remedy against all fevers whatsoever. You will find the effect of it in less than an hour's time."

The magician, to dissemble the better, took it after a great deal of entreaty; but at last she took the china dish, and, holding back her head, swallowed down the liquor. When she was laid down again the two women covered her up. "Lie quiet," said she who brought her the china cup, "and get a little sleep if you can. We'll leave you, and hope to find you perfectly cured when we come again an hour hence."

The two women came again at the time they said they should, and found the magician up and dressed, and sitting upon the sofa. "Oh, admirable potion!" she said: "it has wrought its cure much sooner than you told me it would, and I shall be able to prosecute my journey."

The two women, who were fairies as well as their mistress, after they had told the magician how glad they were that she was cured so soon, walked before her, and conducted her through several apartments, all more noble than that wherein she lay, into a large hall, the most richly and magnificently furnished of all the palace.

Fairy Paribanou sat in this hall on a throne of massive gold, enriched with diamonds, rubies, and pearls of an extraordinary size, and attended on each hand by a great number of beautiful fairies, all richly clothed. At the sight of so much majesty, the magician was not only dazzled, but was so amazed that, after she had prostrated herself before the throne, she could not open her lips to thank the Fairy as she proposed. However, Paribanou saved her the trouble, and said to her: "Good woman, I am glad I had an opportunity to oblige you, and to see you are able to pursue your journey. I won't detain you, but perhaps you may not be displeased to see my palace; follow my women, and they will show it you."

Then the magician went back and related to the Sultan of the Indies all that had happened, and how very rich Prince Ahmed was since his marriage with the Fairy, richer than all the kings in the world, and how there was danger that he should come and take the throne from his father.

Though the Sultan of the Indies was very well persuaded that Prince Ahmed's natural disposition was good, yet he could not help being concerned at the discourse of the old sorceress, to whom, when she was taking her leave, he said: "I thank thee for the pains thou hast taken, and thy wholesome advice. I am so sensible of the great importance it is to me that I shall deliberate upon it in council."

Now the favorites advised that the Prince should be killed, but the magician advised differently: "Make him give you all kinds of wonderful things, by the Fairy's help, till she tires of him and sends him away. As, for example, every time your Majesty goes into the field, you are obliged to be at a great expense, not only in pavilions and tents for your army, but likewise in mules and camels to carry their baggage. Now, might not you engage him to use his interest with the Fairy to procure you a tent which might be carried in a man's hand, and which should be so large as to shelter your whole army against bad weather?"

When the magician had finished her speech, the Sultan asked his favorites if they had anything better to propose; and, finding them all silent, determined to follow the magician's advice, as the most reasonable and most agreeable to his mild government.

Next day the Sultan did as the magician had advised him, and asked for the pavilion.

Prince Ahmed never expected that the Sultan his father would have asked such a thing, which at first appeared so difficult, not to say impossible. Though he knew not absolutely how great the power of genies and fairies was, he doubted whether it extended so far as to compass such a tent as his father desired. At last he replied: "Though it is with the greatest reluctance imaginable, I will not fail to ask the favor of my wife your Majesty desires, but will not promise you to obtain it; and if I should not have the honor to come again to pay you my respects that shall be the sign that I have not had success. But beforehand, I desire you to forgive me, and consider that you yourself have reduced me to this extremity."

"Son," replied the Sultan of the Indies, "I should be very sorry if what I ask of you should cause me the displeasure of never seeing you more. I find you don't know the power a husband has over a wife; and yours would show that her love to you was very indifferent if she, with the power she has of a fairy, should refuse you so trifling a request as this I desire you to ask of her for my sake." The Prince went back, and was very sad for fear of offending the Fairy. She kept pressing him to tell her what was the matter, and at last he said: "Madam, you may have observed that hitherto I have been content with your love, and have never asked you any other favor. Consider then, I conjure you, that it is not I, but the Sultan my father, who indiscreetly, or at least I think so, begs of you a pavilion large enough to shelter him, his Court, and army from the violence of the weather, and which a man may carry in his hand. But remember it is the Sultan my father asks this favor."

"Prince," replied the Fairy, smiling, "I am sorry that so small a matter should disturb you, and make you so uneasy as you appeared to me."

Then the Fairy sent for her treasurer, to whom, when she came, she said: "Nourgihan"--which was her name--"bring me the largest pavilion in my treasury." Nourgiham returned presently with the pavilion, which she could not only hold in her hand, but in the palm of her hand when she shut her fingers, and presented it to her mistress, who gave it to Prince Ahmed to look at.

When Prince Ahmed saw the pavilion which the Fairy called the largest in her treasury, he fancied she had a mind to jest with him, and thereupon the marks of his surprise appeared presently in his countenance; which Paribanou perceiving burst out laughing. "What! Prince," cried she, "do you think I jest with you? You'll see presently that I am in earnest. Nourgihan," said she to her treasurer, taking the tent out of Prince Ahmed's hands, "go and set it up, that the Prince may judge whether it may be large enough for the Sultan his father."

The treasurer went immediately with it out of the palace, and carried it a great way off; and when she had set it up one end reached to the very palace; at which time the Prince, thinking it small, found it large enough to shelter two greater armies than that of the Sultan his father's, and then said to Paribanou: "I ask my Princess a thousand pardons for my incredulity; after what I have seen I believe there is nothing impossible to you." "You see," said the Fairy, "that the pavilion is larger than what your father may have occasion for; for you must know that it has one property--that it is larger or smaller according to the army it is to cover."

The treasurer took down the tent again, and brought it to the Prince, who took it, and, without staying any longer than till the next day, mounted his horse, and went with the same attendants to the Sultan his father.

The Sultan, who was persuaded that there could not be any such thing as such a tent as he asked for, was in a great surprise at the Prince's diligence. He took the tent and after he had admired its smallness his amazement was so great that he could not recover himself. When the tent was set up in the great plain, which we have before mentioned, he found it large enough to shelter an army twice as large as he could bring into the field.

But the Sultan was not yet satisfied. "Son," said he, "I have already expressed to you how much I am obliged to you for the present of the tent you have procured me; that I look upon it as the most valuable thing in all my treasury. But you must do one thing more for me, which will be every whit as agreeable to me. I am informed that the Fairy, your spouse, makes use of a certain water, called the Water of the Fountain of Lions, which cures all sorts of fevers, even the most dangerous, and, as I am perfectly well persuaded my health is dear to you, I don't doubt but you will ask her for a bottle of that water for me, and bring it me as a sovereign medicine, which I may make use of when I have occasion. Do me this other important piece of service, and thereby complete the duty of a good son toward a tender father."

The Prince returned and told the Fairy what his father had said; "There's a great deal of wickedness in this demand?" she answered, "as you will understand by what I am going to tell you. The Fountain of Lions is situated in the middle of a court of a great castle, the entrance into which is guarded by four fierce lions, two of which sleep alternately, while the other two are awake. But don't let that frighten you: I'll give you means to pass by them without any danger."

The Fairy Paribanou was at that time very hard at work, and, as she had several clews of thread by her, she took up one, and, presenting it to Prince Ahmed, said: "First take this clew of thread. I'll tell you presently the use of it. In the second place, you must have two horses; one you must ride yourself, and the other you must lead, which must be loaded with a sheep cut into four quarters, that must be killed to-day. In the third place, you must be provided with a bottle, which I will give you, to bring the water in. Set out early to-morrow morning, and when you have passed the iron gate throw the clew of thread before you, which will roll till it comes to the gates of the castle. Follow it, and when it stops, as the gates will be open, you will see the four lions: the two that are awake will, by their roaring, wake the other two, but don't be frightened, but throw each of them a quarter of mutton, and then clap spurs to your horse and ride to the fountain; fill your bottle without alighting, and then return with the same expedition. The lions will be so busy eating they will let you pass by them."

Prince Ahmed set out the next morning at the time appointed by the Fairy, and followed her directions exactly. When he arrived at the gates of the castle he distributed the quarters of mutton among the four lions, and, passing through the midst of them bravely, got to the fountain, filled his bottle, and returned back as safe and sound as he went. When he had gone a little distance from the castle gates he turned him about, and, perceiving two of the lions coming after him, he drew his sabre and prepared himself for defense. But as he went forward he saw one of them turned out of the road at some distance, and showed by his head and tail that he did not come to do him any harm, but only to go before him, and that the other stayed behind to follow, he put his sword up again in its scabbard. Guarded in this manner, he arrived at the capital of the Indies, but the lions never left him till they had conducted him to the gates of the Sultan's palace; after which they returned the same way they came, though not without frightening all that saw them, for all they went in a very gentle manner and showed no fierceness.

A great many officers came to attend the Prince while he dismounted his horse, and afterward conducted him into the Sultan's apartment, who was at that time surrounded with his favorites. He approached toward the throne, laid the bottle at the Sultan's feet, and kissed the rich tapestry which covered his footstool, and then said:

"I have brought you, sir, the healthful water which your Majesty desired so much to keep among your other rarities in your treasury, but at the same time wish you such extraordinary health as never to have occasion to make use of it."

After the Prince had made an end of his compliment the Sultan placed him on his right hand, and then said to him: "Son, I am very much obliged to you for this valuable present, as also for the great danger you have exposed yourself to upon my account (which I have been informed of by a magician who knows the Fountain of Lions); but do me the pleasure," continued he, "to inform me by what address, or, rather, by what incredible power, you have been secured."

"Sir," replied Prince Ahmed, "I have no share in the compliment your Majesty is pleased to make me; all the honor is due to the Fairy my spouse, whose good advice I followed." Then he informed the Sultan what those directions were, and by the relation of this his expedition let him know how well he had behaved himself. When he had done the Sultan, who showed outwardly all the demonstrations of great joy, but secretly became more jealous, retired into an inward apartment, where he sent for the magician.

The magician, at her arrival, saved the Sultan the trouble to tell her of the success of Prince Ahmed's journey, which she had heard of before she came, and therefore was prepared with an infallible means, as she pretended. This means she communicated to the Sultan who declared it the next day to the Prince, in the midst of all his courtiers, in these words: "Son," said he, "I have one thing more to ask of you, after which I shall expect nothing more from your obedience, nor your interest with your wife. This request is, to bring me a man not above a foot and a half high, and whose beard is thirty feet long who carries a bar of iron upon his shoulders of five hundredweight, which he uses as a quarterstaff."

Prince Ahmed, who did not believe that there was such a man in the world as his father described, would gladly have excused himself; but the Sultan persisted in his demand, and told him the Fairy could do more incredible things.

The next day the Prince returned to his dear Paribanou, to whom he told his father's new demand, which, he said, he looked upon to be a thing more impossible than the two first; "for," added he, "I cannot imagine there can be such a man in the world; without doubt, he has a mind to try whether or no I am so silly as to go about it, or he has a design on my ruin. In short, how can he suppose that I should lay hold of a man so well armed, though he is but little? What arms can I make use of to reduce him to my will? If there are any means, I beg you will tell them, and let me come off with honor this time."

"Don't affright yourself, Prince," replied the Fairy; "you ran a risk in fetching the Water of the Fountain of Lions for your father, but there's no danger in finding out this man, who is my brother Schaibar, but is so far from being like me, though we both had the same father, that he is of so violent a nature that nothing can prevent his giving cruel marks of his resentment for a slight offense; yet, on the other hand, is so good as to oblige anyone in whatever they desire. He is made exactly as the Sultan your father has described him, and has no other arms than a bar of iron of five hundred pounds weight, without which he never stirs, and which makes him respected. I'll send for him, and you shall judge of the truth of what I tell you; but be sure to prepare yourself against being frightened at his extraordinary figure when you see him." "What! my Queen," replied Prince Ahmed, "do you say Schaibar is your brother? Let him be never so ugly or deformed I shall be so far from being frightened at the sight of him that, as our brother, I shall honor and love him."

The Fairy ordered a gold chafing-dish to be set with a fire in it under the porch of her palace, with a box of the same metal, which was a present to her, out of which taking a perfume, and throwing it into the fire, there arose a thick cloud of smoke.

Some moments after the Fairy said to Prince Ahmed: "See, there comes my brother." The Prince immediately perceived Schaibar coming gravely with his heavy bar on his shoulder, his long beard, which he held up before him, and a pair of thick mustachios, which he tucked behind his ears and almost covered his face; his eyes were very small and deep-set in his head, which was far from being of the smallest size, and on his head he wore a grenadier's cap; besides all this, he was very much hump-backed.

If Prince Ahmed had not known that Schaibar was Paribanou's brother, he would not have been able to have looked at him without fear, but, knowing first who he was, he stood by the Fairy without the least concern.

Schaibar, as he came forward, looked at the Prince earnestly enough to have chilled his blood in his veins, and asked Paribanou, when he first accosted her, who that man was. To which she replied: "He is my husband, brother. His name is Ahmed; he is son to the Sultan of the Indies. The reason why I did not invite you to my wedding was I was unwilling to divert you from an expedition you were engaged in, and from which I heard with pleasure you returned victorious, and so took the liberty now to call for you."

At these words, Schaibar, looking on Prince Ahmed favorably, said: "Is there anything else, sister, wherein I can serve him? It is enough for me that he is your husband to engage me to do for him whatever he desires." "The Sultan, his father," replied Paribanou, "has a curiosity to see you, and I desire he may be your guide to the Sultan's Court." "He needs but lead me the way I'll follow him." "Brother," replied Paribanou, "it is too late to go to-day, therefore stay till to-morrow morning; and in the meantime I'll inform you of all that has passed between the Sultan of the Indies and Prince Ahmed since our marriage."

The next morning, after Schaibar had been informed of the affair, he and Prince Ahmed set out for the Sultan's Court. When they arrived at the gates of the capital the people no sooner saw Schaibar but they ran and hid themselves; and some shut up their shops and locked themselves up in their houses, while others, flying, communicated their fear to all they met, who stayed not to look behind them, but ran too; insomuch that Schaibar and Prince Ahmed, as they went along, found the streets all desolate till they came to the palaces where the porters, instead of keeping the gates, ran away too, so that the Prince and Schaibar advanced without any obstacle to the council-hall, where the Sultan was seated on his throne, and giving audience. Here likewise the ushers, at the approach of Schaibar, abandoned their posts, and gave them free admittance.

Schaibar went boldly and fiercely up to the throne, without waiting to be presented by Prince Ahmed, and accosted the Sultan of the Indies in these words: "Thou hast asked for me," said he; "see, here I am; what wouldst thou have with me?"

The Sultan, instead of answering him, clapped his hands before his eyes to avoid the sight of so terrible an object; at which uncivil and rude reception Schaibar was so much provoked, after he had given him the trouble to come so far, that he instantly lifted up his iron bar and killed him before Prince Ahmed could intercede in his behalf. All that he could do was to prevent his killing the grand vizier, who sat not far from him, representing to him that he had always given the Sultan his father good advice. "These are they, then," said Schaibar, "who gave him bad," and as he pronounced these words he killed all the other viziers and flattering favorites of the Sultan who were Prince Ahmed's enemies. Every time he struck he killed some one or other, and none escaped but they who were not so frightened as to stand staring and gaping, and who saved themselves by flight.

When this terrible execution was over Schaibar came out of the council-hall into the midst of the courtyard with the iron bar upon his shoulder, and, looking hard at the grand vizier, who owed his life to Prince Ahmed, he said: "I know here is a certain magician, who is a greater enemy of my brother-in-law than all these base favorites I have chastised. Let the magician be brought to me presently." The grand vizier immediately sent for her, and as soon as she was brought Schaibar said, at the time he fetched a stroke at her with his iron bar: "Take the reward of thy pernicious counsel, and learn to feign sickness again."

After this he said: "This is not yet enough; I will use the whole town after the same manner if they do not immediately acknowledge Prince Ahmed, my brother-in-law, for their Sultan and the Sultan of the Indies." Then all that were there present made the air echo again with the repeated acclamations of: "Long life to Sultan Ahmed"; and immediately after he was proclaimed through the whole town. Schaibar made him be clothed in the royal vestments, installed him on the throne, and after he had caused all to swear homage and fidelity to him went and fetched his sister Paribanou, whom he brought with all the pomp and grandeur imaginable, and made her to be owned Sultaness of the Indies.

As for Prince Ali and Princess Nouronnihar, as they had no hand in the conspiracy against Prince Ahmed and knew nothing of any, Prince Ahmed assigned them a considerable province, with its capital, where they spent the rest of their lives. Afterwards he sent an officer to Prince Houssain to acquaint him with the change and make him an offer of which province he liked best; but that Prince thought himself so happy in his solitude that he bade the officer return the Sultan his brother thanks for the kindness he designed him, assuring him of his submission; and that the only favor he desired of him was to give him leave to live retired in the place he had made choice of for his retreat.[1]

[1] Arabian Nights.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f35]

THE HISTORY OF JACK THE GIANT-KILLER

In the reign of the famous King Arthur there lived in Cornwall a lad named Jack, who was a boy of a bold temper, and took delight in hearing or reading of conjurers, giants, and fairies; and used to listen eagerly to the deeds of the knights of King Arthur's Round Table.

In those days there lived on St. Michael's Mount, off Cornwall, a huge giant, eighteen feet high and nine feet round; his fierce and savage looks were the terror of all who beheld him.

He dwelt in a gloomy cavern on the top of the mountain, and used to wade over to the mainland in search of prey; when he would throw half a dozen oxen upon his back, and tie three times as many sheep and hogs round his waist, and march back to his own abode.

The giant had done this for many years when Jack resolved to destroy him.

Jack took a horn, a shovel, a pickaxe, his armor, and a dark lantern, and one winter's evening he went to the mount. There he dug a pit twenty-two feet deep and twenty broad. He covered the top over so as to make it look like solid ground. He then blew his horn so loudly that the giant awoke and came out of his den crying out: "You saucy villain! you shall pay for this I'll broil you for my breakfast!"

He had just finished, when, taking one step further, he tumbled headlong into the pit, and Jack struck him a blow on the head with his pickaxe which killed him. Jack then returned home to cheer his friends with the news.

Another giant, called Blunderbore, vowed to be revenged on Jack if ever he should have him in his power. This giant kept an enchanted castle in the midst of a lonely wood; and some time after the death of Cormoran Jack was passing through a wood, and being weary, sat down and went to sleep.

The giant, passing by and seeing Jack, carried him to his castle, where he locked him up in a large room, the floor of which was covered with the bodies, skulls and bones of men and women.

Soon after the giant went to fetch his brother who was likewise a giant, to take a meal off his flesh; and Jack saw with terror through the bars of his prison the two giants approaching.

Jack, perceiving in one corner of the room a strong cord, took courage, and making a slip-knot at each end, he threw them over their heads, and tied it to the window-bars; he then pulled till he had choked them. When they were black in the face he slid down the rope and stabbed them to the heart.

Jack next took a great bunch of keys from the pocket of Blunderbore, and went into the castle again. He made a strict search through all the rooms, and in one of them found three ladies tied up by the hair of their heads, and almost starved to death. They told him that their husbands had been killed by the giants, who had then condemned them to be starved to death because they would not eat the flesh of their own dead husbands.

"Ladies," said Jack, "I have put an end to the monster and his wicked brother; and I give you this castle and all the riches it contains, to make some amends for the dreadful pains you have felt." He then very politely gave them the keys of the castle, and went further on his journey to Wales.

As Jack had but little money, he went on as fast as possible. At length he came to a handsome house. Jack knocked at the door, when there came forth a Welsh giant. Jack said he was a traveler who had lost his way, on which the giant made him welcome, and let him into a room where there was a good bed to sleep in.

Jack took off his clothes quickly, but though he was weary he could not go to sleep. Soon after this he heard the giant walking backward and forward in the next room, and saying to himself:

"Though here you lodge with me this night,
 You shall not see the morning light;
 My club shall dash your brains out quite."

"Say you so?" thought Jack. "Are these your tricks upon travelers? But I hope to prove as cunning as you are." Then, getting out of bed, he groped about the room, and at last found a large thick billet of wood. He laid it in his own place in the bed, and then hid himself in a dark corner of the room.

The giant, about midnight, entered the apartment, and with his bludgeon struck many blows on the bed, in the very place where Jack had laid the log; and then he went back to his own room, thinking he had broken all Jack's bones.

Early in the morning Jack put a bold face upon the matter, and walked into the giant's room to thank him for his lodging. The giant started when he saw him, and began to stammer out: "Oh! dear me; is it you? Pray how did you sleep last night? Did you hear or see anything in the dead of the night?"

"Nothing to speak of," said Jack, carelessly; "a rat, I believe, gave me three or four slaps with its tail, and disturbed me a little; but I soon went to sleep again."

The giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not answer a word, but went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for their breakfast. Jack wanted to make the giant believe that he could eat as much as himself, so he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his coat, and slip the hasty-pudding into this bag, while he seemed to put it into his mouth.

When breakfast was over he said to the giant: "Now I will show you a fine trick. I can cure all wounds with a touch; I could cut off my head in one minute, and the next put it sound again on my shoulders. You shall see an example." He then took hold of the knife, ripped up the leathern bag, and all the hasty-pudding tumbled out upon the floor.

"Ods splutter hur nails!" cried the Welsh giant, who was ashamed to be outdone by such a little fellow as Jack, "hur can do that hurself"; so he snatched up the knife, plunged it into his own stomach, and in a moment dropped down dead.

Jack, having hitherto been successful in all his undertakings, resolved not to be idle in future; he therefore furnished himself with a horse, a cap of knowledge, a sword of sharpness, shoes of swiftness, and an invisible coat, the better to perform the wonderful enterprises that lay before him.

He traveled over high hills, and on the third day he came to a large and spacious forest through which his road lay. Scarcely had he entered the forest when he beheld a monstrous giant dragging along by the hair of their heads a handsome knight and his lady. Jack alighted from his horse, and tying him to an oak tree, put on his invisible coat, under which he carried his sword of sharpness.

When he came up to the giant he made several strokes at him, but could not reach his body, but wounded his thighs in several places; and at length, putting both hands to his sword and aiming with all his might, he cut off both his legs. Then Jack, setting his foot upon his neck, plunged his sword into the giant's body, when the monster gave a groan and expired.

The knight and his lady thanked Jack for their deliverance, and invited him to their house, to receive a proper reward for his services. "No," said Jack, "I cannot be easy till I find out this monster's habitation." So, taking the knight's directions, he mounted his horse and soon after came in sight of another giant, who was sitting on a block of timber waiting for his brother's return.

Jack alighted from his horse, and, putting on his invisible coat, approached and aimed a blow at the giant's head, but, missing his aim, he only cut off his nose. On this the giant seized his club and laid about him most unmercifully.

"Nay," said Jack, "if this be the case I'd better dispatch you!" so, jumping upon the block, he stabbed him in the back, when he dropped down dead.

Jack then proceeded on his journey, and traveled over hills and dales, till arriving at the foot of a high mountain he knocked at the door of a lonely house, when an old man let him in.

When Jack was seated the hermit thus addressed him: "My son, on the top of this mountain is an enchanted castle, kept by the giant Galligantus and a vile magician. I lament the fate of a duke's daughter, whom they seized as she was walking in her father's garden, and brought hither transformed into a deer."

Jack promised that in the morning, at the risk of his life, he would break the enchantment; and after a sound sleep he rose early, put on his invisible coat, and got ready for the attempt.

When he had climbed to the top of the mountain he saw two fiery griffins, but he passed between them without the least fear of danger, for they could not see him because of his invisible coat. On the castle gate he found a golden trumpet, under which were written these lines:

"Whoever can this trumpet blow
 Shall cause the giant's overthrow."

As soon as Jack had read this he seized the trumpet and blew a shrill blast, which made the gates fly open and the very castle itself tremble.

The giant and the conjurer now knew that their wicked course was at an end, and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking with fear. Jack, with his sword of sharpness, soon killed the giant, and the magician was then carried away by a whirlwind; and every knight and beautiful lady who had been changed into birds and beasts returned to their proper shapes. The castle vanished away like smoke, and the head of the giant Galligantus was then sent to King Arthur.

The knights and ladies rested that night at the old man's hermitage, and next day they set out for the Court. Jack then went up to the King, and gave his Majesty an account of all his fierce battles.

Jack's fame had now spread through the whole country, and at the King's desire the duke gave him his daughter in marriage, to the joy of all his kingdom. After this the King gave him a large estate, on which he and his lady lived the rest of their days in joy and contentment.[1]

[1] Old Chapbook.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f36]

THE BLACK BULL OF NORROWAY

And many a hunting song they sung,
 And song of game and glee;
 Then tuned to plaintive strains their tongue,
 "Of Scotland's luve and lee."
 To wilder measures next they turn
 "The Black, Black Bull of Norroway!"
 Sudden the tapers cease to burn,
 The minstrels cease to play.
 
 "The Cout of Keeldar," by J. Leyden.

In Norroway, langsyne, there lived a certain lady, and she had three dochters. The auldest o' them said to her mither: "Mither, bake me a bannock, and roast me a collop, for I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune." Her mither did sae; and the dochter gaed awa' to an auld witch washerwife and telled her purpose. The auld wife bade her stay that day, and gang and look out o' her back door, and see what she could see. She saw nocht the first day. The second day she did the same, and saw nocht. On the third day she looked again, and saw a coach-and-six coming along the road. She ran in and telled the auld wife what she saw. "Aweel," quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." Sae they took her into the coach, and galloped aff.

The second dochter next says to her mither: "Mither, bake me a bannock, and roast me a collop, fur I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune." Her mither did sae; and awa' she gaed to the auld wife, as her sister had dune. On the third day she looked out o' the back door, and saw a coach-and-four coming along the road. "Aweel," quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." Sae they took her in, and aff they set.

The third dochter says to her mither: "Mither, bake me a bannock, and roast me a collop, for I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune." Her mither did sae; and awa' she gaed to the auld witch-wife. She bade her look out o' her back door, and see what she could see. She did sae; and when she came back said she saw nocht. The second day she did the same, and saw nocht. The third day she looked again, and on coming back said to the auld wife she saw nocht but a muckle Black Bull coming roaring alang the road. "Aweel," quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." On hearing this she was next to distracted wi' grief and terror; but she was lifted up and set on his back, and awa' they went.

Aye they traveled, and on they traveled, till the lady grew faint wi' hunger. "Eat out o' my right lug," says the Black Bull, "and drink out o' my left lug, and set by your leavings." Sae she did as he said, and was wonderfully refreshed. And lang they gaed, and sair they rade, till they came in sight o' a very big and bonny castle. "Yonder we maun be this night," quo' the bull; "for my auld brither lives yonder"; and presently they were at the place. They lifted her aff his back, and took her in, and sent him away to a park for the night. In the morning, when they brought the bull hame, they took the lady into a fine shining parlor, and gave her a beautiful apple, telling her no to break it till she was in the greatest strait ever mortal was in in the world, and that wad bring her o't. Again she was lifted on the bull's back, and after she had ridden far, and farer than I can tell, they came in sight o' a far bonnier castle, and far farther awa' than the last. Says the bull till her: "Yonder we maun be the night, for my second brither lives yonder"; and they were at the place directly. They lifted her down and took her in, and sent the bull to the field for the night. In the morning they took the lady into a fine and rich room, and gave her the finest pear she had ever seen, bidding her no to break it till she was in the greatest strait ever mortal could be in, and that wad get her out o't. Again she was lifted and set on his back, and awa' they went. And lang they gaed, and sair they rade, till they came in sight o' the far biggest castle, and far farthest aff, they had yet seen. "We maun be yonder the night," says the bull, "for my young brither lives yonder"; and they were there directly. They lifted her down, took her in, and sent the bull to the field for the night. In the morning they took her into a room, the finest of a', and gied her a plum, telling her no to break it till she was in the greatest strait mortal could be in, and that wad get her out o't. Presently they brought hame the bull, set the lady on his back, and awa' they went.

And aye they gaed, and on they rade, till they came to a dark and ugsome glen, where they stopped, and the lady lighted down. Says the bull to her: "Here ye maun stay till I gang and fight the deil. Ye maun seat yoursel' on that stane, and move neither hand nor fit till I come back, else I'll never find ye again. And if everything round about ye turns blue I hae beated the deil; but should a' things turn red he'll hae conquered me." She set hersel' down on the stane, and by-and-by a' round her turned blue. O'ercome wi' joy, she lifted the ae fit and crossed it owre the ither, sae glad was she that her companion was victorious. The bull returned and sought for but never could find her.

Lang she sat, and aye she grat, till she wearied. At last she rase and gaed awa', she kedna whaur till. On she wandered till she came to a great hill o' glass, that she tried a' she could to climb, bat wasna able. Round the bottom o' the hill she gaed, sabbing and seeking a passage owre, till at last she came to a smith's house; and the smith promised, if she wad serve him seven years, he wad make her iron shoon, wherewi' she could climb owre the glassy hill. At seven years' end she got her iron shoon, clamb the glassy hill, and chanced to come to the auld washerwife's habitation. There she was telled of a gallant young knight that had given in some bluidy sarks to wash, and whaever washed thae sarks was to be his wife. The auld wife had washed till she was tired, and then she set to her dochter, and baith washed, and they washed, and they better washed, in hopes of getting the young knight; but a' they could do they couldna bring out a stain. At length they set the stranger damosel to wark; and whenever she began the stains came out pure and clean, but the auld wife made the knight believe it was her dochter had washed the sarks. So the knight and the eldest dochter were to be married, and the stranger damosel was distracted at the thought of it, for she was deeply in love wi' him. So she bethought her of her apple, and breaking it, found it filled with gold and precious jewelry, the richest she had ever seen. "All these," she said to the eldest dochter, "I will give you, on condition that you put off your marriage for ae day, and allow me to go into his room alone at night." So the lady consented; but meanwhile the auld wife had prepared a sleeping-drink, and given it to the knight, wha drank it, and never wakened till next morning. The lee-lang night ther damosel sabbed and sang:

"Seven lang years I served for thee,
 The glassy hill I clamb for thee,
 The bluidy shirt I wrang for thee;
 And wilt thou no wauken and turn to me?"

Next day she kentna what to do for grief. She then brak the pear, and found it filled wi' jewelry far richer than the contents o' the apple. Wi' thae jewels she bargained for permission to be a second night in the young knight's chamber; but the auld wife gied him anither sleeping-drink, and he again sleepit till morning. A' night she kept sighing and singing as before:

"Seven lang years I served for thee," &c. Still he sleepit, and she nearly lost hope a'thegither. But that day when he was out at the hunting, somebody asked him what noise and moaning was yon they heard all last night in his bedchamber. He said he heardna ony noise. But they assured him there was sae; and he resolved to keep waking that night to try what he could hear. That being the third night, and the damosel being between hope and despair, she brak her plum, and it held far the richest jewelry of the three. She bargained as before; and the auld wife, as before, took in the sleeping-drink to the young knight's chamber; but he telled her he couldna drink it that night without sweetening. And when she gaed awa' for some honey to sweeten it wi', he poured out the drink, and sae made the auld wife think he had drunk it. They a' went to bed again, and the damosel began, as before, singing:

"Seven lang years I served for thee,
 The glassy hill I clamb for thee,
 The bluidy shirt I wrang for thee;
 And wilt thou no wauken and turn to me?"

He heard, and turned to her. And she telled him a' that had befa'en her, and he telled her a' that had happened to him. And he caused the auld washerwife and her dochter to be burned. And they were married, and he and she are living happy till this day, for aught I ken.[1]

[1] Chambers, Popular Traditions of Scotland.

The Blue Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f37]

THE RED ETIN

There were ance twa widows that lived on a small bit o' ground, which they rented from a farmer. Ane of them had twa sons, and the other had ane; and by-and-by it was time for the wife that had twa sons to send them away to seeke their fortune. So she told her eldest son ae day to take a can and bring her water from the well, that she might bake a cake for him; and however much or however little water he might bring, the cake would be great or sma' accordingly; and that cake was to be a' that she could gie him when he went on his travels.

The lad gaed away wi' the can to the well, and filled it wi' water, and then came away hame again; but the can being broken the maist part of the water had run out before he got back. So his cake was very sma'; yet sma' as it was, his mother asked if he was willing to take the half of it with her blessing, telling him that, if he chose rather to have the hale, he would only get it wi' her curse. The young man, thinking he might hae to travel a far way, and not knowing when or how he might get other provisions, said he would like to hae the hale cake, com of his mother's malison what like; so she gave him the hale cake, and her malison alang wi't. Then he took his brither aside, and gave him a knife to keep till he should come back, desiring him to look at it every morning, and as lang as it continued to be clear, then he might be sure that the owner of it was well; but if it grew dim and rusty, then for certain some ill had befallen him.

So the young man set out to seek his fortune. And he gaed a' that day, and a' the next day; and on the third day, in the afternoon, he came up to where a shepherd was sitting with a flock o' sheep. And he gaed up to the shepherd and asked him wha the sheep belanged to; and the man answered:

"The Red Etin of Ireland
 Ance lived in Bellygan,
 And stole King Malcolm's daughter,
 The King of fair Scotland.
 He beats her, he binds her,
 He lays her on a band;
 And every day he dings her
 With a bright silver wand
  Like Julian the Roman
 He's one that fears no man.
 It's said there's ane predestinate
 To be his mortal foe;
 But that man is yet unborn
 And lang may it be so."

The young man then went on his journey; and he had not gone far when he espied an old man with white locks herding a flock of swine; and he gaed up to him and asked whose swine these were, when the man answered:

"The Red Etin of Ireland"--

        (Repeat the verses above.)

Then the young man gaed on a bit farther, and came to another very old man herding goats; and when he asked whose goats they were, the answer was:

"The Red Etin of Ireland"--

        (Repeat the verses again.)

This old man also told him to beware of the next beasts that he should meet, for they were of a very different kind from any he had yet seen.

So the young man went on, and by-and-by he saw a multitude of very dreadfu' beasts, ilk ane o' them wi' twa heads, and on every head four horns. And he was sore frightened, and ran away from them as fast as he could; and glad was he when he came to a castle that stood on a hillock, wi' the door standing wide to the wa'. And he gaed into the castle for shelter, and there he saw an auld wife sitting beside the kitchen fire. He asked the wife if he might stay there for the night, as he was tired wi' a lang journey; and the wife said he might, but it was not a good place for him to be in, as it belanged to the Red Etin, who was a very terrible beast, wi' three heads, that spared no living man he could get hold of. The young man would have gone away, but he was afraid of the beasts on the outside of the castle; so he beseeched the old woman to conceal him as well as she could, and not to tell the Etin that he was there. He thought, if he could put over the night, he might get away in the morning without meeting wi' the beasts, and so escape. But he had not been long in his hidy-hole before the awful Etin came in; and nae sooner was he in than he was heard crying:

"Snouk but and snouk ben,
 I find the smell of an earthly man;
 Be he living, or be he dead,
 His heart this night shall kitchen[1] my bread."

[1] "Kitchen," that is, "season."

The monster soon found the poor young man, and pulled him from his hole. And when he had got him out he told him that if he could answer him three questions his life should be spared. The first was: Whether Ireland or Scotland was first inhabited? The second was: Whether man was made for woman, or woman for man? The third was: Whether men or brutes were made first? The lad not being able to answer one of these questions, the Red Etin took a mace and knocked him on the head, and turned him into a pillar of stone.

On the morning after this happened the younger brither took out the knife to look at it, and he was grieved to find it a' brown wi' rust. He told his mother that the time was now come for him to go away upon his travels also; so she requested him to take the can to the well for water, that she might bake a cake for him. The can being broken, he brought hame as little water as the other had done, and the cake was as little. She asked whether he would have the hale cake wi' her malison, or the half wi' her blessing; and, like his brither, he thought it best to have the hale cake, come o' the malison what might. So he gaed away; and everything happened to him that had happened to his brother!

The other widow and her son heard of a' that had happened frae a fairy, and the young man determined that he would also go upon his travels, and see if he could do anything to relieve his twa friends. So his mother gave him a can to go to the well and bring home water, that she might bake him a cake for his journey. And he gaed, and as he was bringing hame the water, a raven owre abune his head cried to him to look, and he would see that the water was running out. And he was a young man of sense, and seeing the water running out, he took some clay and patched up the holes, so that he brought home enough water to bake a large cake. When his mother put it to him to take the half-cake wi' her blessing, he took it in preference to having the hale wi' her malison; and yet the half was bigger than what the other lads had got a'thegither.

So he gaed away on his journey; and after he had traveled a far way he met wi' an auld woman, that asked him if he would give her a bit of his bannock. And he said he would gladly do that, and so he gave her a piece of the bannock; and for that she gied him a magical wand, that she said might yet be of service to him if he took care to use it rightly. Then the auld woman, who was a fairy, told him a great deal that whould happen to him, and what he ought to do in a' circumstances; and after that she vanished in an instant out o' his sight. He gaed on a great way farther, and then he came up to the old man herding the sheep; and when he asked whose sheep these were, the answer was:

"The Red Etin of Ireland
 Ance lived in Bellygan,
 And stole King Malcolm's daughter,
 The King of fair Scotland.
 He beats her, he binds her,
 He lays her on a band;
 And every day he dings her
 With a bright silver wand.
 Like Julian the Roman,
 He's one that fears no man,
 But now I fear his end is near,
 And destiny at hand;
 And you're to be, I plainly see,
 The heir of all his land."

(Repeat the same inquiries to the man attending the swine and the man attending the goats, with the same answer in each case.)

When he came to the place where the monstrous beasts were standing, he did not stop nor run away, but went boldly through among them. One came up roaring with open mouth to devour him, when he struck it with his wand, and laid it in an instant dead at his feet. He soon came to the Etin's castle, where he knocked, and was admitted. The auld woman that sat by the fire warned him of the terrible Etin, and what had been the fate of the twa brithers; but he was not to be daunted. The monster soon came in, saying:

"Snouk but and snouk ben,
 I find the smell of an earthly man;
 Be he living, or be he dead,
 His heart shall be kitchen to my bread."

He quickly espied the young man, and bade him come forth on the floor. And then he put the three questions to him, but the young man had been told everything by the good fairy, so he was able to answer all the questions. When the Etin found this he knew that his power was gone. The young man then took up the axe and hewed off the monster's three heads. He next asked the old woman to show him where the King's daughters lay; and the old woman took him upstairs and opened a great many doors, and out of every door came a beautiful lady who had been imprisoned there by the Etin; and ane o' the ladies was the King's daughter. She also took him down into a low room, and there stood two stone pillars that he had only to touch wi' his wand, when his two friends and neighbors started into life. And the hale o' the prisoners were overjoyed at their deliverance, which they all acknowledged to be owing to the prudent young man. Next day they a' set out for the King's Court, and a gallant company they made. And the King married his daughter to the young man that had delivered her, and gave a noble's daughter to ilk ane o' the other young men; and so they a' lived happily a' the rest o' their days.[1]

[1] Chambers, Popular Traditions of Scotland.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: boe.txt =====



The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE

 

BOOK OF ENOCH

 

TRANSLATED BY

 

R. H. CHARLES, D.LITT., D.D.

 

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

 

W. O. E. OESTERLEY, D.D.

 

London

 

Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge

 

[1917]

 

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, June 2004. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vi]

 

EDITORS' PREFACE

THE object of this series of translations is primarily to furnish students with short, cheap, and handy text-books, which, it is hoped, will facilitate the study of the particular texts in class under competent teachers. But it is also hoped that the volumes will be acceptable to the general reader who may be interested in the subjects with which they deal. It has been thought advisable, as a general rule, to restrict the notes and comments to a small compass; more especially as, in most cases, excellent works of a more elaborate character are available. Indeed, it is much to be desired that these translations may have the effect of inducing readers to study the larger works.

Our principal aim, in a word, is to make some difficult texts, important for the study of Christian origins, more generally accessible in faithful and scholarly translations.

In most cases these texts are not available in a cheap and handy form. In one or two cases texts have been included of books which are available in the official Apocrypha; but in every such case reasons exist for putting forth these texts in a new translation, with an Introduction, in this series.

W. O. E. OESTERLEY.

G. H. Box.

 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

 

INTRODUCTION

 

THE APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE

As the Book of Enoch is, in some respects, the most notable extant apocalyptic work outside the canonical Scriptures, it will not be inappropriate to offer a few remarks here on the Apocalyptic Literature generally. In writing about the books which belong to this literature, Prof. Burkitt says very pointedly that "they are the most characteristic survival of what I will venture to call, with all its narrowness and its incoherence, the heroic age of Jewish history, the age when the nation attempted to realize in action the part of the peculiar people of God. It ended in catastrophe, but the nation left two successors, the Christian Church and the Rabbinical Schools, each of which carried on some of the old national aims. And of the two it was the Christian Church that was most faithful to the ideas enshrined in the Apocalypses, and it did consider itself, not without some reason, the fulfilment of those ideas. What is wanted, therefore, in studying the Apocalypses is, above all, sympathy with the ideas that underlie them, and especially with the belief in the New Age. And those who believe that in Christianity a new Era really did dawn for us ought, I think, to have that sympathy. . . . We study the Apocalypses to learn how our spiritual ancestors hoped again that God would make all right in the end; and that we, their children, are here to-day studying them is an indication

[p. viii]

that their hope was not wholly unfounded." [*1]

Hope is, indeed, the main underlying motive-power which prompted the writers of the Apocalypses. And this hope is the more intensive and ardent in that it shines forth from a background which is dark with despair; for the Apocalyptists despaired of the world in which they lived, a world in which the godly were of no account, while the wicked seemed too often triumphant and prosperous. With evil everywhere around, the Apocalyptists saw no hope for the world as it was; for such a world there was no remedy, only destruction; if the good were ever to triumph it must be in a new world. Despairing, therefore, of the world around them, the Apocalyptists centred their hope upon a world to come, where the righteous would come to their own and evil would find no place. It is this thought which underlies the opening words of the Book of Enoch: "The words of the blessing of Enoch, wherewith he blessed the elect and righteous, who will be living in the day of tribulation, when all the wicked and godless are to be removed." Nowhere in this book is the essence of this hope more beautifully expressed than in a short metrical piece in the first chapter:

	 
		"But with the righteous He will make peace,
		 And will protect the elect,
		 And mercy shall be upon them.
		
		"And they shall all belong to God,
		 And they shall all be prospered,
		 And they shall all be blessed.
		
		"And He will help them all,
		 And light shall appear unto them,
		 And He will make peace with them" (1 Enoch i. 8).
		
		 In all the books belonging to this literature which have come down to us this hope is expressed more or

[p. ix]

less vividly; nor is the dark background wanting. with prophecies of coming wrath. It will, therefore, be realized that the Apocalyptic Literature is almost wholly concerned with the future; it is true that again and again the Apocalyptist glances at the contemporary history of the world around him, to which many a cryptic reference is made--a fact which necessitates some knowledge of the history of this period (circa 200 B.C.-A.D. 100) for a full understanding of the books in question--but these references are only made with a view to comforting the oppressed and afflicted with the thought that even the most mighty of earthly powers are shortly to be overthrown by. the advent of the new and glorious era when every injustice and all the incongruities of life will be done away with. So that every reference to the present is merely a position taken up from which to point to the future. Now, since, as we have seen, the Apocalyptists despair of any bettering of the present world, and therefore contemplate its destruction as the preliminary of the new order of things, they look away from this world in their visions of the future; they conceive of other-worldly forces coming into play in the reconstitution of things, and of society generally; and since these are other-worldly forces the supernatural plays a great part in the Apocalyptic Literature. This supernatural colouring will often strike the reader of this literature as fantastic, and at times bizarre; but this should not be permitted to obscure the reality which often lies behind these weird shadows. Mental visions are not always easily expressed in words; the seer who in a vision has received a message in some fantastic guise necessarily has the impress upon his mind of what he has seen when giving his message; and when he describes his vision the picture he presents is, in the nature of the case, more fantastic to the ear of the hearer than to the eye of him who saw it. Allowance should be made for this; especially by us Westerns who are so lacking in the rich imaginativeness

[p. x]

of the Oriental. Our love of literalness hinders the play of the imagination because we are so apt to "materialize" a mental picture presented by another. The Apocalypses were written by and for Orientals, and we cannot do justice to them unless we remember this; but it would be best if we could get into the Oriental mind and look at things from that point of view.

Another thing which the reader of the Apocalyptic Literature must be prepared for is the frequent inconsistency of thought to be found there, together with variableness of teaching often involving contradiction. The reason of this is not to be sought simply in the fact that in the Apocalypses the hand of more than one author is frequently to be discerned, a fact which would easily account for divergence of views in one and the same book-no, the chief reason is that, on the one hand. the minds of the Apocalyptists were saturated with the traditional thoughts and ideas of the Old Testament, and, on the, other, they were eagerly absorbing the newer conceptions which the spirit of the age had brought into being. This occasioned a continual conflict of thought in their minds; the endeavour to harmonize the old and the new would not always succeed, and in consequence there often resulted a compromise which was illogical and which presented contradictions. Inconsistency of teaching on certain points is, therefore, not surprising under the circumstances.

Again, to realize the significance of much that is found in these Apocalypses one has to reckon with a rigid predestinarianism which was characteristic of the Apocalyptists as a whole. They started with the absolute conviction that the whole course of the world, from beginning to end, both as regards its physical changes and also in all that concerns the history of nations, their growth and decline, and of every single individual, was in every respect predetermined by God Almighty before all time. This

[p. xi]

belief of the Apocalyptists is well illustrated in one of the later Apocalypses by these words:

	 
		"For He hath weighed the age in the balance,
		 And by number hath He numbered the seasons;
		 Neither will He move nor stir things,
		 Till the measure appointed be fulfilled."
		                       (ii. (iv.) Esdras iv. 36, 37.)
		
		 Thus "the times and periods of the course of the world's history have been predetermined by God. The numbers of the years have been exactly fixed. This was a fundamental postulate of the Apocalyptists, who devoted much of their energy to calculations, based upon a close study of prophecy, as to the exact period when history should reach its consummation . . . the underlying idea is predestinarian." [*1] But all these things, according to the Apocalyptists, were divine secrets hidden from the beginning the world, but revealed to God-fearing men to whom was accorded the faculty of peering into the hidden things of God and of understanding them; upon these men was laid the privilege and duty of revealing the divine secrets to others, hence their name of Apocalyptists or "revealers." It was because the Apocalyptists believed so firmly in this power which they possessed of looking into the deep things of God that they claimed to be able to measure the significance of what had happened in the past and of what was happening in the present; and upon the basis of this knowledge they believed that they also had the power, given them by God, of foreseeing the march of future events; above all, of knowing when the end of the world would come, a consummation towards which the whole history of the world had been tending from the beginning.

In spite of all the mysticism, sometimes of a rather fantastic kind, and of the frequently supra-mundane vision with which the Apocalyptic Literature abounds,

[p. xii]

the Apocalyptists fully realized the need of practical religion; they were upholders, of the Law, the loyal observance of which they regard as a necessity for all God-fearing men. In this the Apocalyptists were at one, in principle, with Pharisaism; but their conception of what constituted loyal observance of the Law differed from that of the Pharisees, for, unlike these, the Apocalyptists laid all stress on the spirit of its observance rather than upon the letter. Characteristic of their attitude here are the words in 1 Enoch v. 4:

	 
		"But ye--ye have not been steadfast, nor done the commandments of the Lord,
		 But ye have turned away, and have spoken proud and hard words
		 With your impure mouths against His greatness,
		 O ye hard-hearted, ye shall find no peace."
		
		 And again, in xcix. 2:

	 
		"Woe to them that pervert the words of uprightness,
		            And transgress the eternal Law."
		
		 We do not find in this Literature that insistence on the literal carrying-out of the minutest precepts of the Law which was characteristic of Pharisaism. Veneration for the Law is whole-hearted; it is the real guide of life; punishment awaits those who ignore its guidance; but the Pharisaic interpretation of the Law and its requirements is alien to the spirit of the Apocalyptists.

As a whole, the Apocalyptic Literature presents an universalistic attitude very different from the nationalistic narrowness of the Pharisees. It is true, the Apocalyptists are not always consistent in this, but normally they embrace the Gentiles equally with the men of their own nation in the divine scheme of salvation; and, in the same way, the wicked who are

[p. xiii]

excluded are not restricted to the Gentiles, but the Jews equally with them shall suffer torment hereafter according to their deserts. [*1]

The Apocalyptic Literature, as distinct from the Apocalyptic Movement owing to which it took its rise, began to come into existence about the period 200-150 B.C.; at any rate, the earliest extant example of this Literature--the earliest portions of the Book of Enoch--belongs to this period. Works of an Apocalyptic character, continued to be written for about three centuries; the Second (Fourth) Book of Esdras, one of the most remarkable Apocalypses, belongs to the end of the first Christian century, approximately. There are Apocalypses of later date, some of subordinate interest are of much later date; but the real period of the Apocalyptic Literature is from about 200 B.C. to about A.D. 100; its beginnings date, therefore, from a time prior to that great landmark in Jewish history, the Maccabaean Era.

 

THE BOOK OF ENOCH: ITS COMPONENT PARTS AND THEIR DATES

The Book of Enoch is now usually designated 1 Enoch, to distinguish it from the later Apocalypse, The Secrets of Enoch, known as 2 Enoch. The former is also called the Ethiopic Enoch, the latter the Slavonic Enoch, after the languages of the earliest versions extant of each respectively. No manuscript of the original language of either is known to be in existence.

According to Canon Charles, the various elements of which our book in its present form is made up belong to different dates. The following table will show the dates of the different parts of the book. Canon Charles believes that these are approximately

[p. xiv]

correct, without committing himself to the certainty of this in each case:

  CHAPTERS       
  xii.-xxxvi.
 xclii.
 xci. 12-17  "The Apocalypse of Weeks."  The oldest pre-Maccabaean portions. 
  vi.-xi.
 liv. 7-lv. 2
 lx.
 lxv.-lxix. 25
 cvi., cvii.  Fragments of "The Book of Noah."  Pre-Maccabaean at the latest. 
  lxxxiii.-xc.  "The Dream-Visions,"   165-161 B.C. 
  lxxii.-lxxxii.  "The Book of the Heavenly Luminaries."  Before 110 B.C. 
  xxxvii.-lxxi.
 xci. 1-11, 18, 19-civ.  "The Parables," or "Similitudes."  circa 105-64 B.C. 
  i.-v.  The latest portion,  but pre-Christian. 
  

 

[paragraph continues] Chapter cv, which consists of only two verses, cannot be dated; while cviii. is in the nature of an appendix, probably added subsequently, to the whole work.

While these dates may be regarded as approximately correct, it should be pointed out that differences of opinion exist among scholars on the subject. Schurer holds, for example, that, with the exception of chapters xxxvii.-lxxi. (the "Parables," or "Similitudes"), the entire book belongs to the period 130-100 B.C.; the "Parables" he assigns to a time not earlier than Herod the Great. Beer thinks that the "Dream-Visions" (chapters lxxxiii.-xc.) belong to the time of John Hyrcanus (135-105 B.C.), and he includes under the pre-Maccabaean portions only xci. 12-17, xcii. xciii. 1-14; and holds that the rest of the book was written before 64 B.C. Dalman maintains that it cannot be proved that the important section xxxvii.-lxxi. (the "Similitudes") is "the product of the pre-Christian period," though he fully

[p. xv]

recognizes its Jewish character. Burkitt regards the writer as "almost contemporary" with the philosopher Posidonius (135-51 B.C.). There is thus some diversity of opinion as to the date of the book among leading authorities. That it is, as a whole, pre-Christian, may be regarded as definitely established. More difficult is the question whether any portions of it are pre-Maccabaean; Charles gives various reasons for his belief that considerable parts are pre-Maccabaean; we are inclined to agree with him, though it may be questioned whether the last word on the subject has been spoken.

 

AUTHORSHIP

As the various parts of the book [*1] clearly belong to different dates, diversity of authorship is what one is naturally led to expect; and of this there can, indeed, be no shadow of doubt. The author of the earliest portions was a Jew who lived, as Burkitt has shown, in northern Palestine, in the land of Dan, south-west of the Hermon range, near the headwaters of the Jordan. This is important, as it tends to show that the book, or books, is really Palestinian, and one which, therefore, circulated among Jews in Palestine. "If, moreover, the author came from the north, that helps to explain the influence the book had upon the Religion that was cradled in Galilee." [*2] Of the authors of the other three books of which "Enoch" is made up (viz. "The Dream-Visions," "The Book of the Heavenly Luminaries," and "The Similitudes") we know nothing save what can be gathered from their writings as to their religious standpoint.

Charles holds that though there is not unity of authorship there is, none the less, uniformity; for,

[p. xvi]

according to him, all the books were written by Chassidim, [*1] or by their successors, the Pharisees. This contention has been strongly assailed and much weakened by Leszynsky in a recent work on the Sadducees. [*2] While frankly recognizing the composite character of the book, Leszynsky holds that the original portions of it [*3] emanate from Sadducaean circles; and that the special object of the book originally was the bringing about of a reform of the calendar. He points to the ascription of the book to Enoch as supporting his contention, for Enoch lived 365 years, [*4] i.e. is years correspond to the number of days in the solar year; the basis of reckoning time was one of the fundamental points of difference between the Pharisees and Sadducees, for whereas the former reckoned time by the lunar year (360 days), the latter did so by the solar year. Here a significant remark of Burkitt's is worth recalling; in writing about the false titles given to all the Apocalyptic books, he says: "There is another aspect of pseudonymous authorship to which I venture to think sufficient attention has not been given. It is this, that the names were not chosen out of mere caprice; they indicated to a certain extent what subjects would be treated and the point of view of the writer." [*5] Further, the fact that "Enoch walked with God; and he was not; for God took him," [*6] i.e. that he ascended into the heavens, is also significant; for he would thereby be just the one to know all about the heavenly luminaries; he was just the most appropriate author of a book which was to deal with astronomical questions. "The Sadducaean character of the original work," says Leszynsky, "is seen most clearly in the discussion regarding the calendar; chapters

[p. xvii]

lxxii.-lxxxii. are rightly called the Book of Astronomy: [*1] 'the book of the courses of the luminaries of the heaven, the relations of each, according to their classes, their dominion and their seasons, according to their names and places of origin, and according to their months . . . with regard to all the years of the world and unto eternity, till the new creation is accomplished which endureth till all eternity' (lxxii. 1). That sounds almost as though the author of the Book of jubilees had written it. That it is not a merely scientific interest which impels the writer to give expression to his astronomical theories may be seen from the words at the conclusion of the section: 'Blessed are all the righteous, blessed are all those who walk in the way of righteousness, and sin not as the sinners in the reckoning of all their days, in which the sun traverseth the heaven, entering into and departing from the portals for thirty days . . .' (lxxxii. 4-7). Herein one can discern quite clearly the tendency of the writer. He desires the adoption of the solar year, while his contemporaries wrongly followed a different reckoning, and therefore celebrated the feasts at the wrong time. The 'sinners who sin in the reckoning of the year' are the Pharisees; and the righteous ones who are blessed, the Zaddikim, [*2] who walk upon the paths of righteousness (Zedek) as the name is made to imply, are the Sadducees." [*3] The point may appear small to us, but we may compare with it the Quartodeciman controversy in the Church during the second century. It is, at any rate, a strong point in favour of the Sadducaean authorship of "The Book of the Heavenly Luminaries."

The pre-Maccabaean portions (assuming that some portions of it are pre-Maccabaean) of the book of Enoch must certainly be ascribed to the Chassidim;

[p. xviii]

but it is not on that account necessary to ascribe all the later portions to the Pharisees. Three points especially militate against this: some of the teaching concerning the Messiah; the, generally speaking, universalistic spirit, which is quite un-Pharisaic, and the attitude towards the Law, which is not that of the Pharisees. It is not to be denied that some portions (e.g. cii. 6 ff.) are from the hands of Pharisees; nor can it be doubted that the whole collection in its present form has been worked over by a Pharisee, or Pharisees; but that all the post-Maccabaean portions in their original form emanated from Pharisaic circles does not appear to have been proved. It seems more likely that, with the exceptions already referred to, the various component parts of the book were written by Apocalyptists who belonged neither to Pharisaic nor yet to Sadducaean circles.

 

LANGUAGE

The Book of Enoch exists only in the Ethiopic Version; this was translated from the Greek Version, of which only a few portions are extant. [*1] The Latin Version, which was also made from the Greek, is not extant, with the exception of i. 9, and cvi. 1-18; the fragment containing these two passages was discovered by the Rev. Al. R. James, of King's College, Cambridge, in the British Museum. The book was originally written either in Hebrew or Aramaic; Charles thinks that chapters vi.-xxxvi., lxxxiii.-xc. were Aramaic, the rest Hebrew. It is, however, very difficult to say for certain which of these two languages was really the original, because,

[p. xix]

as Burkitt says, "most of the most convincing proofs that the Greek text of Enoch is a translation from a Semitic language fit equally well with a Hebrew or an Aramaic original"; his opinion is that Aramaic was the original language, "but that a few passages do seem to suggest a Hebrew origin, yet not decisively." [*1]

 

GENERAL CONTENTS

The reader who comes to peruse the Book of Enoch for the first time will find much that appears to him strange and unattractive; he must not, however, be repelled by this; for in due time he will come to other arts of the book which he will soon see to be of real value from many points of view. But even regarding the less attractive parts, he will find that when these are carefully studied they contain more that is of interest than appears upon the surface. Unfortunately, the opening portion (i.-xxxvi.), which is naturally read first, contains a good deal of the least important parts of the whole book; some passages are even repellent. It is well to remember the point, already referred to, that there are at least four quite independent books included in the "Book of Enoch," exclusive of certain "Noah" fragments and other pieces (see below); the student is, therefore, advised to treat these as separate works, and to read them as such. There is no reason to begin with the book which happens to come first, especially as the first thirty-six chapters do not all belong together. [*2] But, in any case, it will be found most useful to have some general idea of the contents of each of the different books before beginning to read them. For this purpose a brief resume of each is given here.

[p. xx]

i. The Book of Enoch (chapters xii.-xxxvi.). The book begins With a Dream-Vision of Enoch. In this dream Enoch is asked to intercede for the watchers of heaven, i.e. the angels, who had left their heavenly home to commit iniquity with the daughters of men. He writes out the petition (cp. the title "Enoch the Scribe") the fallen angels make, and then retires to await the answer, which comes to him in a series of visions. These visions are not quite easy to follow; they are evidently incomplete and somewhat confused; in all probability the text has suffered in transmission. At any rate, the petition is refused; Enoch declares to the fallen angels the doom which, as he has been taught in the visions, is to be their lot; the final words of the message which he is bidden to give them are: "You have no peace" (xii.-xvi.). There follow then accounts of the different journeys which Enoch makes, being conducted by angels of light, through certain parts of the earth, and through Sheol. After the account of the first journey (xvii.-xix.) a short enumeration is made of the archangels, seven in number, and their functions (xx.). In the second journey is described the place of final punishment of the fallen angels: "This place is the prison of the angels and here they will imprisoned for ever." From thence Enoch is taken to Sheol; then to the west, where he sees the luminaries of heaven. After that the angels show him "seven magnificent mountains," upon one of which is the throne of God; he sees also the Tree of Life, which is to be given to the holy and. righteous after the great judgement. From thence he comes back to the centre of the earth and sees the "blessed place," Jerusalem, and the "accursed valley" (xxi.-xxvii.). The book concludes with what appear to be fragments of other journeys, to the east, to the north, and to the south. Of special interest here is the mention of the Garden of Righteousness, and the Tree of Wisdom (xxviii.-xxxvi.).

Much that is written in these chapters may appear

[p. xxi]

pointless and uninspiring; but we must bear in mind the purpose that lies behind it all. The fallen angels were believed to have brought sin on to the earth; all the wickedness of the world the Apocalyptist traces back to them. This cause of sin must be wholly destroyed before righteousness can come truly to its own. Therefore the Apocalyptist has a practical aim in view when describing in much detail the final place of punishment of the fallen angels; for here, too, are to come all those who by sin are the offspring of this race. No less does he delight in telling of the abode of joy prepared for the righteous. That all these descriptions were constructed out of the imagination of the Apocalyptist, based largely, no doubt, upon popular tradition, did not detract from their practical value for the people of his day. He was a preacher of righteousness who looked forward in absolute conviction to the final overthrow of sin; and all his visions have as their motive-power the yearning for and belief in the triumph of righteousness over sin. One of a like mind wrote later on, in a kind of preface to his book, these significant words, which sum up the essence of the teaching of this book:

And destroy all the spirits of the reprobate, and the children of the Watchers. because they have wronged mankind. Destroy all wrong from the face of the earth, and let every evil work come to an end: and let the plant of righteousness and truth appear: and it shall prove a blessing: the works of righteousness and truth shall be planted in truth and joy for evermore.

ii. The Parables (chapters xxxvii.-lxxi.). There are three Parables. or Similitudes, and they all have as their underlying thought the destruction of evil and the triumph of righteousness, as in the preceding book. But here some new and important elements are introduced which give special value to this book.

The first parable (xxxviii.-xliv.) is a prophecy of coming judgement upon the wicked, and especially the kings and mighty ones on the earth. On the

[p. xxii]

other hand, the Apocalyptist sees in his vision the abode and resting-places of the righteous who are continually praising the "Lord of Spirits "; this is the usual title given -to God in this book. Here occurs the first mention of the "Elect One" (cp. Luke xxiii. 35). In the presence of the Lord of Spirits are also the four Archangels and innumerable companies of other angels. Here he learns many secrets of the heavens; a fragment on Wisdom (xlii.), which recalls some passages in Ecclus. xxiv., comes in the middle of the secrets, and is clearly out of place. The second parable (xlv.-lvii.) continues the same theme and further develops it. Of special importance is the sitting of the Elect One on the throne of glory as Judge (xlv. 3), and the mention of His title, "Son of Man" (xlvi. 2). The thought of the vindication of the righteous is marred by their joy at vengeance upon the wicked. A particularly striking passage is chapter xlviii. 1-7, which speaks of the inexhaustible fountain of righteousness reserved for the holy and elect in the presence of the Son of Man and of the Lord of Spirits. The Apocalyptist prophesies further of the repentance of the Gentiles (chapter l.), an universalistic note of significance, and speaks of the Resurrection of the dead in a notable passage:

	 
		And In those days shall the earth also give back that which has been entrusted to it,
		 And Sheol also shall give back that which it has received,
		 And Hell shall give back that which it owes.
		
		 [paragraph continues] The parable ends with an account of the judgement, followed by two short passages on the last struggle of the heathen powers against Israel (lvi. 5-8), and the return from the Dispersion (lvii.), which do not appear to be in their original place. The third parable (lviii.-lxxi.) has clearly suffered largely from the intrusion of alien matter, and is probably incomplete. Its main theme is the final judgement upon all flesh, and especially upon the great ones of -the earth; the judge is the Son of Man. Some of

[p. xxiii]

the passages which speak of the future reward of the righteous are full of beauty; the following is well worth quoting:

	 
		And the righteous and elect shall have risen from the earth,
		 And ceased to be of downcast countenance.
		 And they shall have been clothed with garments of glory.
		 And they shall be garments of life from the Lord of Spirits: And your garments shall not grow old.
		 Nor your glory pass away before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 A large Noah fragment comes in the middle of the Parable (see p. xxvi below). The close of this Parable is contained in lxix. 26-29; the account of Enoch's final translation (lxx.), and two of Enoch's visions (lxxi.) are out of place.

iii. The Book of the Courses of the Heavenly Luminaries (chapters lxxii.-lxxxii.). In lxxiv. 12 it says: "And the sun and the stars bring in all the years exactly, so that they do not advance or delay their position by a single day unto eternity; but complete the years with perfect justice in 364 days." [*1] This gives the key-note of this book, viz. that time is to be reckoned by the sun, not by the moon (see further on this the section on Authorship, above). Until we come to chapter lxxx. this book is uninteresting in the extreme; it purports to tell in detail of the laws by which the sun, moon, stars and the winds are governed; they are described by Uriel, "the holy angel," to the Apocalyptist. The four quarters of the world, the seven mountains and the seven rivers are also dealt with. "The author has no other interest save a scientific one coloured by Jewish conceptions and beliefs." [*2] It is, however, different when we come to chapter lxxx. 2-8; the whole tone alters in these verses, in which it is said that owing to the sin of men the moon and the sun will mislead them. An ethical thought is thus brought in

[p. xxiv]

which is wholly lacking in the previous chapters of this book; this is also true of chapter lxxxi.; it is probable that neither of these chapters stood here originally.

Regarding the point of the 364 days to the year which the writer of this book makes, Charles says that "he did this only through sheer incapacity for appreciating an thing better; for he must have been acquainted with the solar year of 365A 1/4 days. His acquaintance with the Greek cycles shows this. . . . The author's reckoning of the year at 364 days may be partly due to his opposition to heathen systems, and partly to the fact that 364 is divisible by seven, and amounts to fifty-two weeks exactly." [*1] In any case, he is opposed to the lunar year, the Pharisaic way of reckoning time; and this is an important point in favour of Sadducaean authorship. It will be noted that this book was written in post-Maccabaean times; it was after the Maccabaean struggle that the Sadducees and Pharisees appeared as parties definitely opposed to one another. [*2]

iv. The Dream-Visions (chapters lxxxiii.-xc.). This book consists of two dream-visions; the first deals with the judgement brought upon the world by the deluge on account of sin; the origin of sin is again traced to the angels who fell. It concludes with a hymn of praise to God in which a prayer is offered that all flesh may not be destroyed (lxxxiii.-lxxxiv.). The second dream-vision is much longer; it gives in brief outline the history of the world to the founding of the Messianic Kingdom. First, the patriarchs, symbolized by bulls, etc. (lxxxv.); then the fallen angels, also described in symbolic language, and their punishment (lxxxvi.-lxxxviii.). The history then proceeds to deal more specifically with Israel from the time of Noah to the Maccabaean revolt (lxxxix.-xc. 19).

[p. xxv]

[paragraph continues] Throughout the dream-vision symbolic language is used; the faithful in Israel are spoken of as the sheep, while the Gentiles are symbolized by wild beasts and birds of prey.

The dream-vision concludes with some familiar eschatological notes: the judgement and condemnation of the wicked; the establishment of the New Jerusalem; the conversion of the Gentiles, who become subject to Israel; the gathering-in of the dispersed Israelites; the resurrection of the righteous dead and the setting-up of the Messianic Kingdom on the appearance of the Messiah (xc. 20-38).

v. The Concluding Section of the Book (xcii.-cv.; xci. x-10, 18, 19 also belong here) is a complete, though short, work; but there are some obvious interpolations, and it is quite possible that some parts of the text are dislocated. This makes the understanding of the book difficult; but if we follow Charles's guidance here the difficulties will disappear. He says that this concluding piece has in some degree suffered at the hands the final editor of the book, both in the way of direct interpolation and of severe dislocations of the text. The interpolations are: xci. 11, xciii. 11-14, xciv. 7d, xcvi. 2. The dislocations of the text are a more important feature of the book. They are confined (with the exception of xciii. 13-14, and of cvi. 17a which should be read immediately after cvi. 14) to xci.-xciii. All critics are agreed as to the chief of these. xci. 12-17 should undoubtedly be read directly after xciii. . . . Taken together xciii. 1-10, xci. 12-17 form an independent whole--the Apocalypse of Weeks--which has been incorporated in xci.-civ. . . . The remaining dislocations need only to be pointed out in order to be acknowledged. On other grounds we find that xci.-civ. is a book of different authorship from that of the rest of the sections. Now, this being so, this section obviously begins with xcii.: 'Written by Enoch the Scribe.' etc. On xcii. follows xci. 1-10, 18, 19 as a natural sequel, where

[p. xxvi]

[paragraph continues] Enoch summons his children to receive his parting words. Then comes the Apocalypse of weeks, xciii. 1-10, xci. 12-17. The original order of the text, therefore, was: xcii. xci. 1-10, 18, 19, xciii. 1-10, xci. 12-17. xciv. These dislocations were the work of the editor, who put the different books of Enoch together, and added lxxx. and lxxxi." [*1]

This book is concerned with the question of the final reward of the righteous and the final punishment of the wicked. . But a new teaching of great importance is put forth here. Hitherto it had been taught that although much incongruity and apparent injustice were to be found on this earth owing to the suffering of the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked,. nevertheless all things would be righted in the world to come, where the wicked would receive their deserts, and the righteous would come to their own. In this book it is taught that retribution will overtake the wicked, and the righteous will have peace and prosperity, even on this earth, with the setting-up of the Messianic Kingdom; and that at the last there will come, with the final judgement, the destruction of the former heaven and earth, and the creation of a new heaven. Then will follow the resurrection of the spirits of the righteous dead who will live for ever in peace and joy, while the wicked will perish everlastingly. The important point, which is a development, is the idea of the punishment of the wicked taking place on this earth, the very scene of their unrighteous triumphs.

vi. The Noah Fragments (vi.-xi, lvii. 7-lv. 2, ix. lxv.-lxix. 25, cvi., cvii.). These fragments are not of much importance; the main topics touched upon are the fall of the angels and sin among men in consequence; judgement on mankind, i.e. the Deluge, and the preservation of Noah.

The first five chapters are generally field to be as late as any part of the whole collection; they deal with the punishment hereafter of the wicked and

[p. xxvii]

the blessedness of the righteous. Chapter cviii., which reads like a final word to the whole collection, touches upon the same theme.

 

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE BOOK FOR THE STUDY OF CHRISTIAN ORIGINS

This is a subject which cannot be thoroughly appreciated without studying the book in detail, especially from its doctrinal standpoint, and seeing in how many aspects it represents the doctrine and the popular conceptions of the Jews during the two last pre-Christian centuries. To do this here would involve a far too extended investigation; it must suffice to indicate a few of the many points which should be studied; from these it will be seen how important the book is for the study of Christian origins. Charles says that "the influence of 1 Enoch on the New Testament has been greater than that of all the other apocryphal and pseudepigraphical books put together"; and he gives a formidable list of passages in the New Testament which "either in phraseology or idea directly depend on, or are illustrative of, passages in 1 Enoch," as well as a further list showing that various doctrines in 1 Enoch had "an undoubted share in moulding the corresponding New Testament doctrines." These passages should be studied--and they will be found to be a most interesting study--in Charles's work already referred to several times, pp. xcv.-ciii.; and with these should be read the section on the Theology of the Book of Enoch, pp. ciii.-cx. Another book of great value and interest--also already quoted--is Burkitt's Jewish and Christian Apocalypses. In dealing with the subject of 1 Enoch and the Gospels, this writer points out that the former "contains a serious attempt to account for the presence of Evil in human history, and this attempt claims our attention, because it is in essentials the view presupposed in the Gospels, especially in the Synoptic Gospels.

[p. xxviii]

[paragraph continues] It is when you study Matthew, Mark, and Luke against the background of the Books of Enoch that you see them in their true perspective. In saying this I have no intention of detracting from the importance of what the, Gospels report to us. On the contrary, it puts familiar words into their proper setting. Indeed, it seems to me that some of the best-known Sayings of Jesus only appear in their true light if regarded as Midrash upon words and concepts that were familiar to those who heard the Prophet of Galilee, though now they have been forgotten by Jew and Christian alike" (p. 21). He then gives an illustration of this from Matt. xii. 43-45, Luke xi. 24--26. Of still greater interest are his remarks upon the relationship between 1 Enoch lxii. and Matt. xxv, 31-46; he believes that "the Similitudes of Enoch are presupposed in the scene from Matthew." The whole of the discussion which follows should be read.

The special points of interest that should be studied in seeking to realize the importance of these books of Enoch for the study of Christian origins are the problems of evil, including, of course, the subjects of daemonology, and future judgement; the Messiah and the Messianic Kingdom--the title "Son of Man" is of special importance--and the Resurrection. There are, of course, other subjects which will suggest themselves in studying the book.

Footnotes

^viii:1 Jewish and Christian Apocalypses, pp. 15, 16 (1913).

^xi:1 G. H. Box, The Ezra Apocalypse, pp. 35, 36 (1912).

^xiii:1 The general Pharisaic point of view regarding this may be gathered from Matt. iii. 7-10.

^xv:1 Burkitt rightly insists that we should speak of the collection as the books. not the book, of Enoch.

^xv:2 Burkitt, op. cit., 28-30.

^xvi:1 i.e. the " Pious ones." or " Saints."

^xvi:2 Die Saddurder (1912).

^xvi:3 i.e., according to him, i.-xxxvi., lxxii.-lxxxii., lxxxiii.-xc., xci. 12-17, xciii.

^xvi:4 See Gen. v. 21-23.

^xvi:5 Op. cit., p. 18.

^xvi:6 Gen. v. 24.

^xvii:1 i.e. "The Book of the Heavenly Luminaries." as Charles calls it.

^xvii:2 i.e. "the righteous"; a play on the word Zaddukim, the "sons of Zadok," i.e. the Sadducees.

^xvii:3 Leszynsky, op cit., pp. 253 ff.

^xviii:1 Chaps. i.-xxxii. 6. and xix. 3-xxi. 9 in a duplicate form were discovered at Akhmim in 1886-1887; vi.-x. 14. xv. 8-xvi. x, and viii. 4-ix. 4 in a duplicate form, have been preserved in Syncellus; lxxxix. 42-49 occurs in a Greek Vatican MS. (No. 1809); there are also a few quotations in early Greek ecclesiastical writings; and i. 9, v. 4. xxvii. 2 are quoted in the Epistle of St. Jude 14, 15.

^xix:1 Op. cit., p. 27.

^xix:2 It is a great pity that one system of chapter-enumeration runs through the whole volume; if each separate book began with chap. i. it would be much better. For obvious reasons this cannot be done here; see Editors' General Preface.

^xxiii:1 See also lxxxii. 4-6. it.

^xxiii:2 Charles, The Book of Enoch, p. 147 (1912).

^xxiv:1 Op. cit. p. 150.

^xxiv:2 for the points of difference between the Pharisees and Sadducees see the present writer's The Books of the Apocrypha, their Origin, Teaching, and Contents, chap. vii. (1914).

^xxvi:1 Op. cit., p. 218.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxx]

 

ABBREVIATIONS, BRACKETS, AND SYMBOLS SPECIALLY USED IN THE TRANSLATION OF 1 ENOCH

E denotes the Ethiopic Version.

Gs denotes the fragments of the Greek Version preserved In Syncellus: in the case of 8b-9b there are two forms of the text, Gs1 Gs2.

Gg denotes the large fragment of the Greek Version discovered at Akhmim, and deposited in the Gizeh Museum, Cairo.

The following brackets are used in the translation of 1 Enoch:

[[ ]]. The use of these brackets means that the words so enclosed are found in Gg but not In E.

[[[[ ]]]]. The use of these brackets means that the words so enclosed are found in E but not in Gg or Gs.

< >. The use of these brackets means that the words so enclosed are restored.

[ ] The use of these brackets means that the words so enclosed are interpolations.

( ). The use of these brackets means that the words so enclosed are supplied by the editor.

The use of thick type denotes that the words so printed are emended.

+ + corruption in the text.

. . . = some words which have been lost.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

 

BOOK OF ENOCH

 

I-XXXVI

 

I-V. Parable of Enoch on the Future Lot of the Wicked and the Righteous

 

CHAPTER I.

1. The words of the blessing of Enoch, wherewith he blessed the elect [[[[and]]]] righteous, who will be living in the day of tribulation, when all the wicked [[[[and godless]]]] are to be removed. 2. And he took up his parable and said--Enoch a righteous man, whose eyes were opened by God, saw the vision of the Holy One in the heavens, [[which]] the angels showed me, and from them I heard everything, and from them I understood as I saw, but not for this generation, but for a remote one which is for to come. 3. Concerning the elect I said, and took up my parable concerning them:

	 
		The Holy Great One will come forth from His dwelling,
		 4. And the eternal God will tread upon the earth, (even) on Mount Sinai,
		 [[And appear from His camp]]
		 And appear in the strength of His might from the heaven of heavens.
		
		5. And all shall be smitten with fear
		 And the Watchers shall quake,
		 And great fear and trembling shall seize them unto the ends of the earth.
		
		6. And the high mountains shall be shaken,
		 And the high hills shall be made low,
		 And shall melt like wax before the flame [p. 32]
		
		7. And the earth shall be [[wholly]] rent in sunder,
		 And all that is upon the earth shall perish,
		 And there shall be a judgement upon all (men).
		
		8. But with the righteous He will make peace.
		
		And will protect the elect,
		 And mercy shall be upon them.
		
		And they shall all belong to God,
		 And they shall be prospered,
		 And they shall [[all]] be blessed.
		
		[[And He will help them all]],
		 And light shall appear unto them,
		 [[And He will make peace with them]].
		
		9. And behold! He cometh with ten thousands of [[His]] holy ones
		 To execute judgement upon all,
		 And to destroy [[all]] the ungodly:
		
		And to convict all flesh
		 Of all the works [[of their ungodliness]] which they have ungodly committed,
		 And of all the hard things which ungodly sinners [[have spoken]] against Him.
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER II.

1. Observe ye everything that takes place in the heaven, how they do not change their orbits, [[and]] the luminaries which are in the heaven, how they all rise and set in order each in its season, and transgress not against their appointed order. 2. Behold ye the earth, and give heed to the things which take place upon it from first to last, [[how steadfast they are]], how [[none of the things upon earth]] change, [[but]] all the works of God appear [[to you]]. 3. Behold the summer and the winter, [[[[how the whole earth is filled with water, and clouds and dew and rain lie upon it]]]].

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER III.

Observe and see how (in the winter) all the trees [[[[seem as though they had withered and shed all their leaves, except fourteen trees, which do not lose their foliage but retain the old foliage from two to three years till the new comes.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

 

CHAPTER IV.

And again, observe ye the days of summer how the sun is above the earth over against it. And you seek shade and shelter by reason of the heat of the sun, and the earth also burns with growing heat, and so you cannot tread on the earth, or on a rock by reason of its heat.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER V.

1. Observe [[[[ye]]]] how the trees cover themselves with green leaves and bear fruit: wherefore give ye heed [[and know]] with regard to all [[His works]], and recognize how He that liveth for ever hath made them so.

2. And [[all]] His works go on [[thus]] from year to year for ever, and all the tasks [[which]] they accomplish for Him, and [[their tasks]] change not, but according as [[[[God]]]] hath ordained so is it done.

3. And behold how the sea and the rivers in like manner accomplish and [[change not]] their tasks [[from His commandments]].

	 
		4. But ye--ye have not been steadfast, nor done the commandments of the Lord,
		 But ye have turned away and spoken proud and hard words
		 With your impure mouths against His greatness.
		 Oh, ye hard-hearted, ye shall find no peace.
		
		5. Therefore shall ye execrate your days,
		 And the years of your life shall perish,
		 And [[the years of your destruction]] shall be multiplied in eternal execration,
		 And ye shall find no mercy.
		
		6a. In those days ye shall make your names an eternal execration unto all the righteous,
		 b. And by you shall [[all]] who curse, curse,
		 And all the sinners [[and godless]] shall imprecate by you,
		 7c. And for you the godless there shall be a curse.
		
		6d. And all the . . . shall rejoice,
		 e. And there shall be forgiveness of sins,
		 f. And every mercy and peace and forbearance: [p. 34]
		 g. There shall be salvation unto them, a goodly light.
		
		 i. And for all of you sinners there shall be no salvation,
		 j But on you all shall abide a curse.
		 7a. But for the elect there shall be light and joy and peace,
		 b. And they shall inherit the earth.
		
		8 And then there shall be bestowed upon the elect wisdom,
		 And they shall all live and never again sin,
		 Either through ungodliness or through pride:
		 But they who are wise shall be humble.
		
		9 And they shall not again transgress,
		 Nor shall they sin all the days of their life,
		 Nor shall they die of (the divine) anger or wrath,
		 But they shall complete the number of the days of their life.
		
		And their lives shall be increased in peace,
		 And the years of their joy shall be multiplied,
		 In eternal gladness and peace,
		 All the days of their life.
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

VI-XI. The Fall of the Angels: the Demoralisation of Mankind: the Intercession of the Angels on behalf of Mankind. The Dooms pronounced by God on the Angels: the Messianic Kingdom (a Noah fragment).

 

CHAPTER VI.

1. And it came to pass when the children of men had multiplied that in those days were born unto them beautiful and comely daughters. 2. And the angels, the children of the heaven, saw and lusted after them, and said to one another: 'Come, let us choose us wives from among the children of men and beget us children.' 3. And Semjaza, who was their leader, said unto them: 'I fear ye will not indeed agree to do this deed, and I alone shall have to pay the penalty of a great sin.' 4. And they all answered

[p. 35]

him and said: 'Let us all swear an oath, and all bind ourselves by mutual imprecations not to abandon this plan but to do this thing.' 5. Then sware they all together and bound themselves by mutual imprecations upon it. 6. And they were in all two hundred; who descended [[in the days]] of Jared on the summit of Mount Hermon, and they called it Mount Hermon, because they had sworn and bound themselves by mutual imprecations upon it. 7. And these are the names of their leaders: Semiazaz, their leader, Arakiba, Rameel, Kokabiel, Tamiel, Ramiel, Danel, Ezeqeel, Baraqijal, Asael, Armaros, Batarel, Ananel, Zaqiel, Samsapeel, Satarel, Turel, Jomjael, Sariel. 8. These are their chiefs of tens.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VII.

1. And all the others together with them took unto themselves wives, and each chose for himself one, and they began to go in unto them and to defile themselves with them, and they taught them charms and enchantments, and the cutting of roots, and made them acquainted with plants. 2. And they became pregnant, and they bare great giants, whose height was three thousand ells: 3. Who consumed all the acquisitions of men. And when men could no longer sustain them, 4. the giants turned against them and devoured mankind. 5. And they began to sin against birds, and beasts, and reptiles, and fish, and to devour one another's flesh, and drink the blood. 6. Then the earth laid accusation against the lawless ones.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VIII.

1. And Azazel taught men to make swords, and knives, and shields, and breastplates, and made known to them the metals <of the earth> and the art of working them, and bracelets, and ornaments, and the use of antimony, and the beautifying of the eyelids, and all kinds of costly stones, and all colouring tinctures. 2. And there arose much godlessness, and they committed fornication, and they were led astray, and became corrupt in all their ways. Semjaza taught enchantments, and root-cuttings, Armaros the resolving of enchantments, Baraqijal,

[p. 36]

[paragraph continues] (taught) astrology, Kokabel the constellations, Ezeqeel the knowledge of the clouds, <Araqiel the signs of the earth, Shamsiel the signs of the sun>, and Sariel the course of the moon. And as men perished, they cried, and their cry went up to heaven . . .

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER IX.

1. And then Michael, Uriel, Raphael, and Gabriel looked down from heaven and saw much blood being shed upon the earth, and all lawlessness being wrought upon the earth. 2. And they said one to another: 'The earth made +without inhabitant cries the voice of their crying+ up to the gates of heaven. 3 [[[[And now to you, the holy ones of heaven]]]], the souls of men make their suit, saying, "Bring our cause before the Most High.".' 4. And they said to the Lord of the ages: 'Lord of lords, God of gods, King of kings, <and God of the ages>, the throne of Thy glory (standeth) unto all the generations of the ages, and Thy name holy and glorious and blessed unto all the ages! 5. Thou hast made all things, and power over all things hast Thou: and all things are naked and open in Thy sight, and Thou seest all things, and nothing can hide itself from Thee. 6. Thou seest what Azazel hath done, who hath taught all unrighteousness on earth and revealed the eternal secrets which were (preserved) in heaven, which men were striving to learn: 7. And Semjaza, to whom Thou hast given authority to bear rule over his associates. 8. And they have gone to the daughters of men upon the earth, and have slept with the women, and have defiled themselves, and revealed to them all kinds of sins. 9. And the women have borne giants, and the whole earth has thereby been filled with blood and unrighteousness. 10. And now, behold, the souls of those who have died are crying and making their suit to the gates of heaven, and their lamentations have ascended: and cannot cease because of the lawless deeds which are wrought on the earth. 11. And Thou knowest all things before they come to pass, and

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] Thou seest these things and Thou dost suffer them, and Thou dost not say to us what we are to do to them in regard to these.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER X.

1. Then said the Most High, the Holy and Great One spake, and sent Uriel to the son of Lamech, and said to him: 2. '<Go to Noah> and tell him in my name "Hide thyself!" and reveal to him the end that is approaching: that the whole earth will be destroyed, and a deluge is about to come upon the whole earth, and will destroy all that is on it. 3. And now instruct him that he may escape and his seed may be preserved for all the generations of the world.' 4. And again the Lord said to Raphael: 'Bind Azazel hand and foot, and cast him into the darkness: and make an opening in the desert, which is in Dudael, and cast him therein. 5. And place upon him rough and jagged rocks, and cover him with darkness, and let him abide there for ever, and cover his face that he may not see light. 6. And on the day of the great judgement he shall be cast into the fire. And heal the earth which the angels have corrupted, and proclaim the healing of the earth, that they may heal the plague, and that all the children of men may not perish through all the secret things that the Watchers have disclosed and have taught their sons. 8. And the whole earth has been corrupted through the works that were taught by Azazel: to him ascribe all sin.' 9. And to Gabriel said the Lord: 'Proceed against the bastards and the reprobates, and against the children of fornication: and destroy [the children of fornication and] the children of the Watchers from amongst men [and cause them to go forth]: send them one against the other that they may destroy each other in battle: for length of days shall they not have. 10. And no request that they (i.e. their fathers) make of thee shall be granted unto their fathers on their behalf; for they hope to live an eternal life, and that each one of them will live five hundred years.' 11. And the Lord said unto Michael: 'Go, bind Semjaza and

[p. 38]

his associates who have united themselves with women so as to have defiled themselves with them in all their uncleanness. 12. And when their sons have slain one another, and they have seen the destruction of their beloved ones, bind them fast for seventy generations in the valleys of the earth, till the day of their judgement and of their consummation, till the judgement that is for ever and ever is consummated. 13. In those days they shall be led off to the abyss of fire: <and> to the torment and the prison in which they shall be confined for ever. And whosoever shall be condemned and destroyed will from thenceforth be bound together with them to the end of all generations. 15. And destroy all the spirits of the reprobate and the children of the Watchers, because they have wronged mankind. Destroy all wrong from the face of the earth and let every evil work come to an end: and let the plant of righteousness and truth appear: [[and it shall prove a blessing; the works of righteousness and truth]] shall be planted in truth and joy for evermore.

	 
		17 And then shall all the righteous escape,
		 And shall live till they beget thousands of children,
		 And all the days of their youth and their old age
		 Shall they complete in peace.
		
		 18 And then shall the whole earth be tilled in righteousness, and shall all be planted with trees and be full of blessing. 19. And all desirable trees shall be planted on it, and they shall plant vines on it: and the vine which they plant thereon shall yield wine in abundance, and as for all the seed which is sown thereon each measure (of it) shall bear a thousand, and each measure of olives shall yield ten presses of oil. 20. And cleanse thou the earth from all oppression, and from all unrighteousness, and from all sin, and from all godlessness: and all the uncleanness that is wrought upon the earth destroy from off the earth. 21. [[And all the children of men shall become righteous]], and all nations shall

[p. 39]

offer adoration and shall praise Me, and all shall worship Me. And the earth shall be cleansed from all defilement, and from all sin, and from all punishment, and from all torment, and I will never again send (them) upon it from generation to generation and for ever.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XI.

1. And in those days I will open the store chambers of blessing which are in the heaven, so as to send them down [[upon the earth]] over the work and labour of the children of men. 2. And truth and peace shall be associated together throughout all the days of the world and throughout all the generations of men.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XII-XVI. Dream Vision of Enoch: his intercession for Azazel and the fallen Angels: and his announcement to them of their first and final doom.

 

CHAPTER XII.

1. Before these things Enoch was hidden, and no one of the children of men knew where he was hidden, and where he abode, and what had become of him. 2. And his activities had to do with the Watchers, and his days were with the holy ones.

3. And I, Enoch was blessing the Lord of majesty and the King of the ages, and lo! the Watchers called me--Enoch the scribe--and said to me: 4. 'Enoch, thou scribe of righteousness, go, +declare+ to the Watchers of the heaven who have left the high heaven, the holy eternal place, and have defiled themselves with women, and have done as the children of earth do, and have taken unto themselves wives: "Ye have wrought great destruction on the earth: 5. And ye shall have no peace nor forgiveness of sin: and inasmuch as +they+ delight themselves in +their+ children, 6. The murder of +their+ beloved ones shall +they+ see, and over the destruction of +their+ children shall +they+ lament, and shall make supplication unto eternity, but mercy and peace shall ye not attain."'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIII.

1. And Enoch went and said: 'Azazel,

[p. 40]

thou shalt have no peace: a severe sentence has gone forth against thee to put thee in bonds: 2. And thou shalt not have toleration nor +request+ granted to thee, because of the unrighteousness which thou hast taught, and because of all the works of godlessness and unrighteousness and sin which thou hast shown to men.' 3. Then I went and spoke to them all together, and they were all afraid, and fear and trembling seized them. 4. And they besought me to draw up a petition for them that they might find forgiveness, and to read their petition in the presence of the Lord of heaven. 5. For from thenceforward they could not speak (with Him) nor lift up their eyes to heaven for shame of their sins for which they had been condemned. 6. Then I wrote out their petition, and the prayer in regard to their spirits and their deeds individually and in regard to their requests that they should have forgiveness and length <of days>+. 7. And I went off and sat down at the waters of Dan, in the land of Dan, to the south of the west of Hermon: I read their petition till I fell asleep. 8. And behold a dream came to me, and visions fell down upon me, and I saw visions of chastisement, [[and a voice came bidding (me)]] I to tell it to the sons of heaven, and reprimand them. 9. And when I awaked, I came unto them, and they were all sitting gathered together, weeping in 'Abelsjail, which is between Lebanon and Seneser, with their faces covered. 10. And I recounted before them all the visions which I had seen in sleep, and I began to speak the words of righteousness, and to reprimand the heavenly Watchers.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIV.

1. The book of the words of righteousness, and of the reprimand of the eternal Watchers in accordance with the command of the Holy Great One in that vision. 2. I saw in my sleep what I will now say with a tongue of flesh and with the breath of my mouth: which the Great One has given to men to converse therewith and understand with the heart. 3. As He has created and given [[[[to man

[p. 41]

the power of understanding the word of wisdom, so hath He created me also and given]]]] me the power of reprimanding the Watchers, the children of heaven. 4. I wrote out your petition, and in my vision it appeared thus, that your petition will not be granted unto you [[[[throughout all the days of eternity, and that judgement has been finally passed upon you: yea (your petition) will not be granted unto you]]]]. 5. And from henceforth you shall not ascend into heaven unto all eternity, and [[in bonds]] of the earth the decree has gone forth to bind you for all the days of the world. 6. And (that) previously you shall have seen the destruction of your beloved sons and ye shall have no pleasure in them, but they shall fall before you by the sword. 7. And your petition on their behalf shall not be granted, nor yet on your own: even though you weep and pray and speak all the words contained in the writing which I have written. 8. And the vision was shown to me thus: Behold, in the vision clouds invited me and a mist summoned me, and the course of the stars and the lightnings sped and hastened me, and the winds in the vision caused me to fly and lifted me upward, and bore me into heaven. 9. And I went in till I drew nigh to a wall which is built of crystals and surrounded by tongues of fire: and it began to affright me. And I went into the tongues of fire and drew nigh to a large house which was built of crystals: and the walls of the house were like a tesselated floor (made) of crystals, and its groundwork was of crystal. 11. Its ceiling was like the path of the stars and the lightnings, and between them were fiery cherubim, and their heaven was (clear as) water. 12. A flaming fire surrounded the walls, and its portals blazed with fire. 13. And I entered into that house, and it was hot as fire and cold as ice: there were no delights of life therein: fear covered me, and trembling got hold upon me. 14. And as I quaked and trembled, I fell upon my face. 15. And I beheld a vision, And lo! there was a second house, greater than the former,

[p. 42]

and the entire portal stood open before me, and it was built of flames of fire. 16. And in every respect it so excelled in splendour and magnificence and extent that I cannot describe to you its splendour and its extent. 17. And its floor was of fire, and above it were lightnings and the path of the stars, and its ceiling also was flaming fire. 18. And I looked and saw [[[[therein]]]] a lofty throne: its appearance was as crystal, and the wheels thereof as the shining sun, and there was the vision of cherubim. 19. And from underneath the throne came streams of flaming fire so that I could not look thereon. 20. And the Great Glory sat thereon, and His raiment shone more brightly than the sun and was whiter than any snow. 21. None of the angels could enter and could behold His face by reason of the magnificence and glory and no flesh could behold Him. 22. The flaming fire was round about Him, and a great fire stood before Him, and none around could draw nigh Him: ten thousand times ten thousand (stood) before Him, yet He needed no counselor. 23. And the most holy ones who were nigh to Him did not leave by night nor depart from Him. 24. And until then I had been prostrate on my face, trembling: and the Lord called me with His own mouth, and said to me: 'Come hither, Enoch, and hear my word.' 25. [[And one of the holy ones came to me and waked me]], and He made me rise up and approach the door: and I bowed my face downwards.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XV.

1. And He answered and said to me, and I heard His voice: 'Fear not, Enoch, thou righteous man and scribe of righteousness: approach hither and hear my voice. 2. And go, say to [[[[the Watchers of heaven]]]], who have sent thee to intercede [[[[for them: "You should intercede"]]]] for men, and not men for you: 3. Wherefore have ye left the high, holy, and eternal heaven, and lain with women, and defiled yourselves with the daughters of men and taken to yourselves wives, and done like the children of earth, and begotten giants (as your) sons? 4. And

[p. 43]

though ye were holy, spiritual, living the eternal life, you have defiled yourselves with the blood of women, and have begotten (children) with the blood of flesh, and, as the children of men, have lusted after flesh and blood as those [[also]] do who die and perish. 5. Therefore have I given them wives also that they might impregnate them, and beget children by them, that thus nothing might be wanting to them on earth. 6. But you were [[formerly]] spiritual, living the eternal life, and immortal for all generations of the world. 7. And therefore I have not appointed wives for you; for as for the spiritual ones of the heaven, in heaven is their dwelling. 8. And now, the giants, who are produced from the spirits and flesh, shall be called evil spirits upon the earth, and on the earth shall be their dwelling. 9. Evil spirits have proceeded from their bodies; because they are born from men, [[[[and]]]] from the holy Watchers is their beginning and primal origin; [[they shall be evil spirits on earth, and]] evil spirits shall they be called. [10. As for the spirits of heaven, in heaven shall be their dwelling, but as for the spirits of the earth which were born upon the earth, on the earth shall be their dwelling.] 11. And the spirits of the giants afflict, oppress, destroy, attack, do battle, and work destruction on the earth, and cause trouble: they take no food, [[but nevertheless hunger]] and thirst, and cause offences. And these spirits shall rise up against the children of men and against the women, because they have proceeded [[from them]].

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XVI.

1. From the days of the slaughter and destruction and death [[of the giants]], from the souls of whose flesh the spirits, having gone forth, shall destroy without incurring judgement--thus shall they destroy until the day of the consummation, the great [[judgement]] in which the age shall be consummated, over the Watchers and the godless, yea, shall be wholly consummated." 2. And now as to the Watchers who have sent thee to intercede for them, who had been [[[[aforetime]]]] in heaven, (say to

[p. 44]

them): "You have been in heaven, but [[all]] the mysteries had not yet been revealed to you, and you knew worthless ones, and these in the hardness of your hearts you have made known to the women, and through these mysteries women and men work much evil on earth." 4. Say to them therefore: "You have no peace."'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XVII-XXXVII. Enoch's Journeys through the Earth and Sheol.

XVII-XIX. The First Journey.

 

CHAPTER XVII.

1. And they took [[and]] brought me to a place in which those who were there were like flaming fire, and, when they wished, they appeared as men. 2. And they brought me to the place of darkness, and to a mountain the point of whose summit reached to heaven. 3. And I saw the places of the luminaries [[and the treasuries of the stars]] and of the thunder [[and]] in the uttermost depths, where were a fiery bow and arrows and their quiver, and [[[[a fiery sword]]]] and all the lightnings. 4. And they took me to the living waters, and to the fire of the west, which receives every setting of the sun. 5. And I came to a river of fire in which the fire flows like water and discharges itself into the great sea towards the west. 6. I saw the great rivers and came to the great [[river and to the great]] darkness, and went to the place where no flesh walks. 7. I saw the mountains of the darkness of winter and the place whence all the waters of the deep flow. 8. I saw the mouths of all the rivers of the earth and the mouth of the deep.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XVIII

1. I saw the treasuries of all the winds: I saw how He had furnished with them the whole creation and the firm foundations of the earth. 2. And I saw the corner-stone of the earth: I saw the four winds which bear [the earth and] the firmament of the heaven. 3. [[[[And I saw how the winds stretch out the vaults of heaven]]]], and have their station between heaven and earth: [[[[these are the

[p. 45]

pillars of the heaven]]]]. 4. I saw the winds of heaven which turn and bring the circumference of the sun and all the stars to their setting. 5. I saw the winds on the earth carrying the clouds: I saw [[[[the paths of the angels. I saw]]]] at the end of the earth the firmament of the heaven above. And I proceeded and saw a place which burns day and night, where there are seven mountains of magnificent stones, three towards the east, and three towards the south. 7. And as for those towards the east, <one> was of coloured stone, and one of pearl, and one of jacinth, and those towards the south of red stone. 8. But the middle one reached to heaven like the throne of God, of alabaster, and the summit of the throne was of sapphire. 9. And I saw a flaming fire. And beyond these mountains 10. is a region the end of the great earth: there the heavens were completed. 11. And I saw a deep abyss, with columns [[[[of heavenly fire, and among them I saw columns]]]] of fire fall, which were beyond measure alike towards the height and towards the depth. 12. And beyond that abyss I saw a place which had no firmament of the heaven above, and no firmly founded earth beneath it: there was no water upon it, and no birds, but it was a waste and horrible place. 13. I saw there seven stars like great burning mountains, and to me, when I inquired regarding them, 14. The angel said: 'This place is the end of heaven and earth: this has become a prison for the stars and the host of heaven. 15. And the stars which roll over the fire are they which have transgressed the commandment of the Lord in the beginning of their rising, because they did not come forth at their appointed times. 16. And He was wroth with them, and bound them till the time when their guilt should be consummated (even) [[for ten thousand years]].'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XIX.

1. And Uriel said to me: 'Here shall stand the angels who have connected themselves with women, and their spirits assuming many different forms are defiling mankind and shall lead them astray

[p. 46]

into sacrificing to demons [[[[as gods]]]], (here shall they stand,) till [[[[the day of]]]] the great judgement in which they shall be judged till they are made an end of. 2. And the women also of the angels who went astray shall become sirens.' 3. And I, Enoch, alone saw the vision, the ends of all things: and no man shall see as I have seen.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XX. Name and Functions of the Seven Archangels.

 

CHAPTER XX.

1. And these are the names of the holy angels who watch. 2. Uriel, one of the holy angels, who is over the world and over Tartarus. 3. Raphael, one of the holy angels, who is over the spirits of men. 4. Raguel, one of the holy angels who +takes vengeance on+ the world of the luminaries. 5. Michael, one of the holy angels, to wit, he that is set over the best part of mankind [[[[and]]]] over chaos. 6. Saraqael, one of the holy angels, who is set over the spirits, who sin in the spirit. 7. Gabriel, one of the holy angels, who is over Paradise and the serpents and the Cherubim. 8. Remiel, one of the holy angels, whom God set over those who rise.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXI. Preliminary and final place of punishment of the fallen angels (stars).

 

CHAPTER XXI.

1. And I proceeded to where things were chaotic. 2. And I saw there something horrible: I saw neither a heaven above nor a firmly founded earth, but a place chaotic and horrible. 3. And there I saw seven stars of the heaven bound together in it, like great mountains and burning with fire. 4. Then I said: 'For what sin are they bound, and on what account have they been cast in hither?' 5. Then said Uriel, one of the holy angels, who was with me, and was chief over them, and said: 'Enoch, why dost thou ask, and why art thou eager for the truth? 6. These are of the number of the stars [[of heaven]], which have transgressed the commandment of the

[p. 47]

[paragraph continues] Lord, and are bound here till ten thousand years, the time entailed by their sins, are consummated.' 7. And from thence I went to another place, which was still more horrible than the former, and I saw a horrible thing: a great fire there which burnt and blazed, and the place was cleft as far as the abyss, being full of great descending columns of fire: neither its extent or magnitude could I see, nor could I conjecture. 8. Then I said: 'How fearful is the place and how terrible to look upon!' 9. Then Uriel answered me, one of the holy angels who was with me, and said unto me: 'Enoch, why hast thou such fear and affright?' And I answered: 'Because of this fearful place, and because of the spectacle of the pain.' 10. And he said [[[[unto me]]]]: 'This place is the prison of the angels, and here they will be imprisoned for ever.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXII. Sheol, or the Underworld.

 

CHAPTER XXII.

1. And thence I went to another place, and he showed me in the west [[another]] great and high mountain [and] of hard rock.

    E 

2 And there was in it +four+ hollow places, deep and wide and very smooth. +How+ smooth are the hollow places and deep and dark to look at.   Gg 

2. And there were +four+ hollow places in it, deep and very smooth: +three+ of them were dark and one bright; and there was a fountain of water in its midst. And I said: '+How+ smooth are these hollow places, and deep and dark to view.' 
  

3. Then Raphael answered, one of the holy angels who was with me, and said unto me: 'These hollow places have been created for this very purpose, that the spirits of the souls of the dead should assemble therein, yea that all the souls of the children of men should assemble here. And these places have 

[p. 48]

 been made to receive them till the day of their judgement and till their appointed period [[till the period appointed]], till the great judgement (comes) upon them.'

    E 

5. I saw the spirits of the children of men who were dead, and their voice went forth to heaven and made suit. 6. Then I asked Raphael the angel who was with me, and I said unto him: 'This spirit--whose is it whose voice goeth forth and maketh suit?'   Gg 

5. I saw (the spirit of) a dead man making suit, and his voice went forth to heaven and made suit. 6. And I asked Raphael the angel who was with me, and I said unto him: 'This spirit which maketh suit, whose is it, whose voice goeth forth and maketh suit to heaven?' 
  

7. And he answered me saying: 'This is the spirit which went forth from Abel, whom his brother Cain slew, and he makes his suit against him till his seed is destroyed from the face of the earth, and his seed is annihilated from amongst the seed of men.'

   E 

8. Then I asked regarding it, and regarding all the hollow places: 'Why as one separated from the other?'

9. And he answered me and said unto me: 'These three have been made that the spirits of the dead might be separated. And such a division has been made <for> the spirits of the righteous, in which there as the bright spring of water. 10. And such has   Gg 

8. Then I asked regarding all the hollow places: 'Why is one separated from the other?'

9. And he answered me saying: 'These three have been made that the spirits of the dead might be separated. And this division has been made for the spirits of the righteous, in which there is the bright spring of water. 10. And this has been made for sinners 
  [p. 49]    
   E 

been made for sinners when they die and are buried in the earth and judgement has not been executed on them in their lifetime. 11. Here their spirits shall be set apart in this great pain till the great day of judgement and punishment and torment of those who +curse+ for ever, and retribution for their spirits. There He shall bind them for ever. 12. And such a division has been made for the spirits of those who make their suit, who make disclosures concerning their destruction, when they were slain in the days of the sinners. 13. Such has been made for the spirits of men who were not righteous but sinners, who were complete in transgression, and of the transgressors. they shall be companions: but their spirits shall not be slain in the day of judgement nor shall they be raised from thence. 14. Then I blessed the Lord of glory and said: 'Blessed be my Lord, the Lord of righteousness, who ruleth for ever.'   Gg 

when they die and are buried in the earth and judgement has not been executed upon them in their lifetime. 11. Here their spirits shall be set apart in this great pain, till the great day of judgement, scourgings, and torments of the accursed for ever, so that (there maybe) retribution for their spirits. There He shall bind them for ever. 12. And this division has been made for the spirits of those who make their suit, who make disclosures concerning their destruction, when they were slain in the days of the sinners. 13. And this has been made for the spirits of men who shall not be righteous but sinners, who are godless, and of the lawless they shall be companions: but their spirits shall not be punished in the day of judgement nor shall they be raised from thence. 14. Then I blessed the Lord of Glory and said: 'Blessed art Thou, Lord of righteousness, who rulest over the world.' 
  

 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

XXIII. The Fire that deals with the Luminaries of Heaven.

 

CHAPTER XXIII.

1. From thence I went to another place to the west of the ends of the earth. 2. And I saw a [[[[burning]]]] fire which ran without resting, and paused not from its course day or night but (ran) regularly. 3. And I asked saying: 'What is this which rests not?' 4. Then Raguel, one of the holy angels who was with me, answered me [[[[and said unto me]]]]: 'This course [[of fire]] [[[[which thou hast seen]]]] is the fire in the west which +persecutes+ all the luminaries of heaven.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXIV. XXV. The Seven Mountains in the North-West and the Tree of Life.

 

CHAPTER XXIV.

1. [[[[And from thence I went to another place of the earth]]]], and he showed me a mountain range of fire which burnt [[[[day and night]]]]. 2. And I went beyond it and saw seven magnificent mountains all differing each from the other, and the stones (thereof) were magnificent and beautiful, magnificent as a whole, of glorious appearance and fair exterior: [[[[three towards]]]] the east, [[[[one]]]] founded on the other, and three towards the south, one upon the other, and deep rough ravines, no one of which joined with any other. 3. And the seventh mountain was in the midst of these, and it excelled them in height, resembling the seat of a throne: and fragrant trees encircled the throne. 4. And amongst them was a tree such as I had never yet smelt, neither was any amongst them nor were others like it: it had a fragrance beyond all fragrance, and its leaves and blooms and wood wither not for ever: and its fruit [[[[is beautiful, and its fruit]]]] resembles the dates of a palm. 5. Then I said: '[[How]] beautiful is this tree, and fragrant, and its leaves are fair, and its blooms [[[[very]]]] delightful in appearance.' 6. Then answered Michael, one of the holy [[[[and honoured]]]] angels who was with me, and was their leader.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXV.

1. And he said unto me: 'Enoch, why dost

[p. 51]

thou ask me regarding the fragrance of the tree, and [[why]] dost thou wish to learn the truth?' Then I answered him [[[[saying]]]]: 'I wish to know about everything, but especially about this tree.' And he answered saying: 'This high mountain [[[[which thou hast seen]]]], whose summit is like the throne of God, is His throne, where the Holy Great One, the Lord of Glory, the Eternal King, will sit, when He shall come down to visit the earth with goodness. 4. And as for this fragrant tree no mortal is permitted to touch it till the great judgement, when He shall take vengeance on all and bring (everything) to its consummation for ever. It shall then be given to the righteous and holy. 5. Its fruit shall be for food to the elect: it shall be transplanted to the holy place, to the temple of the Lord, the Eternal King.

	 
		6 Then shall they rejoice with joy and be glad,
		 And into the holy place shall they enter;
		 And its fragrance shall be in their bones,
		 And they shall live a long life on earth,
		 Such as thy fathers lived:
		 And in their days shall no [[[[sorrow or]]]] plague
		 Or torment or calamity touch them.'
		
		 7 Then blessed I the God of Glory, the Eternal King, who hath prepared such things for the righteous, and hath created them and promised to give to them.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 Jerusalem and the Mountains, Ravines and Streams.

 

CHAPTER XXVI.

1. And I went from thence to the middle of the earth, and I saw a blessed place [[in which there were trees]] with branches abiding and blooming [of a dismembered tree]. 2. And there I saw a holy mountain, [[[[and]]]] underneath the mountain to the east there was a stream and it flowed towards the south. 3. And I saw towards the east another mountain higher than this, and between them a deep and narrow ravine: in it also ran a stream [[underneath]] the mountain. 4. And to the west thereof there was another mountain, lower than the former and of small elevation, and a ravine [[deep and dry]]

[p. 52]

between them: and another deep and dry ravine was at the extremities of the three [[mountains]]. 5. And all the ravines were deep [[[[and narrow]]]], (being formed) of hard rock, and trees were not planted upon them. 6. And I marveled [[[[at the rocks, and I marveled]]]] at the ravine, yea, I marveled very much.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXVII. The Purpose of the Accursed Valley.

 

CHAPTER XXVII.

1. Then said I: 'For what object is this blessed land, which is entirely filled with trees, and this accursed valley [[[[between]]]]?' 2. [[[[Then Uriel, one of the holy angels who was with me, answered and said: 'This]]]] accursed valley is for those who are accursed for ever: Here shall all [[the accursed]] be gathered together who utter with their lips against the Lord unseemly words and of His glory speak hard things.

   E 

Here shall they be gathered together, and here shall be their place of judgement. 3. In the last days there shall be upon them the spectacle of righteous judgement in the presence of the righteous for ever: here shall the merciful bless the Lord of glory, the Eternal King.   Gg 

Here shall they be gathered together, and here shall be the place of their habitation. 3. In the last times, in the days of the true judgement in the presence of the righteous for ever: here shall the godly bless the Lord of Glory, the Eternal Kin. 
  

4. In the days of judgement over the former, they shall bless Him for the mercy in accordance with which He has assigned them (their lot).' 5. Then I blessed the Lord of Glory and set forth His [[glory]] and lauded Him gloriously.

 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXVIII-XXXIII. Further Journey to the East.

 

CHAPTER XXVIII

1. And thence I went [[[[towards the east]]]], into the midst [[[[of the mountain range of the desert]]]],

[p. 53]

and I saw a wilderness and it was solitary, full of trees and plants. 2. [[[[And]]]] water gushed forth from above. 3. Rushing like a copious watercourse [which flowed] towards the north-west it caused clouds and dew to ascend on every side.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXIX.

1. And thence I went to another place in the desert, and approached to the east of this mountain range. 2. And [[[[there]]]] I saw aromatic trees exhaling the fragrance of frankincense and myrrh, and the trees also were similar to the almond tree.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXX.

1 .And beyond these, I went afar to the east, and I saw another place, a valley (full) of water. 2. And [[therein there was]] a tree, the colour (?) of fragrant trees such as the mastic. 3. And on the sides of those valleys I saw fragrant cinnamon. And beyond these I proceeded to the east.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXI.

1. And I saw other mountains, and amongst them were [[groves of]] trees, and there flowed forth from them nectar, which is named sarara and galbanum. 2. And beyond these mountains I saw another mountain [[to the east of the ends of the earth]], [[[[whereon were aloe trees]]]], and all the trees were full of stacte, being like almond-trees. 3. And when one burnt it, it smelt sweeter than any fragrant odour.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXII.

   E 

1. And after these fragrant odours, as I looked towards the north over the mountains I saw seven mountains full of choice nard and fragrant trees and cinnamon and pepper.   Gg 

1. To the north-east I beheld seven mountains full of choice nard and mastic and cinnamon and pepper. 
  

2. And thence I went over the summits of [[all]] these mountains, far towards the east [[of the earth]], and passed above the Erythraean sea and went far from it, and passed over [[[[the angel]]]] Zotiel.

[p. 54]

   E 

3. And I came to the Garden of Righteousness, and saw beyond those trees many large trees growing there and of goodly fragrance, large, very beautiful and glorious, and the tree of wisdom whereof they eat and know great wisdom.   Gg 

3. And I came to the Garden of Righteousness, and from afar off trees more numerous than these trees and great--+two+ trees there, very great, beautiful, and glorious, and magnificent, and the tree of knowledge, whose holy fruit they eat and know great wisdom. 
  

4. [[That tree is in height like the fir, and its leaves are]] like (those of) the Carob tree: and its fruit is like the clusters of the vine, very beautiful: and the fragrance of the tree penetrates afar. 5. Then I said: '[[How]] beautiful is the tree, and how attractive is its look!' 6. Then Raphael the holy angel, who was with me, answered me [[[[and said]]]]: 'This is the tree of wisdom, of which thy father old (in years) and thy aged mother, who were before thee, have eaten, and they learnt wisdom and their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked and they were driven out of the garden.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXIII.

1. And from thence I went to the ends of the earth and saw there great beasts, and each differed from the other; and (I saw) birds also differing in appearance and beauty and voice, the one differing from the other. 2. And to the east of those beasts I saw the ends of the earth whereon the heaven rests, and the portals of the heaven open. 3. And I saw how the stars of heaven come forth, and I counted the portals out of which they proceed, and wrote down all their outlets, of each individual star by itself, according to their number and their names, their courses and their positions, and their times and their months, as Uriel the holy angel who was with me showed me. 4. He showed all things to me

[p. 55]

and wrote them down for me: also their names he wrote for me, and their laws and their companies.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXXIV. XXXV. Enoch's Journey to the North.

 

CHAPTER XXXIV.

1. And from thence I went towards the north to the ends of the earth, and there I saw a great and glorious device at the ends of the whole earth. 2. And here I saw three portals of heaven open in the heaven: through each of them proceed north winds: when they blow there is cold, hail, frost, snow, dew, and rain. 3. And out of one portal they blow for good: but when they blow through the other two portals, it is with violence and affliction on the earth, and they blow with violence.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XXXV.

1. And from thence I went towards the west to the ends of the earth, and saw there three portals of the heaven open such as I had seen in the +east+, the same number of portals, and the same number of outlets.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXXVI. The Journey to the South.

 

CHAPTER XXXVI.

1. And from thence I went to the south to the ends of the earth, and saw there three open portals of the heaven: and thence there come dew, rain, +and wind+. 2. And from thence I went to the east to the ends of the heaven, and saw here the three eastern portals of heaven open and small portals above them. 3. Through each of these small portals pass the stars of heaven and run their course to the west on the path which is shown to them. 4. And as often as I saw I blessed always the Lord of Glory, and I continued to bless the Lord of Glory who has wrought great and glorious wonders, to show the greatness of His work to the angels and to spirits and to men, that they might praise His work and all His creation: that they might see the work of His might and praise the great work of His hands and bless Him for ever.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

 

The Parables

XXXVII-LXXI

 

CHAPTER XXXVII.

1. The second vision which he saw, the vision of wisdom--which Enoch the son of Jared, the son of Mahalalel, the son of Cainan, the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, saw. 2. And this is the beginning of the words of wisdom which I lifted up my voice to speak and say to those which dwell on earth: Hear, ye men of old time, and see, ye that come after, the words of the Holy One which I will speak before the Lord of Spirits. 3. It were better to declare (them only) to the men of old time, but even from those that come after we will not withhold the beginning of wisdom. 4. Till the present day such wisdom has never been given by the Lord of Spirits as I have received according to my insight, according to the good pleasure of the Lord of Spirits by whom the lot of eternal life has been given to me. 5. Now three parables were imparted to me, and I lifted up my voice and recounted them to those that dwell on the earth.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXXVII-XLIV. The First Parable.

XXXVIII. The Coming Judgement of the Wicked.

 

CHAPTER XXXVIII

	 
		1. The First Parable.
		 When the congregation of the righteous shall appear,
		 And sinners shall be judged for their sins,
		 And shall be driven from the face of the earth:
		
		2. And when the Righteous One shall appear before the eyes of the righteous,
		 Whose elect works hang upon the Lord of Spirits,
		 And light shall appear to the righteous and the elect who dwell on the earth, [p. 57]
		 Where then will be the dwelling of the sinners,
		 And where the resting-place of those who have denied the Lord of Spirits?
		 It had been good for them if they had not been born.
		
		3. When the secrets of the righteous shall be revealed and the sinners judged,
		 And the godless driven from the presence of the righteous and elect,
		 4. From that time those that possess the earth shall no longer be powerful and exalted:
		
		And they shall not be able to behold the face of the holy,
		 For the Lord of Spirits has caused His light to appear
		 On the face of the holy, righteous, and elect.
		
		5. Then shall the kings and the mighty perish
		 And be given into the hands of the righteous and holy.
		 6. And thenceforward none shall seek for themselves mercy from the Lord of Spirits
		 For their life is at an end.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XXXIX. The Abode of the Righteous and of the Elect One: the Praises of the Blessed.

 

CHAPTER XXXIX.

1. [And it +shall come to pass in those days that elect and holy children +will descend from the high heaven, and their seed +will become one with the children of men. 2. And in those days Enoch received books of zeal and wrath, and books of disquiet and expulsion.]

	 
		And mercy shall not be accorded to them, saith the Lord of Spirits.
		 3. And in those days a whirlwind carried me off from the earth,
		 And set me down at the end of the heavens. [p. 58]
		
		4. And there I saw another vision, the dwelling-places of the holy,
		 And the resting-places of the righteous.
		
		5. Here mine eyes saw their dwellings with His righteous angels,
		 And their resting-places with the holy.
		
		And they petitioned and interceded and prayed for the children of men,
		 And righteousness flowed before them as water,
		
		And mercy like dew upon the earth:
		 Thus it is amongst them for ever and ever.
		
		6a. And in that place mine eyes saw the Elect One of righteousness and of faith,
		 7a. And I saw his dwelling-place under the wings of the Lord of Spirits.
		 6b. And righteousness shall prevail in his days,
		 And the righteous and elect shall be without number before Him for ever and ever.
		 7b. And all the righteous and elect before Him shall be +strong+ as fiery lights,
		 And their mouth shall be full of blessing,
		
		And their lips extol the name of the Lord of Spirits,
		 And righteousness before Him shall never fail,
		 [And uprightness shall never fail before Him.]
		 8. There I wished to dwell,
		 And my spirit longed for that dwelling-place:
		
		And there heretofore hath been my portion,
		 For so has it been established concerning me before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 9. In those days I praised and extolled the name of the Lord of Spirits with blessings and praises, because He hath destined me for blessing and glory according to the good pleasure of the Lord of Spirits. 10. For a long time my eyes regarded that place, and I blessed Him and praised Him, saying: 'Blessed is He, and may He be blessed from the beginning and

[p. 59]

for evermore. 11. And before Him there is no ceasing. He knows before the world was created what is for ever and what will be from generation unto generation. 12. Those who sleep not bless Thee: they stand before Thy glory and bless, praise, and extol, saying: "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Spirits: He filleth the earth with spirits."' 13. And here my eyes saw all those who sleep not: they stand before Him and bless and say: 'Blessed be Thou, and blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever.' 14. And my face was changed; for I could no longer behold.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XL. XLI. 2. The Four Archangels.

 

CHAPTER XL.

1. And after that I saw thousands of thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand, I saw a multitude beyond number and reckoning, who stood before the Lord of Spirits. 2. And on the four sides of the Lord of Spirits I saw four presences, different from those that sleep not, and I learnt their names: for the angel that went with me made known to me their names, and showed me all the hidden things.

3. And I heard the voices of those four presences as they uttered praises before the Lord of glory. 4. The first voice blesses the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever. 5. And the second voice I heard blessing the Elect One and the elect ones who hang upon the Lord of Spirits. 6. And the third voice I heard pray and intercede for those who dwell on the earth and supplicate in the name of the Lord of Spirits. 7. And I heard the fourth voice fending off the Satans and forbidding them to come before the Lord of Spirits to accuse them who dwell on the earth. 8. After that I asked the angel of peace who went with me, who showed me everything that is hidden: 'Who are these four presences which I have seen and whose words I have heard and written down?' 9. And he said to me: 'This first is Michael, the merciful and long-suffering: and the second, who

[p. 60]

is set over all the diseases and all the wounds of the children of men, is Raphael: and the third, who is set over all the powers, is Gabriel: and the fourth, who is set over the repentance unto hope of those who inherit eternal life, is named Phanuel.' And these are the four angels of the Lord of Spirits and the four voices I heard in those days.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XLI.

1. And after that I saw all the secrets of the heavens, and how the kingdom is divided, and how the actions of men are weighed in the balance. 2. And there I saw the mansions of the elect and the mansions of the holy, and mine eyes saw there all the sinners being driven from thence which deny the name of the Lord of Spirits, and being dragged off: and they could not abide because of the punishment which proceeds from the Lord of Spirits.

XLI. 3-9. Astronomical Secrets.

3. And there mine eyes saw the secrets of the lightning and of the thunder, and the secrets of the winds, how they are divided to blow over the earth, and the secrets of the clouds and dew, and there I saw from whence they proceed in that place and from whence they saturate the dusty earth. 4. And there I saw closed chambers out of which the winds are divided, the chamber of the hail and winds, the chamber of the mist, and of the clouds, and the cloud thereof hovers over the earth from the beginning of the world. 5. And I saw the chambers of the sun and moon, whence they proceed and whither they come again, and their glorious return, and how one is superior to the other, and their stately orbit, and how they do not leave their orbit, and they add nothing to their orbit and they take nothing from it, and they keep faith with each other, in accordance with the oath by which they are bound together. 6. And first the sun goes forth and traverses his path according to the commandment of the Lord of Spirits, and mighty is His name for ever and ever.

[p. 61]

[paragraph continues]  7. And after that I saw the hidden and the visible path of the moon, and she accomplishes the course of her path in that place by day and by night--the one holding a position opposite to the other before the Lord of Spirits.

	 
		And they give thanks and praise and rest not;
		 For unto them is their thanksgiving rest.
		 8. For the sun changes oft for a blessing or a curse,
		 And the course of the path of the moon is light to the righteous
		 And darkness to the sinners in the name of the Lord,
		
		Who made a separation between the light and the darkness,
		 And divided the spirits of men,
		
		And strengthened the spirits of the righteous,
		 In the name of His righteousness.
		
		 9. For no angel hinders and no power is able to hinder; for He appoints a judge for them all and He judges them all before Him.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XLII. The Dwelling-places of Wisdom and of Unrighteousness.

 

CHAPTER XLII.

	 
		1. Wisdom found no place where she might dwell;
		 Then a dwelling-place was assigned her in the heavens.
		
		2 Wisdom went forth to make her dwelling among the children of men,
		 And found no dwelling-place:
		
		Wisdom returned to her place,
		 And took her seat among the angels.
		
		3 And unrighteousness went forth from her chambers:
		 Whom she sought not she found,
		 And dwelt with them, [p. 62]
		
		As rain in a desert
		 And dew on a thirsty land.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XLIII. XLIV. Astronomical Secrets.

 

CHAPTER XLIII.

1. And I saw other lightnings and the stars of heaven, and I saw how He called them all by their names and they hearkened unto Him. 2. And I saw how they are weighed in a righteous balance according to their proportions of light: (I saw) the width of their spaces and the day of their appearing, and how their revolution produces lightning: and (I saw) their revolution according to the number of the angels, and (how) they keep faith with each other. 3. And I asked the angel who went with me who showed me what was hidden: 'What are these?' 4. And he said to me: 'The Lord of Spirits hath showed thee their parabolic meaning (lit. 'their parable'): these are the names of the holy who dwell on the earth and believe in the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XLIV.

Also another phenomenon I saw in regard to the lightnings: how some of the stars arise and become lightnings and cannot part with their new form.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XLV-LVII. The Second Parable.

 The Lot of the Apostates: the New Heaven and the New Earth.

 

CHAPTER XLV.

1. And this is the Second Parable concerning those who deny the name of the dwelling of the holy ones and the Lord of Spirits.

	 
		2. And into the heaven they shall not ascend,
		 And on the earth they shall not come:
		 Such shall be the lot of the sinners
		 Who have denied the name of the Lord of Spirits,
		 Who are thus preserved for the day of suffering and tribulation.[p. 63]
		
		3. On that day Mine Elect One shall sit on the throne of glory
		 And shall try their works,
		 And their places of rest shall be innumerable.
		
		And their souls shall grow strong within them when they see Mine Elect Ones,
		 And those who have called upon My glorious name:
		 4. Then will I cause Mine Elect One to dwell among them.
		
		And I will transform the heaven and make it an eternal blessing and light
		 5. And I will transform the earth and make it a blessing:
		
		And I will cause Mine elect ones to dwell upon it:
		 But the sinners and evil-doers shall not set foot thereon.
		
		6. For I have provided and satisfied with peace My righteous ones
		 And have caused them to dwell before Me:
		
		But for the sinners there is judgement impending with Me,
		 So that I shall destroy them from the face of the earth.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XLVI. The Head of Days and the Son of Man.

 

CHAPTER XLVI.

	 
		1. And there I saw One who had a head of days,
		 And His head was white like wool,
		 And with Him was another being whose countenance had the appearance of a man,
		 And his face was full of graciousness, like one of the holy angels.
		
		 2. And I asked the angel who went with me and showed me all the hidden things, concerning that Son of Man, who he was, and whence he was, (and)

[p. 64]

why he went with the Head of Days? And he answered and said unto me:

	 
		This is the son of Man who hath righteousness,
		 With whom dwelleth righteousness,
		 And who revealeth all the treasures of that which is hidden,
		
		Because the Lord of Spirits hath chosen him,
		 And whose lot hath the pre-eminence before the Lord of Spirits in uprightness for ever.
		
		4, And this Son of Man whom thou hast seen
		 Shall +raise up+ the kings and the mighty from their seats,
		 [And the strong from their thrones]
		
		And shall loosen the reins of the strong,
		 And break the teeth of the sinners.
		
		5. [And he shall put down the kings from their thrones and kingdoms]
		 Because they do not extol and praise Him,
		 Nor humbly acknowledge whence the kingdom was bestowed upon them.
		 6. And he shall put down the countenance of the strong,
		 And shall fill them with shame.
		
		And darkness shall be their dwelling,
		 And worms shall be their bed,
		 And they shall have no hope of rising from their beds,
		 Because they do not extol the name of the Lord of Spirits.
		
		7. And these are they who +judge+ the stars of heaven,
		 [And raise their hands against the Most High],
		 +And tread upon the earth and dwell upon it+.
		
		And all their deeds manifest unrighteousness,
		 And their power rests upon their riches, [p. 65]
		 And their faith is in the +gods+ which they have made with their hands,
		 And they deny the name of the Lord of Spirits,
		
		8. And they persecute the houses of His congregations,
		 And the faithful who hang upon the name of the Lord of Spirits.
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XLVII. The Prayer of the Righteous for Vengeance and their Joy at its coming.

 

CHAPTER XLVII.

	 
		1. And in those days shall have ascended the prayer of the righteous,
		 And the blood of the righteous from the earth before the Lord of Spirits.
		 2. In those days the holy ones who dwell above in the heavens
		 Shall unite with one voice
		 And supplicate and pray [and praise,
		 And give thanks and bless the name of the Lord of Spirits]
		 On behalf of the blood of the righteous which has been shed,
		 And that the prayer of the righteous may not be in vain before the Lord of Spirits,
		 That judgement may be done unto them,
		 And that they may not have to suffer for ever.
		 3. In those days I saw the Head of Days when He seated himself upon the throne of His glory,
		 And the books of the living were opened before Him:
		 And all His host which is in heaven above and His counselors stood before Him,
		 4 And the hearts of the holy were filled with joy;
		 Because the number of the righteous had been offered,
		 And the prayer of the righteous had been heard,
		 And the blood of the righteous been required before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

XLVIII. The Fount of Righteousness; the Son of Man--the Stay of the Righteous: Judgement of the Kings and the Mighty.

 

CHAPTER XLVIII.

	 
		1. And in that place I saw the fountain of righteousness
		 Which was inexhaustible:
		 And around it were many fountains of wisdom;
		
		And all the thirsty drank of them,
		 And were filled with wisdom,
		 And their dwellings were with the righteous and holy and elect.
		 2. And at that hour that Son of Man was named In the presence of the Lord of Spirits,
		 And his name before the Head of Days.
		
		3. Yea, before the sun and the signs were created,
		 Before the stars of the heaven were made,
		 His name was named before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		4. He shall be a staff to the righteous whereon to stay themselves and not fall,
		 And he shall be the light of the Gentiles,
		 And the hope of those who are troubled of heart.
		
		5. All who dwell on earth shall fall down and worship before him,
		 And will praise and bless and celebrate with song the Lord of Spirits.
		
		6. And for this reason hath he been chosen and hidden before Him,
		 Before the creation of the world and for evermore.
		
		7. And the wisdom of the Lord of Spirits hath revealed him to the holy and righteous;
		 For he hath preserved the lot of the righteous,
		 Because they have hated and despised this world of unrighteousness,
		 And have hated all its works and ways in the name of the Lord of Spirits: [p. 67]
		 For in his name they are saved,
		 And according to his good pleasure hath it been in regard to their life.
		
		8. In these days downcast in countenance shall the kings of the earth have become,
		 And the strong who possess the land because of the works of their hands;
		
		For on the day of their anguish and affliction they shall not (be able to) save themselves.
		 9. And I will give them over into the hands of Mine elect:
		
		As straw in the fire so shall they burn before the face of the holy:
		 As lead in the water shall they sink before the face of the righteous,
		 And no trace of them shall any more be found.
		
		10. And on the day of their affliction there shall be rest on the earth,
		 And before them they shall fall and not rise again:
		
		And there shall be no one to take them with his hands and raise them:
		 For they have denied the Lord of Spirits and His Anointed.
		 The name of the Lord of Spirits be blessed.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XLIX. The Power and Wisdom of the Elect One.

 

CHAPTER XLIX.

	 
		l. For wisdom is poured out like water,
		 And glory faileth not before him for evermore.
		
		2. For he is mighty in all the secrets of righteousness,
		 And unrighteousness shall disappear as a shadow,
		 And have no continuance;
		 Because the Elect One standeth before the Lord of Spirits,
		 And his glory is for ever and ever,
		 And his might unto all generations. [p. 68]
		
		3. And in him dwells the spirit of wisdom,
		 And the spirit which gives insight,
		 And the spirit of understanding and of might,
		 And the spirit of those who have fallen asleep in righteousness.
		
		4. And he shall judge the secret things,
		 And none shall be able to utter a lying word before him;
		 For he is the Elect One before the Lord of Spirits according to His good pleasure.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

L. The Glorification and Victory of the Righteous: the Repentance of the Gentiles.

 

CHAPTER L.

	 
		1. And in those days a change shall take place for the holy and elect,
		 And the light of days shall abide upon them,
		 And glory and honour shall turn to the holy,
		 2. On the day of affliction on which evil shall have been treasured up against the sinners.
		
		And the righteous shall be victorious in the name of the Lord of Spirits:
		 And He will cause the others to witness (this)
		 That they may repent
		 And forgo the works of their hands.
		
		3. They shall have no honour through the name of the Lord of Spirits,
		 Yet through His name shall they be saved,
		 And the Lord of Spirits will have compassion on them,
		 For His compassion is great.
		 4. And He is righteous also in His judgement,
		 And in the presence of His glory unrighteousness also shall not maintain itself:
		 At His judgement the unrepentant shall perish before Him.
		 5. And from henceforth I will have no mercy on them, saith the Lord of Spirits.
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

LI. The Resurrection of the Dead, and the Separation by the Judge of the Righteous and the Wicked.

 

CHAPTER LI.

	 
		1. And in those days shall the earth also give back that which has been entrusted to it,
		 And Sheol also shall give back that which it has received,
		 And hell shall give back that which it owes.
		
		5a. For in those days the Elect One shall arise,
		 2. And he shall choose the righteous and holy from among them:
		 For the day has drawn nigh that they should be saved.
		
		3. And the Elect One shall in those days sit on My throne,
		 And his mouth shall pour forth all the secrets of wisdom and counsel:
		 For the Lord of Spirits hath given (them) to him and hath glorified him.
		
		4. And in those days shall the mountains leap like rams,
		 And the hills also shall skip like lambs satisfied with milk,
		 And the faces of [[all]] the angels in heaven shall be lighted up with joy.
		
		5b. And the earth shall rejoice,
		 c. And the righteous shall dwell upon it,
		 d. And the elect shall walk thereon.
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LII. The Seven  [*1] Metal Mountains and the Elect One.

 

CHAPTER LII.

l. And after those days in that place where I had seen all the visions of that which is hidden--for I had been carried off in a whirlwind and they had borne me towards the west-- 2. There mine eyes saw all the secret things of heaven that shall be, a mountain of iron, and a mountain of copper, and a

[p. 70]

mountain of silver, and a mountain of gold, and a mountain of soft metal, and a mountain of lead.

3. And I asked the angel who went with me, saying, 'What things are these which I have seen in secret?' 4. And he said unto me: 'All these things which thou hast seen shall serve the dominion of His Anointed that he may be potent and mighty on the earth.'

5. And that angel of peace answered, saying unto me: 'Wait a little, and there shall be revealed unto thee all the secret things which surround the Lord of Spirits.

	 
		6. And these mountains which thine eyes have seen,
		 The mountain of iron, and the mountain of copper, and the mountain of silver,
		 And the mountain of gold, and the mountain of soft metal, and the mountain of lead,
		 All these shall be in the presence of the Elect One
		 As wax: before the fire,
		 And like the water which streams down from above [upon those mountains],
		 And they shall become powerless before his feet.
		 7. And it shall come to pass in those days that none shall be saved,
		 Either by gold or by silver,
		 And none be able to escape.
		 8 And there shall be no iron for war,
		 Nor shall one clothe oneself with a breastplate.
		 Bronze shall be of no service,
		 And tin [shall be of no service and] shall not be esteemed,
		 And lead shall not be desired.
		 9 And all these things shall be [denied and] destroyed from the surface of the earth,
		 When the Elect One shall appear before the face of the Lord of Spirits.'
		
		 
		
		 

Footnotes

^69:1 [Only six are mentioned; see Charles' note in his large edition--EDD.]

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

LIII. LVI. 6. The Valley of Judgement: the Angels of Punishment: the Communities of the Elect One.

 

CHAPTER LIII.

1. There mine eyes saw a deep valley with open mouths, and all who dwell on the earth and sea and islands shall bring to him gifts and presents and tokens of homage, but that deep valley shall not become full.

	 
		2. And their hands commit lawless deeds,
		 And the sinners devour all whom they lawlessly oppress:
		 Yet the sinners shall be destroyed before the face of the Lord of Spirits,
		 And they shall be banished from off the face of His earth,
		 And they shall perish for ever and ever.
		
		 3. For I saw all the angels of punishment abiding (there) and preparing all the instruments of Satan. 4. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me: 'For whom are they preparing these instruments?' 5. And he said unto me: 'They prepare these for the kings and the mighty of this earth, that they may thereby be destroyed.

6. And after this the Righteous and Elect One shall cause the house of his congregation to appear: henceforth they shall be no more hindered in the name of the Lord of Spirits.

	 
		7. And these mountains shall not stand as the earth before his righteousness,
		 But the hills shall be as a fountain of water,
		 And the righteous shall have rest from the oppression of sinners.'
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER LIV.

1 And I looked and turned to another part of the earth, and saw there a deep valley with burning fire. 2. And they brought the kings and the mighty, and began to cast them into this deep valley. 3. And there mine eyes saw how they made these their instruments, iron chains of immeasurable weight. 4. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me, saying: 'For whom are these chains being prepared?'

[p. 72]

[paragraph continues]  5. And he said unto me: 'These are being prepared for the hosts of Azazel, so that they may take them and cast them into the abyss of complete condemnation, and they shall cover their jaws with rough stones as the Lord of Spirits commanded.

6. And Michael, and Gabriel, and Raphael, and Phanuel shall take hold of them on that great day, and cast them on that day into the burning furnace, that the Lord of Spirits may take vengeance on them for their unrighteousness in becoming subject to Satan and leading astray those who dwell on the earth.'

LIV. 7.-LV 2. Noachic Fragment on the first World Judgement.

7. 'And in those days shall punishment come from the Lord of Spirits, and he will open all the chambers of waters which are above the heavens, and of the fountains which are beneath the earth. 8. And all the waters shall be joined with the waters: that which is above the heavens is the masculine, and the water which is beneath the earth is the feminine. 9. And they shall destroy all who dwell on the earth and those who dwell under the ends of the heaven. 10. And when they have recognized their unrighteousness which they have wrought on the earth, then by these shall they perish.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER LV.

1. And after that the Head of Days repented and said: 'In vain have I destroyed all who dwell on the earth.' 2. And He sware by His great name: 'Henceforth I will not do so to all who dwell on the earth, and I will set a sign in the heaven: and this shall be a pledge of good faith between Me and them for ever, so long as heaven is above the earth. And this is in accordance with My command.'

[p. 73]

LV. 3-LVI. 4. Final Judgement of Azazel, the Watchers and their children.

3. When I have desired to take hold of them by the hand of the angels on the day of tribulation and pain because of this, I will cause My chastisement and My wrath to abide upon them, saith God, the Lord of Spirits. 4. Ye +mighty kings+ who dwell on the earth, ye shall have to behold Mine Elect One, how he sits on the throne of glory and judges Azazel, and all his associates, and all his hosts in the name of the Lord of Spirits.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER LVI.

1. And I saw there the hosts of the angels of punishment going, and they held scourges and chains of iron and bronze. 2. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me, saying: 'To whom are these who hold the scourges going?' 3. And he said unto me: 'To their elect and beloved ones, that they may be cast into the chasm of the abyss of the valley.

	 
		4. And then that valley shall be filled with their elect and beloved,
		 And the days of their lives shall be at an end,
		 And the days of their leading astray shall not thenceforward be reckoned.
		
		 LVI. 5-8. Last struggle of heathen Powers against Israel.

	 
		5. And in those days the angels shall return
		 And hurl themselves to the east upon the Parthians and Medes:
		 They shall stir up the kings, so that a spirit of unrest shall come upon them,
		 And they shall rouse them from their thrones,
		 That they may break forth as lions from their lairs,
		 And as hungry wolves among their flocks.
		 6. And they shall go up and tread under foot the land of His elect ones, [p. 74]
		 [And the land of His elect ones shall be before them a threshing-floor and a highway:]
		 7 But the city of my righteous shall be a hindrance to their horses.
		
		And they shall begin to fight among themselves,
		 And their right hand shall be strong against themselves,
		
		And a man shall not know his brother,
		 Nor a son his father or his mother,
		
		Till there be no number of the corpses through their slaughter,
		 And their punishment be not in vain.
		
		8 In those days Sheol shall open its jaws,
		 And they shall be swallowed up therein
		
		And their destruction shall be at an end;
		 Sheol shall devour the sinners in the presence of the elect.'
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LVII. The Return from the Dispersion.

 

CHAPTER LVII.

1. And it came to pass after this that I saw another host of wagons, and men riding thereon, and coming on the winds from the east, and from the west to the south. 2. And the noise of their wagons was heard, and when this turmoil took place the holy ones from heaven remarked it, and the pillars of the earth were moved from their place, and the sound thereof was heard from the one end of heaven to the other, in one day. 3. And they shall all fall down and worship the Lord of Spirits. And this is the end of the second Parable.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LVIII-LXXI. The Third Parable.

LVIII. The Blessedness of the Saints.

 

CHAPTER LVIII.

	 
		1. And I began to speak the third Parable concerning the righteous and elect. [p. 75]
		
		2. Blessed are ye, ye righteous and elect,
		 For glorious shall be your lot.
		
		3. And the righteous shall be in the light of the sun.
		 And the elect in the light of eternal life:
		 The days of their life shall be unending,
		 And the days of the holy without number.
		
		4. And they shall seek the light and find righteousness with the Lord of Spirits:
		 There shall be peace to the righteous in the name of the Eternal Lord.
		
		5. And after this it shall be said to the holy in heaven
		 That they should seek out the secrets of righteousness, the heritage of faith:
		 For it has become bright as the sun upon earth,
		 And the darkness is past.
		
		6. And there shall be a light that never endeth,
		 And to a limit (lit. 'number') of days they shall not come,
		 For the darkness shall first have been destroyed,
		 [And the light established before the Lord of Spirits]
		 And the light of uprightness established for ever before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LIX. The Lights and the Thunder.

 

CHAPTER LIX.

[1. In those days mine eyes saw the secrets of the lightnings, and of the lights, and the judgements they execute (lit. 'their judgement'): and they lighten for a blessing or a curse as the Lord of Spirits willeth. 2. And there I saw the secrets of the thunder, and how when it resounds above in the heaven, the sound thereof is heard, and he caused me to see the judgements executed on the earth, whether they be for well-being and blessing, or for a curse according to the word of the Lord of Spirits. 3. And after that all the secrets of the lights and lightnings were shown to me, and they lighten for blessing and for satisfying.]

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LX. Book of Noah--a Fragment.

[p. 76]

 Quaking of Heaven: Behemoth and Leviathan: the Elements.

 

CHAPTER LX.

1. In the year five hundred, in the seventh month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the life of +Enoch+. In that Parable I saw how a mighty quaking made the heaven of heavens to quake, and the host of the Most High, and the angels, a thousand thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand, were disquieted with a great disquiet. 2. And the Head of Days sat on the throne of His glory, and the angels and the righteous stood around Him.

	 
		3. And a great trembling seized me,
		 And fear took hold of me,
		 And my loins gave way,
		 And dissolved were my reins,
		 And I fell upon my face.
		
		 4 And Michael sent another angel from among the holy ones and he raised me up, and when he had raised me up my spirit returned; for I had not been able to endure the look of this host, and the commotion and the quaking of the heaven. And Michael said unto me: 'Why art thou disquieted with such a vision? Until this day lasted the day of His mercy; and He hath been merciful and long-suffering towards those who dwell on the earth. 6. And when the day, and the power, and the punishment, and the judgement come, which the Lord of Spirits hath prepared for those who worship not the righteous law, and for those who deny the righteous judgement, and for those who take His name in vain--that day is prepared, for the elect a covenant, but for sinners an inquisition.

25. When the punishment of the Lord of Spirits shall rest upon them, it shall rest in order that the punishment of the Lord of Spirits may not come, in vain, and it shall slay the children with their mothers and the children with their fathers. Afterwards the

[p. 77]

judgement shall take place according to His mercy and His patience.'

7. And on that day were two monsters parted, a female monster named Leviathan, to dwell in the abysses of the ocean over the fountains of the waters. 8. But the male is named Behemoth, who occupied with his breast a waste wilderness named +Duidain+, on the east of the garden where the elect and righteous dwell, where my grandfather was taken up, the seventh from Adam, the first man whom the Lord of Spirits created. 9. And I besought the other angel that he should show me the might of those monsters, how they were parted on one day and cast, the one into the abysses of the sea, and the other unto the dry land of the wilderness. 10. And he said to me: 'Thou son of man, herein thou dost seek to know what is hidden.'

11. And the other angel who went with me and showed me what was hidden told me what is first and last in the heaven in the height, and beneath the earth in the depth, and at the ends of the heaven, and on the foundation of the heaven. 12. And the chambers of the winds, and how the winds are divided, and how they are weighed, and (how) the portals of the winds are reckoned, each according to the power of the wind, and the power of the lights of the moon, and according to the power that is fitting: and the divisions of the stars according to their names, and how all the divisions are divided. 13. And the thunders according to the places where they fall, and all the divisions that are made among the lightnings that it may lighten, and their host that they may at once obey. 14. For the thunder has +places of rest+ (which) are assigned (to it) while it is waiting for its peal; and the thunder and lightning are inseparable, and although not one and undivided, they both go together through the spirit and separate not. 15. For when the lightning lightens, the thunder utters its voice, and the spirit enforces a pause during the peal, and divides equally between them; for the

[p. 78]

treasury of their peals is like the sand, and each one of them as it peals is held in with a bridle, and turned back by the power of the spirit, and pushed forward according to the many quarters of the earth. And the spirit of the sea is masculine and strong, and according to the might of his strength he draws it back with a rein, and in like manner it is driven forward and disperses amid all the mountains of the earth. 17. And the spirit of the hoar-frost is his own angel, and the spirit of the hail is a good angel. 18. And the spirit of the snow has forsaken his chambers on account of his strength--There is a special spirit therein, and that which ascends from it is like smoke, and its name is frost. 19. And the spirit of the mist is not united with them in their chambers, but it has a special chamber; for its course is +glorious+ both in light and in darkness, and in winter and in summer, and in its chamber is an angel. 20. And the spirit of the dew has its dwelling at the ends of the heaven, and is connected with the chambers of the rain, and its course is in winter and summer: and its clouds and the clouds of the mist are connected, and the one gives to the other. 21. And when the spirit of the rain goes forth from its chamber, the angels come and open the chamber and lead it out, and when it is diffused over the whole earth it unites with the water on the earth. And whensoever it unites with the water on the earth . . . 22. For the waters are for those who dwell on the earth; for they are nourishment for the earth from the Most High who is in heaven: therefore there is a measure for the rain, and the angels take it in charge. 23. And these things I saw towards the Garden of the Righteous. 24. And the angel of peace who was with me said to me: 'These two monsters, prepared conformably to the greatness of God, shall feed . . .

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

LXI. Angels go off to measure Paradise: the Judgement of the Righteous by the Elect One: the Praise of the Elect One and of God.

 

CHAPTER LXI.

1. And I saw in those days how long cords were given to those angels, and they took to themselves wings and flew, and they went towards the north.

2. And I asked the angel, saying unto him: 'Why have those (angels) taken these cords and gone off?' And he said unto me: 'They have gone to measure.'

	 
		3. And the angel who went with me said unto me:
		 'These shall bring the measures of the righteous,
		 And the ropes of the righteous to the righteous,
		 That they may stay themselves on the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.
		
		4. The elect shall begin to dwell with the elect,
		 And those are the measures which shall be given to faith
		 And which shall strengthen righteousness.
		
		5. And these measures shall reveal all the secrets of the depths of the earth,
		 And those who have been destroyed by the desert,
		 And those who have been devoured by the beasts,
		 And those who have been devoured by the fish of the sea,
		
		That they may return and stay themselves
		 On the day of the Elect One;
		 For none shall be destroyed before the Lord of Spirits,
		 And none can be destroyed.
		
		 6. And all who dwell above in the heaven received a command and power and one voice and one light like unto fire.

	 
		7. And that One (with) their first words they blessed,
		 And extolled and lauded with wisdom,
		 And they were wise in utterance and in the spirit of life. [p. 80]
		
		8. And the Lord of Spirits placed the Elect one on the throne of glory.
		 And he shall judge all the works of the holy above in the heaven,
		 And in the balance shall their deeds be weighed
		
		9. And when he shall lift up his countenance
		 To judge their secret ways according to the word of the name of the Lord of Spirits,
		 And their path according to the way of the righteous judgement of the Lord of Spirits,
		 Then shall they all with one voice speak and bless,
		 And glorify and extol and sanctify the name of the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 10. And He will summon all the host of the heavens, and all the holy ones above, and the host of God, the Cherubic, Seraphin and Ophannin, and all the angels of power, and all the angels of principalities, and the Elect One, and the other powers on the earth (and) over the water. 11. On that day shall raise one voice, and bless and glorify and exalt in the spirit of faith, and in the spirit of wisdom, and in the spirit of patience, and in the spirit of mercy, and in the spirit of judgement and of peace, and in the spirit of goodness, and shall all say with one voice: "Blessed is He, and may the name of the Lord of Spirits be blessed for ever and ever."

	 
		12. All who sleep not above in heaven shall bless Him:
		 All the holy ones who are in heaven shall bless Him,
		 And all the elect who dwell in the garden of life:
		
		And every spirit of light who is able to bless, and glorify, and extol, and hallow Thy blessed name,
		 And all flesh shall beyond measure glorify and bless Thy name for ever and ever.
		
		13. For great is the mercy of the Lord of Spirits, and He is long-suffering, [p. 81]
		 And all His works and all that He has created He has revealed to the righteous and elect
		 In the name of the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXII. Judgement of the Kings and the Mighty: Blessedness of the Righteous.

 

CHAPTER LXII.

1. And thus the Lord commanded the kings and the mighty and the exalted, and those who dwell on the earth, and said: 'Open your eyes and lift up your horns if ye are able to recognize the Elect One.'

	 
		2. And the Lord of Spirits seated him on the throne of His glory,
		 And the spirit of righteousness was poured out upon him,
		 And the word of his mouth slays all the sinners,
		 And all the unrighteous are destroyed from before his face.
		 3. And there shall stand up in that day all the kings and the mighty,
		 And the exalted and those who hold the earth,
		 And they shall see and recognize How he sits on the throne of his glory,
		 And righteousness is judged before him,
		 And no lying word is spoken before him.
		
		4. Then shall pain come upon them as on a woman in travail,
		 [And she has pain in bringing forth]
		 When her child enters the mouth of the womb,
		 And she has pain in bringing forth.
		
		5. And one portion of them shall look on the other,
		 And they shall be terrified,
		 And they shall be downcast of countenance,
		 And pain shall seize them,
		 When they see that Son of Man Sitting on the throne of his glory.
		
		 [p. 82]

6. And the kings and the mighty and all who possess the earth shall bless and glorify and extol him who rules over all, who was hidden.

	 
		7. For from the beginning the Son of Man was hidden,
		 And the Most High preserved him in the presence of His might,
		 And revealed him to the elect.
		
		8. And the congregation of the elect and holy shall be sown,
		 And all the elect shall stand before him on that day.
		
		9. And all the kings and the mighty and the exalted and those who rule the earth
		 Shall fall down before him on their faces,
		 And worship and set their hope upon that Son of Man,
		 And petition him and supplicate for mercy at his hands.
		
		10. Nevertheless that Lord of Spirits will so press them
		 That they shall hastily go forth from His presence,
		 And their faces shall be filled with shame,
		 And the darkness grow deeper on their faces.
		 11. And He will deliver them to the angels for punishment,
		 To execute vengeance on them because they have oppressed His children and His elect
		 12. And they shall be a spectacle for the righteous and for His elect:
		 They shall rejoice over them,
		 Because the wrath of the Lord of Spirits resteth upon them,
		 And His sword is drunk with their blood.
		 13. And the righteous and elect shall be saved on that day,
		 And they shall never thenceforward see the face of the sinners and unrighteous. [p. 83]
		
		14. And the Lord of Spirits will abide over them,
		 And with that Son of Man shall they eat
		 And lie down and rise up for ever and ever.
		
		15. And the righteous and elect shall have risen from the earth,
		 And ceased to be of downcast countenance.
		
		And they shall have been clothed with garments of glory,
		 16. And these shall be the garments of life from the Lord of Spirits:
		 And your garments shall not grow old,
		 Nor your glory pass away before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXIII. The unavailing Repentance of the Kings and the Mighty.

 

CHAPTER LXIII.

1. In those days shall the mighty and the kings who possess the earth implore (Him) to grant them a little respite from His angels of punishment to whom they were delivered, that they might fall down and worship before the Lord of Spirits, and confess their sins before Him. 2. And they shall bless and glorify the Lord of Spirits, and say:

	 
		'Blessed is the Lord of Spirits and the Lord of kings,
		 And the Lord of the mighty and the Lord of the rich,
		 And the Lord of glory and the Lord of wisdom,
		 3. And splendid in every secret thing is Thy power from generation to generation,
		 And Thy glory for ever and ever:
		
		Deep are all Thy secrets and innumerable,
		 And Thy righteousness is beyond reckoning.
		
		4. We have now learnt that we should glorify
		 And bless the Lord of kings and Him who is king over all kings.' [p. 84]
		 5. And they shall say:
		 'Would that we had rest to glorify and give thanks
		 And confess our faith before His glory!
		
		6. And now we long for a little rest but find it not:
		 We follow hard upon and obtain (it) not:
		
		And light has vanished from before us,
		 And darkness is our dwelling-place for ever and ever:
		
		7. For we have not believed before Him
		 Nor glorified the name of the Lord of Spirits, [nor glorified our Lord]
		
		But our hope was in the sceptre of our kingdom,
		 And in our glory.
		
		8. And in the day of our suffering and tribulation He saves us not,
		 And we find no respite for confession
		
		That our Lord is true in all His works, and in His judgements and His justice,
		 And His judgements have no respect of persons.
		
		9. And we pass away from before His face on account of our works,
		 And all our sins are reckoned up in righteousness.'
		
		 10. Now they shall say unto themselves: 'Our souls are full of unrighteous gain, but it does not prevent us from descending from the midst thereof into the +burden+ of Sheol.'

	 
		11. And after that their faces shall be filled with darkness
		 And shame before that Son of Man,
		 And they shall be driven from his presence,
		 And the sword shall abide before his face in their midst.
		
		 12. Thus spake the Lord of Spirits: 'This is the ordinance and judgement with respect to the mighty and the kings and the exalted and those who possess the earth before the Lord of Spirits.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

LXIV. Vision of the fallen Angels in the Place of Punishment.

 

CHAPTER LXIV.

1. And other forms I saw hidden in that place. 2. I heard the voice of the angel saying: 'These are the angels who descended to the earth, and revealed what was hidden to the children of men and seduced the children of men into committing sin.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXV. Enoch foretells to Noah the Deluge and his own Preservation.

 

CHAPTER LXV.

1. And in those days Noah saw the earth that it had sunk down and its destruction was nigh. 2. And he arose from thence and went to the ends of the earth, and cried aloud to his grandfather Enoch: and Noah said three times with an embittered voice: Hear me, hear me, hear me.' 3. And I said unto him: 'Tell me what it is that is falling out on the earth that the earth is in such evil plight and shaken, lest perchance I shall perish with it?' 4. And thereupon there was a great commotion, on the earth, and a voice was heard from heaven, and I fell on my face. 5. And Enoch my grandfather came and stood by me, and said unto me: 'Why hast thou cried unto me with a bitter cry and weeping?

6. And a command has gone forth from the presence of the Lord concerning those who dwell on the earth that their ruin is accomplished because they have learnt all the secrets of the angels, and all the violence of the Satans, and all their powers--the most secret ones--and all the power of those who practice sorcery, and the power of witchcraft, and the power of those who make molten images for the whole earth: 7. And how silver is produced from the dust of the earth, and how soft metal originates in the earth. 8. For lead and tin are not produced from the earth like the first: it is a fountain that produces them, and an angel stands therein, and that

[p. 86]

angel is pre-eminent.' 9. And after that my grandfather Enoch took hold of me by my hand and raised me up, and said unto me: 'Go, for I have asked the Lord of Spirits as touching this commotion on the earth. 10. And He said unto me: "Because of their unrighteousness their judgement has been determined upon and shall not be withheld by Me for ever. Because of the sorceries which they have searched out and learnt, the earth and those who dwell upon it shall be destroyed." 11. And these--they have no place of repentance for ever, because they have shown them what was hidden, and they are the damned: but as for thee, my son, the Lord of Spirits knows that thou art pure, and guiltless of this reproach concerning the secrets.

	 
		12. And He has destined thy name to be among the holy,
		 And will preserve thee amongst those who dwell on the earth,
		 And has destined thy righteous seed both for kingship and for great honours,
		 And from thy seed shall proceed a fountain of the righteous and holy without number for ever.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXVI. The Angels of the Waters bidden to hold them in Check.

 

CHAPTER LXVI.

1. And after that he showed me the angels of punishment who are prepared to come and let loose all the powers of the waters which are beneath in the earth in order to bring judgement and destruction on all who [abide and] dwell on the earth. 2. And the Lord of Spirits gave commandment to the angels who were going forth, that they should not cause the waters to rise but should hold them in check; for those angels were over the powers of the waters. 3. And I went away from the presence of Enoch.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

LXVII. God's Promise to Noah: Places of Punishment of the Angels and of the Kings.

 

CHAPTER LXVII.

1. And in those days the word of God came unto me, and He said unto me: 'Noah, thy lot has come up before Me, a lot without blame, a lot of love and uprightness. 2. And now the angels are making a wooden (building), and when they have completed that task I will place My hand upon it and preserve it, and there shall come forth from it the seed of life, and a change shall set in so that the earth will not remain without inhabitant. 3. And I will make fast thy seed before me for ever and ever, and I will spread abroad those who dwell with thee: it shall not be unfruitful on the face of the earth, but it shall be blessed and multiply on the earth in the name of the Lord.'

4. And He will imprison those angels, who have shown unrighteousness, in that burning valley which my grandfather Enoch had formerly shown to me in the west among the mountains of gold and silver and iron and soft metal and tin. 5. And I saw that valley in which there was a great convulsion and a convulsion of the waters. 6. And when all this took place, from that fiery molten metal and from the convulsion thereof in that place, there was produced a smell of sulphur, and it was connected with those waters, and that valley of the angels who had led astray (mankind) burned beneath that land. 7. And through its valleys proceed streams of fire, where these angels are punished who had led astray those who dwell upon the earth.

8. But those waters shall in those days serve for the kings and the mighty and the exalted, and those who dwell on the earth, for the healing of the body, but for the punishment of the spirit; now their spirit is full of lust, that they may be punished in their body, for they have denied the Lord of Spirits and see their punishment daily, and yet believe not in His name. 9. And in proportion as the burning

[p. 88]

of their bodies becomes severe, a corresponding change shall take place in their spirit for ever and ever; for before the Lord of Spirits none shall utter an idle word. 10. For the judgement shall come upon them, because they believe in the lust of their body and deny the Spirit of the Lord. 11. And those same waters will undergo a change in those days; for when those angels are punished in these waters, these water-springs shall change their temperature, and when the angels ascend, this water of the springs shall change and become cold. 12. And I heard Michael answering and saying: 'This judgement wherewith the angels are judged is a testimony for the kings and the mighty who possess the earth.' 13. Because these waters of judgement minister to the healing of the body of the kings and the lust of their body; therefore they will not see and will not believe that those waters will change and become a fire which burns for ever.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXVIII. Michael and Raphael  at the Severity of the Judgement.

 

CHAPTER LXVIII.

1. And after that my grandfather Enoch gave me the teaching of all the secrets in the book in the Parables which had been given to him, and he put them together for me in the words of the book of the Parables. 2. And on that day Michael answered Raphael and said: 'The power of the spirit transports and makes me to tremble because of the severity of the judgement of the secrets, the judgement of the angels: who can endure the severe judgement which has been executed, and before which they melt away?' 3. And Michael answered again, and said to Raphael: 'Who is he whose heart is not softened concerning it, and whose reins are not troubled by this word of judgement (that) has gone forth upon them because of those who have thus led them out?' 4. And it came to pass when he stood before the Lord of Spirits, Michael said thus to Raphael: 'I will not

[p. 89]

take their part under the eye of the Lord; for the Lord of Spirits has been angry with them because they do as if they were the Lord. Therefore all that is hidden shall come upon them for ever and ever; for neither angel nor man shall have his portion (in it), but alone they have received their judgement for ever and ever.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXIX. The Names and Functions of the (fallen Angels and) Satans: the secret Oath.

 

CHAPTER LXIX.

1 And after this judgement they shall terrify and make them to tremble because they have shown this to those who dwell on the earth.

2 And behold the names of those angels [and these are their names: the first of them is Samjaza, the second Artaqifa, and the third Armen, the fourth Kokabel, the fifth +Turael+, the sixth Rumjal, the seventh Danjal, the eighth +Neqael+, the ninth Baraqel, the tenth Azazel, the eleventh Armaros, the twelfth Batarjal, the thirteenth +Busasejal+, the fourteenth Hananel, the fifteenth +Turel+, and the sixteenth Simapesiel, the seventeenth Jetrel, the eighteenth Tumael, the nineteenth Turel, the twentieth +Rumael+, the twenty-first +Azazel+. 3. And these are the chiefs of their angels and their names, and their chief ones over hundreds and over fifties and over tens].

4. The name of the first Jeqon: that is, the one who led astray [[all]] the sons of God, and brought them down to the earth, and led them astray through the daughters of men. 5. And the second was named Asbeel: he imparted to the holy sons of God evil counsel, and led them astray so that they defiled their bodies with the daughters of men. 6. And the third was named Gadreel: he it is who showed the children of men all the blows of death, and he led astray Eve, and showed [[the weapons of death to the sons of men]] the shield and the coat of mail, and the sword for battle, and all the weapons of death to the

[p. 90]

children of men. 7. And from his hand they have proceeded against those who dwell on the earth from that day and for evermore. 8. And the fourth was named Penemue: he taught the children of men the bitter and the sweet, and he taught them all the secrets of their wisdom. 9. And he instructed mankind in writing with ink and paper, and thereby many sinned from eternity to eternity and until this day. 10. For men were not created for such a purpose, to give confirmation to their good faith with pen and ink. 11. For men were created exactly like the angels, to the intent that they should continue pure and righteous, and death, which destroys everything, could not have taken hold of them, but through this their knowledge they are perishing, and through this power it is consuming me+. 12. And the fifth was named Kasdeja: this is he who showed the children of men all the wicked smitings of spirits and demons, and the smitings of the embryo in the womb, that it may pass away, and [the smitings of the soul] the bites of the serpent, and the smitings which befall through the noontide heat, the son of the serpent named Tabaa'et. 13. And this is the task of Kasbeel, the chief of the oath which he showed to the holy ones when he dwelt high above in glory, and its name is Biqa. 14. This (angel) requested Michael to show him the hidden name, that he might enunciate it in the oath, so that those might quake before that name and oath who revealed all that was in secret to the children of men. 15. And this is the power of this oath, for it is powerful and strong, and he placed this oath Akae in the hand of Michael. 16 And these are the secrets of this oath . . .

	 
		And they are strong through his oath:
		 And the heaven was suspended before the world was created,
		 And for ever.
		
		17. And through it the earth was founded upon the water, [p. 91]
		 And from the secret recesses of the mountains come beautiful waters,
		 From the creation of the world and unto eternity.
		
		18. And through that oath the sea was created,
		 And +as its foundation+ He set for it the sand against the time of (its) anger,
		 And it dare not pass beyond it from the creation of the world unto eternity.
		
		19. And through that oath are the depths made fast,
		 And abide and stir not from their place from eternity to eternity.
		 20. And through that oath the sun and moon complete their course,
		 And deviate not from their ordinance from eternity to eternity.
		 21. And through that oath the stars complete their course,
		 And He calls them by their names,
		 And they answer Him from eternity to eternity.
		
		 [[22. And in like manner the spirits of the water, and of the winds, and of all zephyrs, and (their) paths from all the quarters of the winds. 23. And there are preserved the voices of the thunder and the light of the lightnings: and there are preserved the chambers of the hail and the chambers of the hoarfrost, and the chambers of the mist, and the chambers of the rain and the dew. 24. And all these believe and give thanks before the Lord of Spirits, and glorify (Him) with all their power, and their food is in every act of thanksgiving: they thank and glorify and extol the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.]]

	 
		25. And this oath is mighty over them
		 And through it [[they are preserved and]] their paths are preserved,
		 And their course is not destroyed.
		
		 [p. 92]

 Close of the Third Parable.

	 
		26. And there was great joy amongst them,
		 And they blessed and glorified and extolled
		 Because the name of that Son of Man had been revealed unto them.
		 27. And he sat on the throne of his glory,
		 And the sum of judgement was given unto the Son of Man,
		 And he caused the sinners to pass away and be destroyed from off the face of the earth,
		 And those who have led the world astray.
		 28. With chains shall they be bound,
		 And in their assemblage-place of destruction shall they be imprisoned,
		 And all their works vanish from the face of the earth.
		 29. And from henceforth there shall be nothing corruptible;
		 For that Son of Man has appeared,
		 And has seated himself on the throne of his glory,
		 And all evil shall pass away before his face,
		 And the word of that Son of Man shall go forth
		 And be strong before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		 
		
		 This is the Third Parable of Enoch.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXX. The Final Translation of Enoch.

 

CHAPTER LXX.

1. And it came to pass after this that his name during his lifetime was raised aloft to that Son of Man and to the Lord of Spirits from amongst those who dwell on the earth. 2. And he was raised aloft on the chariots of the spirit and his name vanished among them. 3. And from that day I was no longer numbered amongst them: and he set me between the two winds, between the North and the West, where the angels took the cords to measure for me the place for the elect and righteous. 4. And there

[p. 93]

I saw the first fathers and the righteous who from the beginning dwell in that place.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXI. Two earlier visions of Enoch.

 

CHAPTER LXXI.

	 
		1. And it came to pass after this that my spirit was translated
		 And it ascended into the heavens:
		 And I saw the holy sons of God.
		
		They were stepping on flames of fire:
		 Their garments were white [and their raiment],
		 And their faces shone like snow.
		
		2. And I saw two streams of fire,
		 And the light of that fire shone like hyacinth,
		 And I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits.
		
		3. And the angel Michael [one of the archangels] seized me by my right hand,
		 And lifted me up and led me forth into all the secrets,
		 And he showed me all the secrets of righteousness.
		
		4. And he showed me all the secrets of the ends of the heaven,
		 And all the chambers of all the stars, and all the luminaries,
		 Whence they proceed before the face of the holy ones.
		
		5. And he translated my spirit into the heaven of heavens,
		 And I saw there as it were a structure built of crystals,
		 And between those crystals tongues of living fire.
		
		6. And my spirit saw the girdle which girt that house of fire,
		 And on its four sides were streams full of living fire,
		 And they girt that house.[p. 94]
		
		7. And round about were Seraphin, Cherubic, and Ophannin:
		 And these are they who sleep not
		 And guard the throne of His glory.
		
		8. And I saw angels who could not be counted,
		 A thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand,
		 Encircling that house.
		
		And Michael, and Raphael, and Gabriel, and Phanuel,
		 And the holy angels who are above the heavens,
		 Go in and out of that house.
		
		9. And they came forth from that house,
		 And Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and Phanuel,
		 And many holy angels without number.
		
		10. And with them the Head of Days,
		 His head white and pure as wool,
		 And His raiment indescribable.
		
		11. And I fell on my face,
		 And my whole body became relaxed,
		 And my spirit was transfigured;
		
		And I cried with a loud voice,
		 . . .with the spirit of power,
		 And blessed and glorified and extolled.
		
		 12. And these blessings which went forth out of my mouth were well pleasing before that Head of Days. 13. And that Head of Days came with Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and Phanuel, thousands and ten thousands of angels without number.

[Lost passage wherein the Son of Man was described as accompanying the Head of Days, and Enoch asked one of the angels (as in 463) concerning the Son of Man as to who he was.]

14. And he (i.e. the angel) came to me and greeted me with His voice, and said unto me:

	 
		'This is the Son of Man who is born unto righteousness;[p. 95]
		 And righteousness abides over him,
		 And the righteousness of the Head of Days forsakes him not.'
		 15. And he said unto me:
		 'He proclaims unto thee peace in the name of the world to come;
		 For from hence has proceeded peace since the creation of the world,
		 And so shall it be unto thee for ever and for ever and ever.
		
		16. And all shall walk in his ways since righteousness never forsaketh him:
		 With him will be their dwelling-places, and with him their heritage,
		 And they shall not be separated from him for ever and ever and ever.
		
		17. And so there shall be length of days with that Son of Man,
		 And the righteous shall have peace and an upright way
		 In the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.'
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE BOOK OF THE COURSES OF THE HEAVENLY LUMINARIES

(LXXII-LXXXII.)

LXXII. The Sun.

 

CHAPTER LXXII.

1. The book of the courses of the luminaries of the heaven, the relations of each, according to their classes, their dominion and their seasons, according to their names and places of origin, and according to their months, which Uriel, the holy angel, who was with me, who is their guide, showed me; and he showed me all their laws exactly as they are, and how it is with regard to all the years of the world and unto eternity, till the new creation is

[p. 96]

accomplished which dureth till eternity. 2. And this is the first law of the luminaries: the luminary the Sun has its rising in the eastern portals of the heaven, and its setting in the western portals of the heaven. 3. And I saw six portals in which the sun rises, and six portals in which the sun sets and the moon rises and sets in these portals, and the leaders of the stars and those whom they lead: six in the east and six in the west, and all following each other in accurately corresponding order: also many windows to the right and left of these portals. 4. And first there goes forth the great luminary, named the Sun, and his circumference is like the circumference of the heaven, and he is quite filled with illuminating and heating fire. 5. The chariot on which he ascends, the wind drives, and the sun goes down from the heaven and returns through the north in order to reach the east, and is so guided that he comes to the appropriate (lit. 'that') portal and shines in the face of the heaven. 6. In this way he rises in the first month in the great portal, which is the fourth [[those six portals in the cast]]. 7. And in that fourth portal from which the sun rises in the first month are twelve window-openings, from which proceed a flame when they are opened in their season. 8. When the sun rises in the heaven, he comes forth through that fourth portal thirty mornings in succession, and sets accurately in the fourth portal in the west of the heaven. 9. And during this period the day becomes daily longer and the night nightly shorter to the thirtieth morning. 10. On that day the day is longer than the night by a ninth part, and the day amounts exactly to ten parts and the night to eight parts. 11. And the sun rises from that fourth portal, and sets in the fourth and returns to the fifth portal of the east thirty mornings, and rises from it and sets in the fifth portal. 12. And then the day becomes longer by +two+ parts and amounts to eleven parts, and the night becomes shorter and amounts to seven parts. 13. And it returns to the east and enters into

[p. 97]

the sixth portal, and rises and sets in the sixth portal one-and-thirty mornings on account of its sign. 14. On that day the day becomes longer than the night, and the day becomes double the night, and the day becomes twelve parts, and the night is shortened and becomes six parts. 15. And the sun mounts up to make the day shorter and the night longer, and the sun returns to the east and enters into the sixth portal, and rises from it and sets thirty mornings. 16. And when thirty mornings are accomplished, the day decreases by exactly one part, and becomes eleven parts, and the night seven. 17. And the sun goes forth from that sixth portal in the west, and goes to the east and rises in the fifth portal for thirty mornings, and sets in the west again in the fifth western portal. 18. On that day the day decreases by +two+ parts, and amounts to ten parts and the night to eight parts. 19. And the sun goes forth from that fifth portal and sets in the fifth portal of the west, and rises in the fourth portal for one-and-thirty mornings on account of its sign, and sets in the west. 20. On that day the day is equalized with the night, [and becomes of equal length], and the night amounts to nine parts and the day to nine parts. 21. And the sun rises from that portal and sets in the west, and returns to the east and rises thirty mornings in the third portal and sets in the west in the third portal. 22. And on that day the night becomes longer than the day, and night becomes longer than night, and day shorter than day till the thirtieth morning, and the night amounts exactly to ten parts and the day to eight parts. 23. And the sun rises from that third portal and sets in the third portal in the west and returns to the east, and for thirty mornings rises in the second portal in the east, and in like manner sets in the second portal in the west of the heaven. 24. And on that day the night amounts to eleven parts and the day to seven parts. 25. And the sun rises on that day from that second portal and sets in the west in the second portal, and

[p. 98]

returns to the east into the first portal for one-and-thirty mornings, and sets in the first portal in the west of the heaven. 26. And on that day the night becomes longer and amounts to the double of the day: and the night amounts exactly to twelve parts and the day to six. 27. And the sun has (therewith) traversed the divisions of his orbit and turns again on those divisions of his orbit, and enters that portal thirty mornings and sets also in the west opposite to it. 28. And on that night has the night decreased in length by a +ninth+ part, and the night has become eleven parts and the day seven parts. 29. And the sun has returned and entered into the second portal in the east, and returns on those his divisions of his orbit for thirty mornings, rising and setting. 30. And on that day the night decreases in length, and the night amounts to ten parts and the day to eight. 31. And on that day the sun rises from that portal, and sets in the west, and returns to the east, and rises in the third portal for one-and-thirty mornings, and sets in the west of the heaven. 32. On that day the night decreases and amounts to nine parts, and the day to nine parts, and the night is equal to the day and the year is exactly as to its days three hundred and sixty-four. 33. And the length of the day and of the night, and the shortness of the day and of the night arise--through the course of the sun these distinctions are made (lit. 'they are separated'). 34. So it comes that its course becomes daily longer, and its course nightly shorter. 35. And this is the law and the course of the sun, and his return as often as he returns sixty times and rises, i.e. the great luminary which is named the sun, for ever and ever. 36. And that which (thus) rises is the great luminary, and is so named according to its appearance, according as the Lord commanded. 37. As he rises, so he sets and decreases not, and rests not, but runs day and night, and his light is sevenfold brighter than that of the moon; but as regards size they are both equal.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

 

CHAPTER LXXIII.

1. And after this law I saw another law dealing with the smaller luminary, which is named the Moon. 2. And her circumference is like the circumference of the heaven, and her chariot in which she rides is driven by the wind, and light is given to her in (definite) measure. 3. And her rising and setting change every month: and her days are like the days of the sun, and when her light is uniform (i.e. full) it amounts to the seventh part of the light of the sun. 4. And thus she rises. And her first phase in the east comes forth on the thirtieth morning: and on that day she becomes visible, and constitutes for you the first phase of the moon on the thirtieth day together with the sun in the portal where the sun rises. 5. And the one half of her goes forth by a seventh part, and her whole circumference is empty, without light, with the exception of one-seventh part of it, (and) the fourteenth part of her light. 6. And when she receives one-seventh part of the half of her light, her light amounts to one-seventh part and the half thereof. 7. And she sets with the sun, and when the sun rises the moon rises with him and receives the half of one part of light, and in that night in the beginning of her morning [in the commencement of the lunar day] the moon sets with the sun, and is invisible that night with the fourteen parts and the half of one of them. 8. And she rises on that day with exactly a seventh part, and comes forth and recedes from the rising of the sun, and in her remaining days she becomes bright in the (remaining) thirteen parts.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER LXXIV.

1. And I saw another course, a law for her, (and) how according to that law she performs her monthly revolution. 2. And all these Uriel, the holy angel who is the leader of them all, showed to me, and

[p. 100]

their positions, and I wrote down their positions as he showed them to me, and I wrote down their months as they were, and the appearance of their lights till fifteen days were accomplished. 3. In single seventh parts she accomplishes all her light in the east, and in single seventh parts accomplishes all her darkness in the west. 4. And in certain months she alters her settings, and in certain months she pursues her own peculiar course. 5. In two months the moon sets with the sun: in those two middle portals the third and the fourth. 6. She goes forth for seven days, and turns about and returns again through the portal where the sun rises, and accomplishes all her light: and she recedes from the sun, and in eight days enters the sixth portal from which the sun goes forth. 7. And when the sun goes forth from the fourth portal she goes forth seven days, until she goes forth from the fifth and turns back again in seven days into the fourth portal and accomplishes all her light: and she recedes and enters into the first portal in eight days. 8. And she returns again in seven days into the fourth portal from which the sun goes forth. 9. Thus I saw their position--how the moons rose and the sun set in those days. 10. And if five years are added together the sun has an overplus of thirty days, and all the days which accrue to it for one of those five years, when they are full, amount to 364 days. 11. And the overplus of the sun and of the stars amounts to six days: in 5 years 6 days every year come to 30 days: and the moon falls behind the sun and stars to the number of 30 days. 12. And the sun and the stars bring in all the years exactly, so that they do not advance or delay their position by a single day unto eternity; but complete the years with perfect justice in 364 days. 13. In 3 years there are 1092 days, and in 5 years 1820 days, so that in 8 years there are 2912 days. 14. For the moon alone the days amount in 3 years to 1062 days, and in 5 years she falls 50 days behind: [i.e. to the sum (of 1770) there is

[p. 101]

to be added (1000 and) 62 days.] 15. And in 5 years there are 1770 days, so that for the moon the days in 8 years amount to 2832 days. 16. [For in 8 years she falls behind to the amount of 80 days], all the days she falls behind in 8 years are 80. 17. And the year is accurately completed in conformity with their world-stations and the stations of the sun, which rise from the portals through which it (the sun) rises and sets 30 days.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER LXXV.

1. And the leaders of the heads of the thousands, who are placed over the whole creation and over all the stars, have also to do with the four intercalary days, being inseparable from their office, according to the reckoning of the year, and these render service on the four days which are not reckoned in the reckoning of the year. 2. And owing to them men go wrong therein, for those luminaries truly render service on the world-stations, one in the first portal, one in the third portal of the heaven, one in the fourth portal, and one in the sixth portal, and the exactness of the year is accomplished through its separate three hundred and sixty-four stations. 3. For the signs and the times and the years and the days the angel Uriel showed to me, whom the Lord of glory hath set for ever over all the luminaries of the heaven, in the heaven and in the world, that they should rule on the face of the heaven and be seen on the earth, and be leaders for the day and the night, i.e. the sun, moon, and stars, and all the ministering creatures which make their revolution in all the chariots of the heaven. 4. In like manner twelve doors Uriel showed me, open in the circumference of the sun's chariot in the heaven, through which the rays of the sun break forth: and from them is warmth diffused over the earth, when they are opened at their appointed seasons. 5. [And for the winds and the spirit of the dew+ when they are opened, standing open in the heavens at the ends.] 6. As for the twelve portals in the heaven, at the ends of the earth, out of which go forth the sun, moon, and stars, and all

[p. 102]

the works of heaven in the east and in the west. 7. There are many windows open to the left and right of them, and one window at its (appointed) season produces warmth, corresponding (as these do) to those doors from which the stars come forth according as He has commanded them, and wherein they set corresponding to their number. 8. And I saw chariots in the heaven, running in the world, above those portals in which revolve the stars that never set. 9. And one is larger than all the rest, and it is that that makes its course through the entire world.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXVI. The Twelve Windows and their Portals.

 

CHAPTER LXXVI.

1 And at the ends of the earth I saw twelve portals open to all the quarters (of the heaven), from which the winds go forth and blow over the earth. 2. Three of them are open on the face (i.e. the east) of the heavens, and three in the west, and three on the right (i.e. the south) of the heaven, and three on the left (i.e. the north). 3. And the three first are those of the east, and three are of +the north, and three [after those on the left] of the south+, and three of the west. 4. Through four of these come winds of blessing and prosperity, and from those eight come hurtful winds: when they are sent, they bring destruction on all the earth and on the water upon it, and on all who dwell thereon, and on everything which is in the water and on the land.

5. And the first wind from those portals, called the east wind, comes forth through the first portal which is in the east, inclining towards the south: from it come forth desolation, drought, heat, and destruction. 6. And through the second portal in the middle comes what is fitting, and from it there come rain and fruitfulness and prosperity and dew; and through the third portal which lies toward the north come cold and drought.

7. And after these come forth the south winds through three portals: through the first portal of

[p. 103]

them inclining to the east comes forth a hot wind. 8. And through the middle portal next to it there come forth fragrant smells, and dew and rain, and prosperity and health. 9. And through the third portal lying to the west come forth dew and rain, locusts and desolation.

10. And after these the north winds: from the seventh portal in the east come dew and rain, locusts and desolation. 11. And from the middle portal come in a direct direction health and rain and dew and prosperity; and through the third portal in the west come cloud and hoar-frost, and snow and rain, and dew and locusts.

12. And after these [four] are the west winds: through the first portal adjoining the north come forth dew and hoar-frost, and cold and snow and frost. And from the middle portal come forth dew and rain, and prosperity and blessing; and through the last portal which adjoins the south come forth drought and desolation, and burning and destruction. 14. And the twelve portals of the four quarters of the heaven are therewith completed, and all their laws and all their plagues and all their benefactions have I shown to thee, my son Methuselah.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXVII. The Four Quarters of the World: the Seven Mountains, the Seven Rivers, &c.

 

CHAPTER LXXVII.

1. And the first quarter is called the east, because it is the first: and the second, the south, because the Most High will descend there, yea, there in quite a special sense will He who is blessed for ever descend. 2. And the west quarter is named the diminished, because there all the luminaries of the heaven wane and go down. 3. And the fourth quarter, named the north, is divided into three parts: the first of them is for the dwelling of men: and the second contains seas of water, and the abysses and forests and rivers, and darkness and clouds; and the third part contains the garden of righteousness.

[p. 104]

4. I saw seven high mountains, higher than all the mountains which are on the earth: and thence comes forth hoar-frost, and days, seasons, and years pass away. 5. I saw seven rivers on the earth larger than all the rivers: one of them coming from the west pours its waters into the Great Sea. 6. And these two come from the north to the sea and pour their waters into the Erythraean Sea in the east. 7. And the remaining four come forth on the side of the north to their own sea, <two of them> to the Erythraean Sea, and two into the Great Sea and discharge themselves there [and some say: into the desert]. 8. Seven great islands I saw in the sea and in the mainland: two in the mainland and five in the Great Sea.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXVIII. The Sun and Moon: the Waxing and Waning of the Moon.

 

CHAPTER LXXVII.

1. And the names of the sun are the following: the first Orjares, and the second Tomas. 2. And the moon has four names: the first name is Asonja, the second Ebla, the third Benase, and the fourth Erae. 3. These are the two great luminaries: their circumference is like the circumference of the heaven, and the size of the circumference of both is alike. 4. In the circumference of the sun there are seven portions of light which are added to it more than to the moon, and in definite measures it is s transferred till the seventh portion of the sun is exhausted. 5. And they set and enter the portals of the west, and make their revolution by the north, and come forth through the eastern portals on the face of the heaven. 6. And when the moon rises one-fourteenth part appears in the heaven: [[the light becomes full in her]]: on the fourteenth day she accomplishes her light. 7. And fifteen parts of light are transferred to her till the fifteenth day (when) her light is accomplished, according to the sign of the year, and she becomes fifteen

[p. 105]

parts, and the moon grows by (the addition of) fourteenth parts. 8. And in her waning (the moon) decreases on the first day to fourteen parts of her light, on the second to thirteen parts of light, on the third to twelve, on the fourth to eleven, on the fifth to ten, on the sixth to nine, on the seventh to eight, on the eighth to seven, on the ninth to six, on the tenth to five, on the eleventh to four, on the twelfth to three, on the thirteenth to two, on the fourteenth to the half of a seventh, and all her remaining light disappears wholly on the fifteenth. 9. And in certain months the month has twenty-nine days and once twenty-eight. 10. And Uriel showed me another law: when light is transferred to the moon, and on which side it is transferred to her by the sun. 11. During all the period during which the moon is growing in her light, she is transferring it to herself when opposite to the sun during fourteen days [her light is accomplished in the heaven], and when she is illumined throughout, her light is accomplished full in the heaven. 12. And on the first day she is called the new moon, for on that day the light rises upon her. 13. She becomes full moon exactly on the day when the sun sets in the west, and from the east she rises at night, and the moon shines the whole night through till the sun rises over against her and the moon is seen over against the sun. 14. On the side whence the light of the moon comes forth, there again she wanes till all the light vanishes and all the days of the month are at an end, and her circumference is empty, void of light. 15. And three months she makes of thirty days, and at her time she makes three months of twenty-nine days each, in which she accomplishes her waning in the first period of time, and in the first portal for one hundred and seventy-seven days. 16. And in the time of her going out she appears for three months (of) thirty days each, and for three months she appears (of) twenty-nine each. 17. At night she appears like a man for twenty days each time, and by day she appears like

[p. 106]

the heaven, and there is nothing else in her save her light.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXIX-LXXX. 1. Recapitulation of several of the Laws.

 

CHAPTER LXXIX.

1. And now, my son, I have shown thee everything, and the law of all the stars of the heaven is completed. 2. And he showed me all the laws of these for every day, and for every season of bearing rule, and for every year, and for its going forth, and for the order prescribed to it every month and every week: 3. And the waning of the moon which takes place in the sixth portal: for in this sixth portal her light is accomplished, and after that there is the beginning of the waning: 4. <And the waning> which takes place in the first portal in its season, till one hundred and seventy-seven days are accomplished: reckoned according to weeks, twenty-five (weeks) and two days. 5. She falls behind the sun and the order of the stars exactly five days in the course of one period, and when this place which thou seest has been traversed. 6. Such is the picture and sketch of every luminary which Uriel the archangel, who is their leader, showed unto me.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER LXXX.

1. And in those days the angel Uriel answered and said to me: 'Behold, I have shown thee everything, Enoch, and I have revealed everything to thee that thou shouldst see this sun and this moon, and the leaders of the stars of the heaven and all those who turn them, their tasks and times and departures.

LXXX. 2-8. Perversion of Nature and the heavenly Bodies owning to the Sin of Men.

	 
		2. And in the days of the sinners the years shall be shortened,
		 And their seed shall be tardy on their lands and fields,
		 And all things on the earth shall alter, [p. 107]
		 And shall not appear in their time:
		 And the rain shall be kept back
		 And the heaven shall withhold (it).
		
		3. And in those times the fruits of the earth shall be backward,
		 And shall not grow in their time,
		 And the fruits of the trees shall be withheld in their time.
		
		4. And the moon shall alter her order,
		 And not appear at her time.
		 5. [And in those days the sun shall be seen and he shall journey in the evening +on the extremity of the great chariot+ in the west]
		 And shall shine more brightly than accords with the order of light.
		
		6. And many chiefs of the stars shall transgress the order (prescribed).
		 And these shall alter their orbits and tasks,
		 And not appear at the seasons prescribed to them.
		
		7. And the whole order of the stars shall be concealed from the sinners,
		 And the thoughts of those on the earth shall err concerning them,
		 [And they shall be altered from all their ways],
		 Yea, they shall err and take them to be gods.
		
		8. And evil shall be multiplied upon them,
		 And punishment shall come upon them So as to destroy all.'
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXXI. The Heavenly Tablets and the Mission of Enoch.

 

CHAPTER LXXXI.

	 
		1. And he said unto me:
		 'Observe, Enoch, these heavenly tablets,
		 And read what is written thereon,
		 And mark every individual fact.'
		
		 [p. 108]

2 And I observed the heavenly tablets, and read everything which was written (thereon) and understood everything, and read the book of all the deeds of mankind, and of all the children of flesh that shall be upon the earth to the remotest generations. 3. And forthwith I blessed the great Lord the King of glory for ever, in that He has made all the works of the world,

	 
		And I extolled the Lord because of His patience,
		 And blessed Him because of the children of men.
		
		4. And after that I said:
		 'Blessed is the man who dies in righteousness and goodness,
		 Concerning whom there is no book of unrighteousness written,
		 And against whom no day of judgement shall be found.'
		
		 5. And those seven holy ones brought me and placed me on the earth before the door of my house, and said to me: 'Declare everything to thy son Methuselah, and show to all thy children that no flesh is righteous in the sight of the Lord, for He is their Creator. 6. One year we will leave thee with thy son, till thou givest thy (last) commands, that thou mayest teach thy children and record (it) for them, and testify to all thy children; and in the second year they shall take thee from their midst.

	 
		7. Let thy heart be strong,
		 For the good shall announce righteousness to the good;
		
		The righteous with the righteous shall rejoice,
		 And shall offer congratulation to one another.
		
		8. But the sinners shall die with the sinners,
		 And the apostate go down with the apostate.
		
		9. And those who practice righteousness shall die on account of the deeds of men,
		 And be taken away on account of the doings of the godless.'
		
		 [p. 109]

10. And in those days they ceased to speak to me, and I came to my people, blessing the Lord of the world.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXXII. Charge given to Enoch: the four Intercalary Days: the Stars which lead the Seasons and the Months.

 

CHAPTER LXXXII.

1. And now, my son Methuselah, all these things I am recounting to thee and writing down for thee, and I have revealed to thee everything, and given thee books concerning all these: so preserve, my son Methuselah, the books from thy father's hand, and (see) that thou deliver them to the generations of the world.

	 
		2. I have given Wisdom to thee and to thy children,
		 [And thy children that shall be to thee],
		 That they may give it to their children for generations,
		 This wisdom (namely) that passeth their thought.
		
		3. And those who understand it shall not sleep,
		 But shall listen with the ear that they may learn this wisdom,
		 And it shall please those that eat thereof better than good food.
		
		 4. Blessed are all the righteous, blessed are all those who walk in the way of righteousness and sin not as the sinners, in the reckoning of all their days in which the sun traverses the heaven, entering into and departing from the portals for thirty days with the heads of thousands of the order of the stars, together with the four which are intercalated which divide the four portions of the year, which lead them and enter with them four days. 5. Owing to them men shall be at fault and not reckon them in the whole reckoning of the year: yea, men shall be at fault, and not recognize them accurately. 6. For they belong to the reckoning of the year and are truly recorded (thereon) for ever, one in the first portal and one in the third, and

[p. 110]

one in the fourth and one in the sixth, and the year is completed in three hundred and sixty-four days.

7. And the account thereof is accurate and the recorded reckoning thereof exact; for the luminaries, and months and festivals, and years and days, has Uriel shown and revealed to me, to whom the Lord of the whole creation of the world hath subjected the host of heaven. 8. And he has power over night and day in the heaven to cause the light to give light to men--sun, moon, and stars, and all the powers of the heaven which revolve in their circular chariots. 9. And these are the orders of the stars, which set in their places, and in their seasons and festivals and months.

10. And these are the names of those who lead them, who watch that they enter at their times, in their orders, in their seasons, in their months, in their periods of dominion, and in their positions. 11. Their four leaders who divide the four parts of the year enter first; and after them the twelve leaders of the orders who divide the months; and for the three hundred and sixty (days) there are heads over thousands who divide the days; and for the four intercalary days there are the leaders which sunder the four parts of the year. 12. And these heads over thousands are intercalated between leader and leader, each behind a station, but their leaders make the division. And these are the names of the leaders who divide the four parts of the year which are ordained: Milki'el, Hel'emmelek, and Mel'ejal, and Narel. 13. And the names of those who lead them: Adnar'el, and Ijasusa'el, and 'Elome'el--these three follow the leaders of the orders, and there is one that follows the three leaders of the orders which follow those leaders of stations that divide the four parts of the year.

15. In the beginning of the year Melkejal rises first and rules, who is named +Tam'aini+ and sun, and all the days of his dominion whilst he bears rule are ninety-one days. 16. And these are the signs of the days which are to be seen on earth in the days of

[p. 111]

his dominion: sweat, and heat, and calms; and all the trees bear fruit, and leaves are produced on all the trees, and the harvest of wheat, and the rose-flowers, and all the flowers which come forth in the field, but the trees of the winter season become withered. 17. And these are the names of the leaders which are under them: Berka'el, Zelebs'el, and another who is added a head of a thousand, called Hilujaseph: and the days of the dominion of this (leader) are at an end.

18. The next leader after him is Hel'emmelek, whom one names the shining sun, and all the days of his light are ninety-one days. 19. And these are the signs of (his) days on the earth: glowing heat and dryness, and the trees ripen their fruits and produce all their fruits ripe and ready, and the sheep pair and become pregnant, and all the fruits of the earth are gathered in, and everything that is in the fields, and the winepress: these things take place in the days of his dominion. 20. These are the names, and the orders, and the leaders of those heads of thousands: Gida'ijal, Ke'el, and He'el, and the name of the head of a thousand which is added to them, Asfa'el': and the days of his dominion are at an end.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE DREAM-VISIONS

(LXXXIII-XC.)

LXXXIII. LXXXIV. First Dream-Vision on the Deluge.

 

CHAPTER LXXXIII.

1. And now, my son Methuselah, I will show thee all my visions which I have seen, recounting them before thee. 2. Two visions I saw before I took a wife, and the one was quite unlike the other: the first when I was learning to write: the second before I took thy mother, (when) I saw a terrible vision. And regarding them I prayed to the

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] Lord. 3. I had laid me down in the house of my grandfather Mahalalel, (when) I saw in a vision how the heaven collapsed and was borne off and fell to the earth. 4. And when it fell to the earth I saw how the earth was swallowed up in a great abyss, and mountains were suspended on mountains, and hills sank down on hills, and high trees were rent from their stems, and hurled down and sunk in the abyss. 5. And thereupon a word fell into my mouth, and I lifted up (my voice) to cry aloud, and said: 'The earth is destroyed.' 6. And my grandfather Mahalalel waked me as I lay near him, and said unto me: 'Why dost thou cry so, my son, and why dost thou make such lamentation?' 7. And I recounted to him the whole vision which I had seen, and he said unto me: 'A terrible thing hast thou seen, my son, and of grave moment is thy dream-vision as to the secrets of all the sin of the earth: it must sink into the abyss and be destroyed with a great destruction. 8. And now, my son, arise and make petition to the Lord of glory, since thou art a believer, that a remnant may remain on the earth, and that He may not destroy the whole earth. 9. My son, from heaven all this will come upon the earth, and upon the earth there will be great destruction. 10. After that I arose and prayed and implored and besought, and wrote down my prayer for the generations of the world, and I will show everything to thee, my son Methuselah. 11. And when I had gone forth below and seen the heaven, and the sun rising in the east, and the moon setting in the west, and a few stars, and the whole earth, and everything as +He had known+ it in the beginning, then I blessed the Lord of judgement and extolled Him because He had made the sun to go forth from the windows of the east, +and he ascended and rose on the face of the heaven, and set out and kept traversing the path shown unto him.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER LXXXIV.

1. And I lifted up my hands in righteousness and blessed the Holy and Great One, and spake with the breath of my mouth, and with the

[p. 113]

tongue of flesh, which God has made for the children of the flesh of men, that they should speak therewith, and He gave them breath and a tongue and a mouth that they should speak therewith:

2. 'Blessed be Thou, O Lord, King,
 Great and mighty in Thy greatness,
 Lord of the whole creation of the heaven,
 King of kings and God of the whole world.

And Thy power and kingship and greatness abide for ever and ever,
 And throughout all generations Thy dominion;
 And all the heavens are Thy throne for ever,
 And the whole earth Thy footstool for ever and ever.

3. For Thou hast made and Thou rulest all things,
 And nothing is too hard for Thee,
 Wisdom departs not from the place of Thy throne,
 Nor turns away from Thy presence.
 And Thou knowest and seest and hearest everything,
 And there is nothing hidden from Thee [for Thou seest everything].
 4. And now the angels of Thy heavens are guilty of trespass,
 And upon the flesh of men abideth Thy wrath until the great day of judgement.
 5. And now, O God and Lord and Great King,
 I implore and beseech Thee to fulfil my prayer,
 To leave me a posterity on earth,
 And not destroy all the flesh of man,
 And make the earth without inhabitant,
 So that there should be an eternal destruction.
 6. And now, my Lord, destroy from the earth the flesh which has aroused Thy wrath,
 But the flesh of righteousness and uprightness establish as a plant of the eternal seed,
 And hide not Thy face from the prayer of Thy servant, O Lord.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 114]

LXXXV-XC. The Second Dream-Vision of Enoch: the History of the World to the Founding of the Messianic Kingdom.

 

CHAPTER LXXXV.

1. And after this I saw another dream, and I will show the whole dream to thee, my son. 2. And Enoch lifted up (his voice) and spake to his son Methuselah: 'To thee, my son, will I speak: hear my words--incline thine ear to the dream-vision of thy father. 3. Before I took thy mother Edna, I saw in a vision on my bed, and behold a bull came forth from the earth, and that bull was white; and after it came forth a heifer, and along with this (latter) came forth two bulls, one of them black and the other red. 4. And that black bull gored the red one and pursued him over the earth, and thereupon I could no longer see that red bull. 5. But that black bull grew and that heifer went with him, and I saw that many oxen proceeded from him which resembled and followed him. 6. And that cow, that first one, went from the presence of that first bull in order to seek that red one, but found him not, and lamented with a great lamentation over him and sought him. 7. And I looked till that first bull came to her and quieted her, and from that time onward she cried no more. 8. And after that she bore another white bull, and after him she bore many bulls and black cows.

9. And I saw in my sleep that white bull likewise grow and become a great white bull, and from Him proceeded many white bulls, and they resembled him. And they began to beget many white bulls, which resembled them, one following the other, (even) many.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXXVI. The Fall of the Angels and the Demoralization of Mankind.

 

CHAPTER LXXXVI.

1. And again I saw with mine eyes as I slept, and I saw the heaven above, and behold a star fell from heaven, and it arose and eat and pastured amongst those oxen. 2. And after that I saw the

[p. 115]

large and the black oxen, and behold they all changed their stalls and pastures and their cattle, and began to live with each other. 3. And again I saw in the vision, and looked towards the heaven, and behold I saw many stars descend and cast themselves down from heaven to that first star, and they became bulls amongst those cattle and pastured with them [[amongst them]]. 4. And I looked at them and saw, and behold they all let out their privy members, like horses, and began to cover the cows of the oxen, and they all became pregnant and bare elephants, camels, and asses. 5. And all the oxen feared them and were affrighted at them, and began to bite with their teeth and to devour, and to gore with their horns. 6. And they began, moreover, to devour those oxen; and behold all the children of the earth began to tremble and quake before them and to flee from them.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXXVII. The Advent of the Seven Archangels.

 

CHAPTER LXXXVII.

1. And again I saw how they began to gore each other and to devour each other, and the earth began to cry aloud. 2. And I raised mine eyes again to heaven, and I saw in the vision, and behold there came forth from heaven beings who were like white men: and four went forth from that place and three with them. 3. And those three that had last come forth grasped me by my hand and took me up, away from the generations of the earth, and raised me up to a lofty place, and showed me a tower raised high above the earth, and all the hills were lower. 4. And one said unto me: 'Remain here till thou seest everything that befalls those elephants, camels, and asses, and the stars and the oxen, and all of them.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXXVIII. The Punishment of the Fallen Angels by the Archangels.

 

CHAPTER LXXXVIII.

1. And I saw one of those four who had come forth first, and he seized that first star which had fallen from the heaven, and bound it hand and

[p. 116]

foot and cast it into an abyss: now that abyss was narrow and deep, and horrible and dark. 2. And one of them drew a sword, and gave it to those elephants and camels and asses: then they began to smite each other, and the whole earth quaked because of them. 3. And as I was beholding in the vision, lo, one of those four who had come forth stoned (them) from heaven, and gathered and took all the great stars whose privy members were like those of horses, and bound them all hand and foot, and cast them in an abyss of the earth.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

LXXXIX. 1-9. The Deluge and the Deliverance of Noah.

 

CHAPTER LXXXIX.

1. And one of those four went to that white bull and instructed him in a secret, without his being terrified: he was born a bull and became a man, and built for himself a great vessel and dwelt thereon; and three bulls dwelt with him in that vessel and they were covered in. 2. And again I raised mine eyes towards heaven and saw a lofty roof, with seven water torrents thereon, and those torrents flowed with much water into an enclosure. 3. And I saw again, and behold fountains were opened on the surface of that great enclosure, and that water began to swell and rise upon the surface, and I saw that enclosure till all its surface was covered with water. 4. And the water, the darkness, and mist increased upon it; and as I looked at the height of that water, that water had risen above the height of that enclosure, and was streaming over that enclosure, and it stood upon the earth. 5. And all the cattle of that enclosure were gathered together until I saw how they sank and were swallowed up and perished in that water. 6. But that vessel floated on the water, while all the oxen and elephants and camels and asses sank to the bottom with all the animals, so that I could no longer see them, and they were not able to escape, (but) perished and sank into the depths. 7. And again I saw in the vision till those water torrents were removed from that high roof, and the chasms of the earth were

[p. 117]

levelled up and other abysses were opened. 8. Then the water began to run down into these, till the earth became visible; but that vessel settled on the earth, and the darkness retired and light appeared. 9. But that white bull which had become a man came out of that vessel, and the three bulls with him, and one of those three was white like that bull, and one of them was red as blood, and one black: and that white bull departed from them.

LXXXIX. 10-27. From the Death of Noah to the Exodus.

10. And they began to bring forth beasts of the field and birds, so that there arose different genera: lions, tigers, wolves, dogs, hyenas, wild boars, foxes, squirrels, swine, falcons, vultures, kites, eagles, and ravens; and among them was born a white bull. 11. And they began to bite one another; but that white bull which was born amongst them begat a wild ass and a white bull with it, and the wild asses multiplied. 12. But that bull which was born from him begat a black wild boar and a white sheep; and the former begat many boars, but that sheep begat twelve sheep. 13. And when those twelve sheep had grown, they gave up one of them to the asses, and those asses again gave up that sheep to the wolves, and that sheep grew up among the wolves. 14. And the Lord brought the eleven sheep to live with it and to pasture with it among the wolves: and they multiplied and became many flocks of sheep. 15. And the wolves began to fear them, and they oppressed them until they destroyed their little ones, and they cast their young into a river of much water: but those sheep began to cry aloud on account of their little ones, and to complain unto their Lord. 16. And a sheep which had been saved from the wolves fled and escaped to the wild asses; and I saw the sheep how they lamented and cried, and besought their Lord with all their might, till that Lord of the sheep descended at the voice of the sheep from a lofty abode, and came to them and pastured them. 17. And He called that

[p. 118]

sheep which had escaped the wolves, and spake with it concerning the wolves that it should admonish them not to touch the sheep. 18. And the sheep went to the wolves according to the word of the Lord, and another sheep met it and went with it, and the two went and entered together into the assembly of those wolves, and spake with them and admonished them not to touch the sheep from henceforth. 19. And thereupon I saw the wolves, and how they oppressed the sheep exceedingly with all their power; and the sheep cried aloud. 20. And the Lord came to the sheep and they began to smite those wolves: and the wolves began to make lamentation; but the sheep became quiet and forthwith ceased to cry out. 21. And I saw the sheep till they departed from amongst the wolves; but the eyes of the wolves were blinded, and those wolves departed in pursuit of the sheep with all their power. 22. And the Lord of the sheep went with them, as their leader, and all His sheep followed Him: and his face was dazzling and glorious and terrible to behold. 23. But the wolves began to pursue those sheep till they reached a sea of water. 24. And that sea was divided, and the water stood on this side and on that before their face, and their Lord led them and placed Himself between them and the wolves. 25. And as those wolves did not yet see the sheep, they proceeded into the midst of that sea, and the wolves followed the sheep, and [those wolves] ran after them into that sea. 26. And when they saw the Lord of the sheep, they turned to flee before His face, but that sea gathered itself together, and became as it had been created, and the water swelled and rose till it covered those wolves. 27. And I saw till all the wolves who pursued those sheep perished and were drowned.

LXXXIX. 28-40. Israel in the Desert, the Giving of the Law, the Entrance into Palestine.

28. But the sheep escaped from that water and went forth into a wilderness, where there was no

[p. 119]

water and no grass; and they began to open their eyes and to see; and I saw the Lord of the sheep pasturing them and giving them water and grass, and that sheep going and leading them. 29. And that sheep ascended to the summit of that lofty rock, and the Lord of the sheep sent it to them. 30. And after that I saw the Lord of the sheep who stood before them, and His appearance was great and terrible and majestic, and all those sheep saw Him and were afraid before His face. 31. And they all feared and trembled because of Him, and they cried to that sheep with them [which was amongst them]: "We are not able to stand before our Lord or to behold Him." 32. And that sheep which led them again ascended to the summit of that rock, but the sheep began to be blinded and to wander from the way which he had showed them, but that sheep wot not thereof. 33. And the Lord of the sheep was wrathful exceedingly against them, and that sheep discovered it, and went down from the summit of the rock, and came to the sheep, and found the greatest part of them blinded and fallen away. 34. And when they saw it they feared and trembled at its presence, and desired to return to their folds. 35. And that sheep took other sheep with it, and came to those sheep which had fallen away, and began to slay them; and the sheep feared its presence, and thus that sheep brought back those sheep that had fallen away, and they returned to their folds. 36. And I saw in this vision till that sheep became a man and built a house for the Lord of the sheep, and placed all the sheep in that house. 37. And I saw till this sheep which had met that sheep which led them fell asleep: and I saw till all the great sheep perished and little ones arose in their place, and they came to a pasture, and approached a stream of water. 38. Then that sheep, their leader which had become a man, withdrew from them and fell asleep, and all the sheep sought it and cried over it with a great crying. 39. And I saw till they left off crying for that sheep and crossed that stream of

[p. 120]

water, and there arose the two sheep as leaders in the place of those which had led them and fallen asleep (lit. "had fallen asleep and led them"). 40. And I saw till the sheep came to a goodly place, and a pleasant and glorious land, and I saw till those sheep were satisfied; and that house stood amongst them in the pleasant land.

LXXXIX. 41-50. From the Time of the Judges till the Building of the Temple.

41. And sometimes their eyes were opened, and sometimes blinded, till another sheep arose and led them and brought them all back, and their eyes were opened.

42. And the dogs and the foxes and the wild boars began to devour those sheep till the Lord of the sheep raised up [another sheep] a ram from their midst, which led them. 43. And that ram began to butt on either side those dogs, foxes, and wild boars till he had destroyed them +all+. 44. And that sheep whose eyes were opened saw that ram, which was amongst the sheep, till it +forsook its glory+ and began to butt those sheep, and trampled upon them, and behaved itself unseemly. 45. And the Lord of the sheep sent the lamb to another lamb and raised it to being a ram and leader of the sheep instead of that ram which had +forsaken its glory+. 46. And it went to it and spake to it alone, and raised it to being a ram, and made it the prince and leader of the sheep; but during all these things those dogs oppressed the sheep. 47. And the first ram pursued that second ram, and that second ram arose and fled before it; and I saw till those dogs pulled down the first ram. 48. And that second ram arose and led the [little] sheep. 49. And those sheep grew and multiplied; but all the dogs, and foxes, and wild boars feared and fled before it, and that ram butted and killed the wild beasts, and those wild beasts had no longer any power among the sheep and robbed them no more of ought. 48b. And that ram begat many sheep and fell asleep; and a

[p. 121]

little sheep became ram in its stead, and became prince and leader of those sheep.

50. And that house became great and broad, and it was built for those sheep: (and) a tower lofty and great was built on the house for the Lord of the sheep, and that house was low, but the tower was elevated and lofty, and the Lord of the sheep stood on that tower and they offered a full table before Him.

LXXXIX. 51-67. The Two Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, to the Destruction of Jerusalem.

51. And again I saw those sheep that they again erred and went many ways, and forsook that their house, and the Lord of the sheep called some from amongst the sheep and sent them to the sheep, but the sheep began to slay them. 52. And one of them was saved and was not slain, and it sped away and cried aloud over the sheep; and they sought to slay it, but the Lord of the sheep saved it from the sheep, and brought it up to me, and caused it to dwell there. 53. And many other sheep He sent to those sheep to testify unto them and lament over them. 54. And after that I saw that when they forsook the house of the Lord and His tower they fell away entirely, and their eyes were blinded; and I saw the Lord of the sheep how He wrought much slaughter amongst them in their herds until those sheep invited that slaughter and betrayed His place. 55. And He gave them over into the hands of the lions and tigers, and wolves and hyenas, and into the hand of the foxes, and to all the wild beasts, and those wild beasts began to tear in pieces those sheep. 56. And I saw that He forsook that their house and their tower and gave them all into the hand of the lions, to tear and devour them, into the hand of all the wild beasts. 57. And I began to cry aloud with all my power, and to appeal to the Lord of the sheep, and to represent to Him in regard to the sheep that they were devoured by all the wild beasts. 58. But He remained unmoved,

[p. 122]

though He saw it, and rejoiced that they were devoured and swallowed and robbed, and left them to be devoured in the hand of all the beasts. 59. And He called seventy shepherds, and cast those sheep to them that they might pasture them, and He spake to the shepherds and their companions: "Let each individual of you pasture the sheep henceforward, and everything that I shall command you that do ye. 60. And I will deliver them over unto you duly numbered, and tell you which of them are to be destroyed--and them destroy ye." And He gave over unto them those sheep. 61. And He called another and spake unto him: "Observe and mark everything that the shepherds will do to those sheep; for they will destroy more of them than I have commanded them. 62. And every excess and the destruction which will be wrought through the shepherds, record (namely) how many they destroy according to my command, and how many according to their own caprice: record against every individual shepherd all the destruction he effects. 63. And read out before me by number how many they destroy, and how many they deliver over for destruction, that I may have this as a testimony against them, and know every deed of the shepherds, that I may comprehend and see what they do, whether or not they abide by my command which I have commanded them. 64. But they shall not know it, and thou shalt not declare it to them, nor admonish them, but only record against each individual all the destruction which the shepherds effect each in his time and lay it all before me." 65. And I saw till those shepherds pastured in their season, and they began to slay and to destroy more than they were bidden, and they delivered those sheep into the hand of the lions. 66. And the lions and tigers eat and devoured the greater part of those sheep, and the wild boars eat along with them; and they burnt that tower and demolished that house. 67. And I became exceedingly sorrowful over that tower because that house of the sheep was demolished,

[p. 123]

and afterwards I was unable to see if those sheep entered that house.

LXXXIX. 68-71. First Period of the Angelic Rulers--from the Destruction of Jerusalem to the Return from the Captivity.

68. And the shepherds and their associates delivered over those sheep to all the wild beasts, to devour them, and each one of them received in his time a definite number: it was written by the other in a book how many each one of them destroyed of them. 69. And each one slew and destroyed many more than was prescribed; and I began to weep and lament on account of those sheep. 70. And thus in the vision I saw that one who wrote, how he wrote down every one that was destroyed by those shepherds, day by day, and carried up and laid down and showed actually the whole book to the Lord of the sheep--(even) everything that they had done, and all that each one of them had made away with, and all that they had given over to destruction. 71. And the book was read before the Lord of the sheep, and He took the book from his hand and read it and sealed it and laid it down.

LXXXIX. 72-77. Second Period--from the time of Cyrus to that of Alexander the Great.

72. And forthwith I saw how the shepherds pastured for twelve hours, and behold three of those sheep turned back and came and entered and began to build up all that had fallen down of that house; but the wild boars tried to hinder them, but they were not able. 73. And they began again to build as before, and they reared up that tower, and it was named the high tower; and they began again to place a table before the tower, but all the bread on it was polluted and not pure. 74. And as touching all this the eyes of those sheep were blinded so that they saw not, and (the eyes of) their shepherds likewise;

[p. 124]

and they delivered them in large numbers to their shepherds for destruction, and they trampled the sheep with their feet and devoured them. 75. And the Lord of the sheep remained unmoved till all the sheep were dispersed over the field and mingled with them (i.e. the beasts), and they (i.e. the shepherds) did not save them out of the hand of the beasts. 76. And this one who wrote the book carried it up, and showed it and read it before the Lord of the sheep, and implored Him on their account, and besought Him on their account as he showed Him all the doings of the shepherds, and gave testimony before Him against all the shepherds. And he took the actual book and laid it down beside Him and departed.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XC. 1-5. Third Period--from Alexander the Great to the Graeco-Syrian Domination.

 

CHAPTER XC.

1. And I saw till that in this manner thirty-five shepherds undertook the pasturing (of the sheep), and they severally completed their periods as did the first; and others received them into their hands, to pasture them for their period, each shepherd in his own period. 2. And after that I saw in my vision all the birds of heaven coming, the eagles, the vultures, the kites, the ravens; but the eagles led all the birds; and they began to devour those sheep, and to pick out their eyes and to devour their flesh. 3. And the sheep cried out because their flesh was being devoured by the birds, and as for me I looked and lamented in my sleep over that shepherd who pastured the sheep. 4. And I saw until those sheep were devoured by the dogs and eagles and kites, and they left neither flesh nor skin nor sinew remaining on them till only their bones stood there: and their bones too fell to the earth and the sheep became few. 5. And I saw until that twenty-three had undertaken the pasturing and completed in their several periods fifty-eight times.

[p. 125]

XC. 6-12. Fourth Period--from the Graeco-Syrian Domination to the Maccabaean Revolt.

6. But behold lambs were borne by those white sheep, and they began to open their eyes and to see, and to cry to the sheep. 7. Yea, they cried to them, but they did not hearken to what they said to them, but were exceedingly deaf, and their eyes were very exceedingly blinded. 8. And I saw in the vision how the ravens flew upon those lambs and took one of those lambs, and dashed the sheep in pieces and devoured them. 9. And I saw till horns grew upon those lambs, and the ravens cast down their horns; and I saw till there sprouted a great horn of one of those sheep, and their eyes were opened. 10. And it +looked at+ them [and their eyes opened], and it cried to the sheep, and the rams saw it and all ran to it. 11. And notwithstanding all this those eagles and vultures and ravens and kites still kept tearing the sheep and swooping down upon them and devouring them: still the sheep remained silent, but the rams lamented and cried out. 12. And those ravens fought and battled with it and sought to lay low its horn, but they had no power over it.

XC. 13-19. The Last Assault of the Gentiles on the Jews (where vv. 13-15 and 16-18 are doublets).

   13. And I saw till the +shepherds and+ eagles and those vultures and kites came, and +they cried to the ravens+ that they should break the horn of that ram, and they battled and fought with it, and it battled with them and cried that its help might come.  16. All the eagles and vultures and ravens and kites were gathered together, and there came with them all the sheep of the field, yea, they all came together, and helped each other to break that horn of the ram. 
  

19. And I saw till a great sword was given to the sheep, and the sheep proceeded against all the beasts

[p. 126]

of the field to slay them, and all the beasts and the birds of the heaven fled before their face.

   14. And I saw till that man, who wrote down the names of the shepherds [and] carried up into the presence of the Lord of the sheep [came and helped it and showed it everything: he had come down for the help of that ram].  17. And I saw that man, who wrote the book according to the command of the Lord, till he opened that book concerning the destruction which those twelve last shepherds had wrought, and showed that they had destroyed much more than their predecessors, before the Lord of the sheep. 
  15. And I saw till the Lord of the sheep came unto them in wrath, and all who saw Him fled, and they all fell +into His shadow+ from before His face.  18. And I saw till the Lord of the sheep came unto them and took in His hand the staff of His wrath, and smote the earth, and the earth clave asunder, and all the beasts and all the birds of the heaven fell from among those sheep, and were swallowed up in the earth and it covered them. 
  

XC. 20-27. Judgement of the Fallen Angels, the Shepherds, and the Apostates.

20. And I saw till a throne was erected in the pleasant land, and the Lord of the sheep sat Himself thereon, and the other took the sealed books and opened those books before the Lord of the sheep. 21. And the Lord called those men the seven first white ones, and commanded that they should bring before Him, beginning with the first star which led the way, all the stars whose privy members were like those of horses, and they brought them all before

[p. 127]

[paragraph continues] Him. 22. And He said to that man who wrote before Him, being one of those seven white ones, and said unto him: "Take those seventy shepherds to whom I delivered the sheep, and who taking them on their own authority slew more than I commanded them." 23. And behold they were all bound, I saw, and they all stood before Him. 24. And the judgement was held first over the stars, and they were judged and found guilty, and went to the place of condemnation, and they were cast into an abyss, full of fire and flaming, and full of pillars of fire. 25. And those seventy shepherds were judged and found guilty, and they were cast into that fiery abyss. 26. And I saw at that time how a like abyss was opened in the midst of the earth, full of fire, and they brought those blinded sheep, and they were all judged and found guilty and cast into this fiery abyss, and they burned; now this abyss was to the right of that house. 27. And I saw those sheep burning +and their bones burning+.

XC. 28-38. The New Jerusalem, the Conversion of the surviving Gentiles, the Resurrection of the Righteous, the Messiah.

28. And I stood up to see till they folded up that old house; and carried off all the pillars, and all the beams and ornaments of the house were at the same time folded up with it, and they carried it off and laid it in a place in the south of the land. 29. And I saw till the Lord of the sheep brought a new house greater and loftier than that first, and set it up in the place of the first which had beer folded up: all its pillars were new, and its ornaments were new and larger than those of the first, the old one which He had taken away, and all the sheep were within it.

30. And I saw all the sheep which had been left, and all the beasts on the earth, and all the birds of the heaven, falling down and doing homage to those sheep and making petition to and obeying them in every thing. 31. And thereafter those three who

[p. 128]

were clothed in white and had seized me by my hand [who had taken me up before], and the hand of that ram also seizing hold of me, they took me up and set me down in the midst of those sheep before the judgement took place+. 32. And those sheep were all white, and their wool was abundant and clean. 33. And all that had been destroyed and dispersed, and all the beasts of the field, and all the birds of the heaven, assembled in that house, and the Lord of the sheep rejoiced with great joy because they were all good and had returned to His house. 34. And I saw till they laid down that sword, which had been given to the sheep, and they brought it back into the house, and it was sealed before the presence of the Lord, and all the sheep were invited into that house, but it held them not. 35. And the eyes of them all were opened, and they saw the good, and there was not one among them that did not see. 36. And I saw that that house was large and broad and very full.

37. And I saw that a white bull was born, with large horns and all the beasts of the field and all the birds of the air feared him and made petition to him all the time. 38. And I saw till all their generations were transformed, and they all became white bulls; and the first among them became a lamb, and that lamb became a great animal and had great black horns on its head; and the Lord of the sheep rejoiced over it and over all the oxen. 39. And I slept in their midst: and I awoke and saw everything. 40. This is the vision which I saw while I slept, and I awoke and blessed the Lord of righteousness and gave Him glory. 41. Then I wept with a great weeping and my tears stayed not till I could no longer endure it: when I saw, they flowed on account of what I had seen; for everything shall come and be fulfilled, and all the deeds of men in their order were shown to me. 42. On that night I remembered the first dream, and because of it I wept and was troubled--because I had seen that vision.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE CONCLUDING SECTION OF THE BOOK.

[p. 129]

(XCII-CV.)

XCII. XCI. 1-10. 18-19 Enoch's Book of Admonition for his Children.

 

CHAPTER XCII.

1. The book written by Enoch--[Enoch indeed wrote this complete doctrine of wisdom, (which is) praised of all men and a judge of all the earth] for all my children who shall dwell on the earth. And for the future generations who shall observe uprightness and peace.

	 
		2. Let not your spirit be troubled on account of the times;
		 For the Holy and Great One has appointed days for all things.
		
		3. And the righteous one shall arise from sleep,
		 [Shall arise] and walk in the paths of righteousness,
		 And all his path and conversation shall be in eternal goodness and grace.
		
		4. He will be gracious to the righteous and give him eternal uprightness,
		 And He will give him power so that he shall be (endowed) with goodness and righteousness.
		 And he shall walk in eternal light.
		
		5. And sin shall perish in darkness for ever,
		 And shall no more be seen from that day for evermore.
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCI. 1-11. 18-19. Enoch's Admonition to his Children.

 

CHAPTER XCI.

	 
		1. 'And now, my son Methuselah, call to me all thy brothers
		 And gather together to me all the sons of thy mother; [p. 130]
		 For the word calls me,
		 And the spirit is poured out upon me,
		 That I may show you everything
		 That shall befall you for ever.'
		
		 2 And there upon Methuselah went and summoned to him all his brothers and assembled his relatives. 3 And he spake unto all the children of righteousness and said:

	 
		'Hear, ye sons of Enoch, all the words of your father,
		 And hearken aright to the voice of my mouth;
		 For I exhort you and say unto you, beloved:
		
		Love uprightness and walk therein.
		 4. And draw not nigh to uprightness with a double heart,
		 And associate not with those of a double heart,
		 But walk in righteousness, my sons.
		 And it shall guide you on good paths,
		 And righteousness shall be your companion.
		
		5. For I know that violence must increase on the earth,
		 And a great chastisement be executed on the earth,
		 And all unrighteousness come to an end:
		
		Yea, it shall be cut off from its roots,
		 And its whole structure be destroyed.
		
		6. And unrighteousness shall again be consummated on the earth,
		 And all the deeds of unrighteousness and of violence
		 And transgression shall prevail in a twofold degree.
		
		7. And when sin and unrighteousness and blasphemy
		 And violence in all kinds of deeds increase,
		 And apostasy and transgression and uncleanness increase, [p. 131]
		
		A great chastisement shall come from heaven upon all these,
		 And the holy Lord will come forth with wrath and chastisement
		 To execute judgement on earth.
		
		8. In those days violence shall be cut off from its roots,
		 And the roots of unrighteousness together with deceit,
		 And they shall be destroyed from under heaven.
		
		9. And all the idols of the heathen shall be abandoned,
		 And the temples burned with fire,
		 And they shall remove them from the whole earth,
		
		And they (i.e. the heathen) shall be cast into the judgement of fire,
		 And shall perish in wrath and in grievous judgement for ever.
		
		10. And the righteous shall arise from their sleep,
		 And wisdom shall arise and be given unto them.
		
		 [11. And after that the roots of unrighteousness shall be cut off, and the sinners shall be destroyed by the sword . . . shall be cut off from the blasphemers in every place, and those who plan violence and those who commit blasphemy shall perish by the sword.]

	 
		18. And now I tell you, my sons, and show you
		 The paths of righteousness and the paths of violence.
		 Yea, I will show them to you again
		 That ye may know what will come to pass.
		
		19. And now, hearken unto me, my sons,
		 And walk in the paths of righteousness,
		 And walk not in the paths of violence;
		 For all who walk in the paths of unrighteousness shall perish for ever.'
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCIII. XCI. 12-17. The Apocalypse of Weeks.

[p. 132]

 

CHAPTER XCIII.

1. And after that Enoch both +gave+ and began to recount from the books. And Enoch said:

	 
		'Concerning the children of righteousness and concerning the elect of the world,
		 And concerning the plant of uprightness, I will speak these things,
		 Yea, I Enoch will declare (them) unto you, my sons:
		
		According to that which appeared to me in the heavenly vision,
		 And which I have known through the word of the holy angels,
		 And have learnt from the heavenly tablets.'
		
		3. And Enoch began to recount from the books and said:
		 'I was born the seventh in the first week,
		 While judgement and righteousness still endured.
		
		4. And after me there shall arise in the second week great wickedness,
		 And deceit shall have sprung up;
		 And in it there shall be the first end.
		
		And in it a man shall be saved;
		 And after it is ended unrighteousness shall grow up,
		 And a law shall be made for the sinners.
		
		5. And after that in the third week at its close
		 A man shall be elected as the plant of righteous judgement,
		 And his posterity shall become the plant of righteousness for evermore.
		
		6. And after that in the fourth week, at its close,
		 Visions of the holy and righteous shall be seen,
		 And a law for all generations and an enclosure shall be made for them.
		
		7. And after that in the fifth week, at its close,
		 The house of glory and dominion shall be built for ever. [p. 133]
		
		8. And after that in the sixth week all who live in it shall be blinded,
		 And the hearts of all of them shall godlessly forsake wisdom.
		
		And in it a man shall ascend;
		 And at its close the house of dominion shall be burnt with fire,
		 And the whole race of the chosen root shall be dispersed.
		
		9. And after that in the seventh week shall an apostate generation arise,
		 And many shall be its deeds,
		 And all its deeds shall be apostate.
		
		10. And at its close shall be elected
		 The elect righteous of the eternal plant of righteousness,
		 To receive sevenfold instruction concerning all His creation.
		
		 [11. For who is there of all the children of men that is able to hear the voice of the Holy One without being troubled? And who can think His thoughts? and who is there that can behold all the works of heaven? 12. And how should there be one who could behold the heaven, and who is there that could understand the things of heaven and see a soul or a spirit and could tell thereof, or ascend and see all their ends and think them or do like them? 13. And who is there of all men that could know what is the breadth and the length of the earth, and to whom has been shown the measure of all of them? 14. Or is there any one who could discern the length of the heaven and how great is its height, and upon what it is founded, and how great is the number of the stars, and where all the luminaries rest?]

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCI. 12.-17. The Last Three Weeks.

 

CHAPTER XCI.

	 
		12. And after that there shall be another, the eighth week, that of righteousness,
		 And a sword shall be given to it that a righteous judgement may be executed on the oppressors,
		 And sinners shall be delivered into the hands of the righteous. [p. 134]
		
		13 And at its close they shall acquire houses through their righteousness,
		 And a house shall be built for the Great King in glory for evermore,
		 14d. And all mankind shall look to the path of uprightness.
		
		14a. And after that, in the ninth week, the righteous judgement shall be revealed to the whole world,
		 b. And all the works of the godless shall vanish from all the earth,
		 c. And the world shall be written down for destruction.
		
		15. And after this, in the tenth week in the seventh part,
		 There shall be the great eternal judgement,
		 In which He will execute vengeance amongst the angels.
		
		16. And the first heaven shall depart and pass away,
		 And a new heaven shall appear,
		 And all the powers of the heavens shall give sevenfold light.
		
		17. And after that there will be many weeks without number for ever,
		 And all shall be in goodness and righteousness,
		 And sin shall no more be mentioned for ever.
		
		  

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCIV. 1-5. Admonitions to the Righteous.

 

CHAPTER XCIV.

	 
		1. And now I say unto you, my sons, love righteousness and walk therein;
		 For the paths of righteousness are worthy of acceptation,
		 But the paths of unrighteousness shall suddenly be destroyed and vanish.
		
		2. And to certain men of a generation shall the paths of violence and of death be revealed,
		 And they shall hold themselves afar from them,
		 And shall not follow them. [p. 135]
		
		3. And now I say unto you the righteous:
		 Walk not in the paths of wickedness, nor in the paths of death,
		 And draw not nigh to them, lest ye be destroyed.
		
		4. But seek and choose for yourselves righteousness and an elect life,
		 And walk in the paths of peace,
		 And ye shall live and prosper.
		
		5. And hold fast my words in the thoughts of your hearts,
		 And suffer them not to be effaced from your hearts;
		
		For I know that sinners will tempt men to evilly-entreat wisdom,
		 So that no place may be found for her,
		 And no manner of temptation may minish.
		
		 XCIV. 6-11. Woes for the Sinners.

	 
		6. Woe to those who build unrighteousness and oppression
		 And lay deceit as a foundation;
		 For they shall be suddenly overthrown,
		 And they shall have no peace.
		
		7. Woe to those who build their houses with sin;
		 For from all their foundations shall they be overthrown,
		 And by the sword shall they fall.
		
		[And those who acquire gold and silver in judgement suddenly shall perish.]
		
		8. Woe to you, ye rich, for ye have trusted in your riches,
		 And from your riches shall ye depart,
		 Because ye have not remembered the Most High in the days of your riches.
		
		9. Ye have committed blasphemy and unrighteousness,
		 And have become ready for the day of slaughter, [p. 136]
		 And the day of darkness and the day of the great judgement.
		
		10. Thus I speak and declare unto you:
		 He who hath created you will overthrow you,
		 And for your fall there shall be no compassion,
		 And your Creator will rejoice at your destruction.
		
		11. And your righteous ones in those days shall be
		 A reproach to the sinners and the godless.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCV. Enoch's Grief: fresh Woes against the Sinners.

 

CHAPTER XCV.

	 
		1. Oh that mine eyes were [a cloud of] waters
		 That I might weep over you,
		 And pour down my tears as a cloud +of+ waters:
		 That so I might rest from my trouble of heart!
		
		2. +Who has permitted you to practice reproaches and wickedness?
		 And so judgement shall overtake you, sinners. +
		
		3. Fear not the sinners, ye righteous;
		 For again will the Lord deliver them into your hands,
		 That ye may execute judgement upon them according to your desires.
		
		4. Woe to you who fulminate anathemas which cannot be reversed:
		 Healing shall therefore be far from you because of your sins.
		
		5. Woe to you who requite your neighbour with evil;
		 For ye shall be requited according to your works.
		
		6. Woe to you, lying witnesses,
		 And to those who weigh out injustice,
		 For suddenly shall ye perish.
		
		7. Woe to you, sinners, for ye persecute the righteous;
		 For ye shall be delivered up and persecuted because of injustice,
		 And heavy shall its yoke be upon you.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCVI. Grounds of Hopefulness for the Righteous: Woes for the Wicked.

[p. 137]

 

CHAPTER XCVI.

	 
		1. Be hopeful, ye righteous; for suddenly shall the sinners perish before you,
		 And ye shall have lordship over them according to your desires.
		
		[2. And in the day of the tribulation of the sinners,
		 Your children shall mount and rise as eagles,
		 And higher than the vultures will be your nest,
		 And ye shall ascend and enter the crevices of the earth,
		 And the clefts of the rock for ever as coneys before the unrighteous,
		 And the sirens shall sigh because of you-and weep.]
		
		3. Wherefore fear not, ye that have suffered;
		 For healing shall be your portion,
		 And a bright light shall enlighten you,
		 And the voice of rest ye shall hear from heaven.
		
		4. Woe unto you, ye sinners, for your riches make you appear like the righteous,
		 But your hearts convict you of being sinners,
		 And this fact shall be a testimony against you for a memorial of (your) evil deeds.
		
		5. Woe to you who devour the finest of the wheat,
		 And drink wine in large bowls,
		 And tread under foot the lowly with your might.
		
		6. Woe to you who drink water from every fountain,
		 For suddenly shall ye be consumed and wither away,
		 Because ye have forsaken the fountain of life.
		
		7. Woe to you who work unrighteousness
		 And deceit and blasphemy:
		 It shall be a memorial against you for evil.
		
		8. Woe to you, ye mighty,
		 Who with might oppress the righteous;
		 For the day of your destruction is coming. [p. 138]
		 In those days many and good days shall come to the righteous--in the day of your judgement.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCVII. The Evils in Store for Sinners and the Possessors of unrighteous Wealth.

 

CHAPTER XCVII.

	 
		1. Believe, ye righteous, that the sinners will become a shame
		 And perish in the day of unrighteousness.
		 2. Be it known unto you (ye sinners) that the Most High is mindful of your destruction,
		 And the angels of heaven rejoice over your destruction.
		
		3. What will ye do, ye sinners,
		 And whither will ye flee on that day of judgement,
		 When ye hear the voice of the prayer of the righteous?
		
		4. Yea, ye shall fare like unto them,
		 Against whom this word shall be a testimony:
		 "Ye have been companions of sinners."
		
		5. And in those days the prayer of the righteous shall reach unto the Lord,
		 And for you the days of your judgement shall come.
		
		6. And all the words of your unrighteousness shall be read out before the Great Holy One,
		 And your faces shall be covered with shame,
		 And He will reject every work which is grounded on unrighteousness.
		
		7. Woe to you, ye sinners, who live on the mid ocean and on the dry land,
		 Whose remembrance is evil against you.
		
		8. Woe to you who acquire silver and gold in unrighteousness and say:
		 "We have become rich with riches and have possessions;
		 And have acquired everything we have desired.[p. 139]
		
		9. And now let us do what we purposed:
		 For we have gathered silver,
		 9d And many are the husbandmen in our houses."
		 9e And our granaries are (brim) full as with water,
		
		10 Yea and like water your lies shall flow away;
		 For your riches shall not abide
		 But speedily ascend from you;
		
		For ye have acquired it all in unrighteousness,
		 And ye shall be given over to a great curse.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCVIII. Self-indulgence of Sinners: Sin originated by Man: all Sin recorded in Heaven: Woes for the Sinners.

 

CHAPTER XCVIII.

	 
		1. And now I swear unto you, to the wise and to the foolish,
		 For ye shall have manifold experiences on the earth.
		
		2. For ye men shall put on more adornments than a woman,
		 And coloured garments more than a virgin:
		 In royalty and in grandeur and in power,
		 And in silver and in gold and in purple,
		 And in splendour and in food they shall be poured out as water.
		
		3. Therefore they shall be wanting in doctrine and wisdom,
		 And they shall perish thereby together with their possessions;
		 And with all their glory and their splendour,
		 And in shame and in slaughter and in great destitution,
		 Their spirits shall be cast into the furnace of fire.
		
		4. I have sworn unto you, ye sinners, as a mountain has not become a slave,
		 And a hill does not become the handmaid of a woman,
		 Even so sin has not been sent upon the earth,
		 But man of himself has created it, [p. 140]
		 And under a great curse shall they fall who commit it.
		
		5. And barrenness has not been given to the woman,
		 But on account of the deeds of her own hands she dies without children.
		
		6. I have sworn unto you, ye sinners, by the Holy Great One,
		 That all your evil deeds are revealed in the heavens,
		 And that none of your deeds of oppression are covered and hidden.
		
		 7. And do not think in your spirit nor say in your heart that ye do not know and that ye do not see that every sin is every day recorded in heaven in the presence of the Most High. 8. From henceforth ye know that all your oppression wherewith ye oppress is written down every day till the day of your judgement.

9. Woe to you, ye fools, for through your folly shall ye perish: and ye transgress against the wise, and so good hap shall not be your portion. 10. And now, know ye that ye are prepared for the day of destruction: wherefore do not hope to live, ye sinners, but ye shall depart and die; for ye know no ransom; for ye are prepared for the day of the great judgement, for the day of tribulation and great shame for your spirits.

	 
		11. Woe to you, ye obstinate of heart, who work wickedness and eat blood:
		 Whence have ye good things to eat and to drink and to be filled?
		
		 [paragraph continues] From all the good things which the Lord the Most High has placed in abundance on the earth; therefore ye shall have no peace. 12. Woe to you who love the deeds of unrighteousness: wherefore do ye hope for good hap unto yourselves? know that ye shall be delivered into the hands of the righteous, and they shall cut off your necks and slay you, and have no mercy upon you. 13. Woe to you who rejoice in the

[p. 141]

tribulation of the righteous; for no grave shall be dug for you. 14. Woe to you who set at nought the words of the righteous; for ye shall have no hope of life. 15. Woe to you who write down lying and godless words; for they write down their lies that men may hear them and act godlessly towards (their) neighbour. 16. Therefore they shall have no peace but die a sudden death.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

XCIX. Woes pronounced on the Godless, the Lawbreakers: evil Plight of Sinners in the last Days: further Woes.

 

CHAPTER XCIX.

	 
		1. Woe to you who work godlessness,
		 And glory in lying and extol them:
		 Ye shall perish, and no happy life shall be yours.
		
		2. Woe to them who pervert the words of uprightness,
		 And transgress the eternal law,
		 And transform themselves into what they were not [into sinners]:
		 They shall be trodden under foot upon the earth.
		
		3. In those days make ready, ye righteous, to raise your prayers as a memorial,
		 And place them as a testimony before the angels,
		 That they may place the sin of the sinners for a memorial before the Most High.
		
		4. In those days the nations shall be stirred up,
		 And the families of the nations shall arise on the day of destruction.
		
		5. And in those days the destitute shall go forth and carry off their children,
		 And they shall abandon them, so that their children shall perish through them:
		 Yea, they shall abandon their children (that are still) sucklings, and not return to them,
		 And shall have no pity on their beloved ones.
		
		 6. And again I swear to you, ye sinners, that sin is prepared for a day of unceasing bloodshed. 7. And they who worship stones, and grave images of gold

[p. 142]

and silver and wood <and stone> and clay, and those who worship impure spirits and demons, and all kinds of idols not according to knowledge, shall get no manner of help from them.

	 
		8. And they shall become godless by reason of the folly of their hearts,
		 And their eyes shall be blinded through the fear of their hearts
		 And through visions in their dreams.
		 9. Through these they shall become godless and fearful;
		 For they shall have wrought all their work in a lie,
		 And shall have worshiped a stone:
		 Therefore in an instant shall they perish.
		
		10. But in those days blessed are all they who accept the words of wisdom, and understand them,
		 And observe the paths of the Most High, and walk in the path of His righteousness,
		 And become not godless with the godless;
		 For they shall be saved.
		
		11. Woe to you who spread evil to your neighbours;
		 For you shall be slain in Sheol.
		 12. Woe to you who make deceitful and false measures,
		 And (to them) who cause bitterness on the earth;
		 For they shall thereby be utterly consumed.
		
		13. Woe to you who build your houses through the grievous toil of others,
		 And all their building materials are the bricks and stones of sin;
		 I tell you ye shall have no peace.
		
		14. Woe to them who reject the measure and eternal heritage of their fathers
		 And whose souls follow after idols;
		 For they shall have no rest.
		
		15. Woe to them who work unrighteousness and help oppression, [p. 143]
		 And slay their neighbours until the day of the great judgement.
		
		16. For He shall cast down your glory,
		 And bring affliction on your hearts,
		 And shall arouse His fierce indignation,
		 And destroy you all with the sword;
		 And all the holy and righteous shall remember your sins.
		
		 
		
		 

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

C. The Sinners destroy each other: Judgement of the fallen Angels: the Safety of the Righteous: further Woes for the Sinners.

 

CHAPTER C.

	 
		1. And in those days in one place the fathers together with their sons shall be smitten
		 And brothers one with another shall fall in death
		 Till the streams flow with their blood.
		
		2 .For a man shall not withhold his hand from slaying his sons and his sons' sons,
		 And the sinner shall not withhold his hand from his honoured brother:
		 From dawn till sunset they shall slay one another.
		
		3. And the horse shall walk up to the breast in the blood of sinners,
		 And the chariot shall be submerged to its height.
		
		4 In those days the angels shall descend into the secret places
		 And gather together into one place all those who brought down sin
		 And the Most High will arise on that day of judgement
		 To execute great judgement amongst sinners.
		
		5. And over all the righteous and holy He will appoint guardians from amongst the holy angels
		 To guard them as the apple of an eye,
		 Until He makes an end of all wickedness and all sin, [p. 144]
		 And though the righteous sleep a long sleep, they have nought to fear.
		
		6. And (then) the children of the earth shall see the wise in security,
		 And shall understand all the words of this book,
		 And recognize that their riches shall not be able to save them
		 In the overthrow of their sins.
		
		7. Woe to you, Sinners, on the day of strong anguish,
		 Ye who afflict the righteous and burn them with fire:
		 Ye shall be requited according to your works.
		
		8. Woe to you, ye obstinate of heart,
		 Who watch in order to devise wickedness:
		 Therefore shall fear come upon you
		 And there shall be none to help you.
		
		9. Woe to you, ye sinners, on account of the words of your mouth,
		 And on account of the deeds of your hands which your godlessness as wrought,
		 In blazing flames burning worse than fire shall ye burn.
		
		 10 And now, know ye that from the angels He will inquire as to your deeds in heaven, from the sun and from the moon and from the stars in reference to your sins because upon the earth ye execute judgement on the righteous. 11. And He will summon to testify against you every cloud and mist and dew and rain; for they shall all be withheld because of you from descending upon you, and they shall be mindful of your sins. 12. And now give presents to the rain that it be not withheld from descending upon you, nor yet the dew, when it has received gold and silver from you that it may descend. 13. When the hoar-frost and snow with their chilliness, and all the snow-storms with all their plagues fall upon you, in those days ye shall not be able to stand before them.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 145]

CI. Exhortation to the Fear of God: all Nature fears Him, but not the Sinners.

 

CHAPTER CI.

1. Observe the heaven, ye children of heaven, and every work of the Most High, and fear ye Him and work no evil in His presence. 2. If He closes the windows of heaven, and withholds the rain and the dew from descending on the earth on your account, what will ye do then? 3. And if He sends His anger upon you because of your deeds, ye cannot petition Him; for ye spake proud and insolent words against His righteousness: therefore ye shall have no peace. 4. And see ye not the sailors of the ships, how their ships are tossed to and fro by the waves, and are shaken by the winds, and are in sore trouble? 5. And therefore do they fear because all their goodly possessions go upon the sea with them, and they have evil forebodings of heart that the sea will swallow them and they will perish therein.

6. Are not the entire sea and all its waters, and all its movements, the work of the Most High, and has He not set limits to its doings, and confined it throughout by the sand? 7. And at His reproof it is afraid and dries up, and all its fish die and all that is in it; But ye sinners that are on the earth fear Him not. 8. Has He not made the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein? Who has given understanding and wisdom to everything that moves on the earth and in the sea. 9. Do not the sailors of the ships fear the sea? Yet sinners fear not the Most High.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

CII. Terrors of the Day of Judgement: the adverse Fortunes of the Righteous on the Earth.

 

Chapter CII.

	 
		1. In those days when He hath brought a grievous fire upon you,
		 Whither will ye flee, and where will ye find deliverance?
		 And when He launches forth His Word against you Will you not be affrighted and fear? [p. 146]
		
		2. And all the luminaries shall be affrighted with great fear,
		 And all the earth shall be affrighted and tremble and be alarmed.
		
		3. And all the +angels shall execute their commands+
		 And shall seek to hide themselves from the presence of the Great Glory,
		 And the children of earth shall tremble and quake;
		 And ye sinners shall be cursed for ever,
		 And ye shall have no peace.
		 4. Fear ye not, ye souls of the righteous,
		 And be hopeful ye that have died in righteousness.
		
		5. And grieve not if your soul into Sheol has descended in grief,
		 And that in your life your body fared not according to your goodness,
		 But wait for the day of the judgement of sinners
		 And for the day of cursing and chastisement.
		
		6. And yet when ye die the sinners speak over you:
		 "As we die, so die the righteous,
		 And what benefit do they reap for their deeds?
		
		7. Behold, even as we, so do they die in grief and darkness,
		 And what have they more than we?
		 From henceforth we are equal.
		
		8. And what will they receive and what will they see for ever?
		 Behold, they too have died,
		 And henceforth for ever shall they see no light."
		
		 9. I tell you, ye sinners, ye are content to eat and drink, and rob and sin, and strip men naked, and acquire wealth and see good days. 10. Have ye seen the righteous how their end falls out, that no manner of violence is found in them till their death?

[p. 147]

11. "Nevertheless they perished and became as though they had not been, and their spirits descended into Sheol in tribulation."

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

CIII. Different Destinies of the Righteous and the Sinners: fresh Objections of the Sinners.

 

CHAPTER CIII.

1. Now, therefore, I swear to you, the righteous, by the glory of the Great and Honoured and 2 Mighty One in dominion, and by His greatness I swear to you:

	 
		2. I know a mystery
		 And have read the heavenly tablets,
		 And have seen the holy books,
		 And have found written therein and inscribed regarding them:
		 3. That all goodness and joy and glory are prepared for them,
		 And written down for the spirits of those who have died in righteousness,
		 And that manifold good shall be given to you in recompense for your labours,
		 And that your lot is abundantly beyond the lot of the living.
		
		4. And the spirits of you who have died in righteousness shall live and rejoice,
		 And their spirits shall not perish, nor their memorial from before the face of the Great One
		 Unto all the generations of the world: wherefore no longer fear their contumely.
		
		5. Woe to you, ye sinners, when ye have died,
		 If ye die in the wealth of your sins,
		 And those who are like you say regarding you:
		 'Blessed are the sinners: they have seen all their days.
		 6. And how they have died in prosperity and in wealth,
		 And have not seen tribulation or murder in their life; [p. 148]
		 And they have died in honour,
		 And judgement has not been executed on them during their life."
		
		7. Know ye, that their souls will be made to descend into Sheol
		 And they shall be wretched in their great tribulation.
		
		8. And into darkness and chains and a burning flame where there is grievous judgement shall your spirits enter;
		 And the great judgement shall be for all the generations of the world.
		 Woe to you, for ye shall have no peace.
		
		9. Say not in regard to the righteous and good who are in life:
		 "In our troubled days we have toiled laboriously and experienced every trouble,
		 And met with much evil and been consumed,
		 And have become few and our spirit small.
		
		10. And we have been destroyed and have not found any to help us even with a word:
		 We have been tortured [[and destroyed]], and not hoped to see life from day to day.
		
		11. We hoped to be the head and have become the tail:
		 We have toiled laboriously and had no satisfaction in our toil;
		 And we have become the food of the sinners and the unrighteous,
		 And they have laid their yoke heavily upon us.
		
		12. They have had dominion over us that hated us +and smote us;
		 And to those that hated us+ we have bowed our necks
		 But they pitied us not.
		
		13. We desired to get away from them that we might escape and be at rest,
		 But found no place whereunto we should flee and be safe from them. [p. 149]
		
		14. And are complained to the rulers in our tribulation,
		 And cried out against those who devoured us,
		 But they did not attend to our cries
		 And would not hearken to our voice.
		
		 15. And they helped those who robbed us and devoured us and those who made us few; and they concealed their oppression, and they did not remove from us the yoke of those that devoured us and dispersed us and murdered us, and they concealed their murder, and remembered not that they had lifted up their hands against us.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

CIV. Assurances given to the Righteous: Admonitions to Sinners and the Falsifiers of the Words of Uprightness.

 

CHAPTER CIV.

1. I swear unto you, that in heaven the angels remember you for good before the glory of the Great One: and your names are written before the glory of the Great One. 2. Be hopeful; for aforetime ye were put to shame through ill and affliction; but now ye shall shine as the lights of heaven, ye shall shine and ye shall be seen, and the portals of heaven shall be opened to you. 3. And in your cry, cry for judgement, and it shall appear to you; for all your tribulation shall be visited on the rulers, and on all who helped those who plundered you. 4. Be hopeful, and cast not away your hopes for ye shall have great joy as the angels of heaven. 5. What shall ye be obliged to do? Ye shall not have to hide on the day of the great judgement and ye shall not be found as sinners, and the eternal judgement shall be far from you for all the generations of the world. 6. And now fear not, ye righteous, when ye see the sinners growing strong and prospering in their ways: be not companions with them, but keep afar from their violence; for ye shall become companions of the hosts of heaven. 7. And, although ye sinners say: "All our sins shall not be searched out and be written down," nevertheless they shall write down all your sins every day.

[p. 150]

[paragraph continues] 8. And now I show unto you that light and darkness, day and night, see all your sins. 9. Be not godless in your hearts, and lie not and alter not the words of uprightness, nor charge with lying the words of the Holy Great One, nor take account of your idols; for all your lying and all your godlessness issue not in righteousness but in great sin. 10. And now I know this mystery, that sinners will alter and pervert the words of righteousness in many ways, and will speak wicked words, and lie, and practice great deceits, and write books concerning their words. 11. But when they write down truthfully all my words in their languages, and do not change or minish ought from my words but write them all down truthfully--all that I first testified concerning them. 12. Then, I know another mystery, that books will be given to the righteous and the wise to become a cause of joy and uprightness and much wisdom. 13. And to them shall the books be given, and they shall believe in them and rejoice over them, and then shall all the righteous who have learnt therefrom all the paths of uprightness be recompensed.'

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

CV. God and the Messiah to dwell with Man.

 

CHAPTER CV.

1. In those days the Lord bade (them) to summon and testify to the children of earth concerning their wisdom: Show (it) unto them; for ye are their guides, and a recompense over the whole earth. 2. For I and My son will be united with them for ever in the paths of uprightness in their lives; and ye shall have peace: rejoice, ye children of uprightness. Amen.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

FRAGMENT OF THE BOOK OF NOAH

(CVI-CVII.)

 

CHAPTER CVI.

1. And after some days my son Methuselah took a wife for his son Lamech, and she became

[p. 151]

pregnant by him and bore a son. 2. And his body was white as snow and red as the blooming of a rose, and the hair of his head +and his long locks were white as wool, and his eyes beautiful+. And when he opened his eyes, he lighted up the whole house like the sun, and the whole house was very bright. 3. And thereupon he arose in the hands of the midwife, opened his mouth, and +conversed with+ the Lord of righteousness. 4. And his father Lamech was afraid of him and fled, and came to his father Methuselah. 5. And he said unto him: 'I have begotten a strange son, diverse from and unlike man, and resembling the sons of the God of heaven; and his nature is different and he is not like us, and his eyes are as the rays of the sun, and his countenance is glorious. 6. And it seems to me that he is not sprung from me but from the angels, and I fear that in his days a wonder may be wrought on the earth. 7. And now, my father, I am here to petition thee and implore thee that thou mayest go to Enoch, our father, and learn from him the truth, for his dwelling-place is amongst the angels.' 8. And when Methuselah heard the words of his son, he came to me to the ends of the earth; for he had heard that I was there, and he cried aloud, and I heard his voice and I came to him. And 1 said unto him: 'Behold, here am I, my son, wherefore hast thou come to me?' 9. And he answered and said: 'Because of a great cause of anxiety have I come to thee, and because of a disturbing vision have I approached. 10. And now, my father, hear me: unto Lamech my son there hath been born a son, the like of whom there is none, and his nature is not like man's nature, and the colour of his body is whiter than snow and redder than the bloom of a rose, and the hair of his head is whiter than white wool, and his eyes are like the rays of the sun, and he opened his eyes and thereupon lighted up the whole house. 11. And he arose in the hands of the midwife, and opened his mouth and blessed the Lord of heaven. 12. And his father Lamech

[p. 152]

became afraid and fled to me, and did not believe that he was sprung from him, but that he was in the likeness of the angels of heaven; and behold I have come to thee that thou mayest make known to me the truth.' 13. And I, Enoch, answered and said unto him: 'The Lord will do a new thing on the earth, and this I have already seen in a vision, and make known to thee that in the generation of my father Jared some of the angels of heaven transgressed the word of the Lord. 14. And behold they commit sin and transgress the law, and have united themselves with women and commit sin with them, and have married some of them, and have begot children by them. 17. And they shall produce on the earth giants not according to the spirit, but according to the flesh, and there shall be a great punishment on the earth, and the earth shall be cleansed from all impurity. 15. Yea, there shall come a great destruction over the whole earth, and there shall be a deluge and a great destruction for one year. 16. And this son who has been born unto you shall be left on the earth, and his three children shall be saved with him: when all mankind that are on the earth shall die [he and his sons shall be saved]. 18. And now make known to thy son Lamech that he who has been born is in truth his son, and call his name Noah; for he shall be left to you, and he and his sons shall be saved from the destruction, which shall come upon the earth on account of all the sin and all the unrighteousness, which shall be consummated on the earth in his days. 19. And after that there shall be still more unrighteousness than that which was first consummated on the earth; for I know the mysteries of the holy ones; for He, the Lord, has showed me and informed me, and I have read (them) in the heavenly tablets.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER CVII.

1. And I saw written on them that generation upon generation shall transgress, till a generation of righteousness arises, and transgression is destroyed and sin passes away from the earth, and all manner

[p. 153]

of good comes upon it. 2. And now, my son, go and make known to thy son Lamech that this son, which has been born, is in truth his son, and that (this) is no lie.' 3. And when Methuselah had heard the words of his father Enoch--for he had shown to him everything in secret--he returned and showed (them) to him and called the name of that son Noah; for he will comfort the earth after all the destruction.

The Book of Enoch, by R.H. Charles, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

CVIII. AN APPENDIX TO THE BOOK OF ENOCH.

 

CHAPTER CVIII.

1. Another book which Enoch wrote for his son Methuselah and for those who will come after him, and keep the law in the last days. 2. Ye who have done good shall wait for those days till an end is made of those who work evil; and an end of the might of the transgressors. 3. And wait ye indeed till sin has passed away, for their names shall be blotted out of the book of life and out of the holy books, and their seed shall be destroyed for ever, and their spirits shall be slain, and they shall cry and make lamentation in a place that is a chaotic wilderness, and in the fire shall they burn; for there is no earth there. 4. And I saw there something like an invisible cloud; for by reason of its depth I could not look over, and I saw a flame of fire blazing brightly, and things like shining mountains circling and sweeping to and fro. 5. And I asked one of the holy angels who was with me and said unto him: 'What is this shining thing? for it is not a heaven but only the flame of a blazing fire, and the voice of weeping and crying and lamentation and strong pain.' 6. And he said unto me: 'This place which thou seest--here are cast the spirits of sinners and blasphemers, and of those who work wickedness, and of those who pervert everything that the Lord hath spoken through the mouth of the prophets--(even) the things that shall be. 7. For some of them are written and

[p. 154]

inscribed above in the heaven, in order that the angels may read them and know that which shall befall the sinners, and the spirits of the humble, and of those who have afflicted their bodies, and been recompensed by God; and of those who have been put to shame by wicked men: 8. Who love God and loved neither gold nor silver nor any of the good things which are in the world, but gave over their bodies to torture. 9. Who, since they came into being, longed not after earthly food, but regarded everything as a passing breath, and lived accordingly, and the Lord tried them much, and their spirits were found pure so that they should bless His name. 10. And all the blessings destined for them I have recounted in the books. And he hath assigned them their recompense, because they have been found to be such as loved heaven more than their life in the world, and though they were trodden under foot of wicked men, and experienced abuse and reviling from them and were put to shame, yet they blessed Me. 11. And now I will summon the spirits of the good who belong to the generation of light, and I will transform those who were born in darkness, who in the flesh were not recompensed with such honour as their faithfulness deserved. 12. And I will bring forth in shining light those who have loved My holy name, and I will seat each on the throne of his honour. 13. And they shall be resplendent for times without number; for righteousness is the judgement of God; for to the faithful He will give faithfulness in the habitation of upright paths. 14. And they shall see those who were, born in darkness led into darkness, while the righteous shall be resplendent. 15. And the sinners shall cry aloud and see them resplendent, and they indeed will go where days and seasons are prescribed for them.'

 

 


===== BOOK: boo.txt =====


    
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

  

The Wisdom of the East Series

EDITED BY

L. CRANMER-BYNG

DR. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE CLASSICS OF CONFUCIUS

  

BOOK OF ODES

  

(SHI-KING)

  

BY L. CRANMER-BYNG

AUTHOR OF "THE NEVER-ENDING WRONG"

AND OTHER RENDERINGS FROM THE CHINESE

LONDON

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET

  

[1908]

  

FIRST EDITION...February, 1905

  

Reprinted...April, 1906

  

SECOND EDITION...January, 1908

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Front Cover and Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

CONTENTS

          INTRODUCTION

       <page 5>

     
      THE DESERTED WIFE

       <page 15>

     
      KING'S MESSENGER

       <page 18>

     
      FLIGHT

       <page 19>

     
      THE TOWER OF WAN

       <page 20>

     
      DRIFTING

       <page 21>

     
      THE SLANDERERS

       <page 22>

     
      LOVE AND THE MAGISTRATE

       <page 23>

     
      CITY OF CHOW

       <page 24>

     
      THE PRAYER OF CHING, I

       <page 25>

     
      THE PRAYER OF CHING, II

       <page 26>

     
      MAYTIME

       <page 28>

     
      LADY OF THE LAGOON

       <page 29>

     
      THROUGH EASTERN GATES

       <page 30>

     
      THE STRAGGLER

       <page 31>

     
      THE HAPPY MAN

       <page 33>

     
      THE PEAR-TREE

       <page 34>

     
      PRINCELY VISITORS

       <page 35>

     
      THE NIGHTLONG TRYST

       <page 36>

     
      A WIFE'S MEMORIES

       <page 37>

     
      THE PRINCES

       <page 38>

     
      BLUE COLLAR

       <page 39>

     
      A FRIEND FORGOTTEN

       <page 40>

     
      THE EPHEMERAE

       <page 41>

     
      HAPPY IN HAOU

       <page 42>

     
      THREE GIFTS

       <page 43>

     
      BRAVE THOUGHTS

       <page 44>

     
      ON THE BANKS OF HO

       <page 45>

     
      SORROW

       <page 46>

     
      BULWARKS OF EMPIRE

       <page 47>

     
      THE BRIDE COMETH

       <page 48>

     
      BEFORE THE FORD

       <page 49>

     
      GOOD KING WU

       <page 50>

     
      FAINT HEART

       <page 51>

     
      WITHOUT HER

       <page 52>

     
      THE FOREST LOVER

       <page 53>

     
      THE HOUSEHOLDER'S LAMENT

       <page 55>

     
      UNAVAILING

       <page 56>

     
      GREY DAWNS AND RED

       <page 57>

     
   
     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

EDITORIAL NOTE

THE object of the editors of this series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West, the old world of Thought, and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour. Finally, in thanking press and public for the very cordial reception given to the "Wisdom of the East" series, they wish to state that no pains have been spared to secure the best specialists for the treatment of the various subjects at hand.

L. CRANMER-BYNG
 S. A. KAPADIAI

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
        185 PICCADILLY, W.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

INTRODUCTION

"WHILE reading the works of Confucius, I have always fancied I could see the man as he was in life, and, when I went to Shantung, I actually beheld his carriage, his robes, and the material parts of his ceremonial usages. There were his descendants practising the old rites in their ancestral home; and I lingered on, unable to tear myself away. Many are the princes and prophets that the world has seen in its time; glorious in life, forgotten in death. But Confucius, though only a humble member of the cotton-clothed masses, remains among us after many generations. He is the model for such as would be wise. By all, from the Son of Heaven down to the meanest student, the supremacy of his principles is fully and freely admitted. He may, indeed, be pronounced the divinest of men." [**]

This is the tribute of Ssu-Ma Ch'ien, the author of the first great History of China, who lived in the first century before Christ. Many centuries have gone since the old historian, out of the fulness of his heart, sang the praises of the Master and the supremacy of his principles. To-day, as a thousand years ago, the school children take their first serious instruction from the five books, or King as they are called in Chinese:--

[p. 6]

[paragraph continues] The Shu King, or Book of History; The I King, or Book of Changes; The Shi King, or Book of Poetry; The Li Chi, or Book of Rites; The Ch'un Ch'in, or Annals of Spring and Autumn.

The Shi King, or Book of Poetry, from which these poems are rendered through the prose translations of Professor Legge in his great series of Chinese classics, was compiled by Confucius about 500 B.C. from earlier collections which had been long existent, two of which, we know from an ode written about 780 B.C., were called Ya and Nan respectively. The oldest of these odes belong to the Shang dynasty, 1765-1122 B.C.; the latest to the time of King Ting, 605-585 B.C. The odes may be roughly divided into two classes:--(I) The Songs of the People; (2) The Official Odes. Professor Giles, in his "History of Chinese Literature" (Heinemann), divides the latter into three classes:--(a) Odes sung at ordinary entertainments given by the suzerain; (b) Odes sung on grand occasions when the feudal nobles were gathered together; (c) Panegyrics and sacrificial odes.

The great importance that Confucius placed upon the Book of Poetry may be gathered from the following anecdote:--One day his son Le was passing hurriedly through the Court, when he met his father standing alone lost in thought. Confucius, on seeing his son, addressed him thus--

"Have you read the Odes?"

He replied, "Not yet."

"Then," said Confucius, "if you do not learn the Odes, you will not be fit to converse with." [**]

[p. 7]

To understand this, we must know something of the character and teachings of Confucius. William Morris was to some extent the Confucius of his age. Both men dreamt of a golden past--a past brilliant with heroic deeds, mellowed with peace, and serene beneath the first clear dawn of ancient wisdom. Both drew inspiration from the unstained springs of poetry. Morris went back to the sagas of the North and the tales and tragedies of the early Greeks; Confucius to the odes and ballads of his own country. For Morris, "the idle singer of an empty day," the world had grown old and careworn and unheroic. Confucius, too, was born out of his due time. The world--his world of petty princelings and court intriguers and oppression--was not ripe for the great gospel of humanity he had come to preach. Each failed lamentably in politics, and succeeded elsewhere; Confucius as the transmitter of the wisdom of the ages, the revealer of human goodness through conduct and knowledge; William Morris as the inspired prophet of beauty, the teacher of good taste to the hideous Victorian age in which he was born. When the dogmas and economics of his socialism are forgotten, this influence will remain.

Lastly, and perhaps greatest parallel of all, both passionately loved the people. Confucius, when asked how the superior man attained his position, said: "He cultivates himself so as to bring rest unto the people." Again he said: "To govern a country of a thousand chariots, there must be reverent attention to business, and faithfulness,

[p. 8]

economy in expenditure, and love for the people." Both recognised, as all great men must, that there is more to be learnt from the natural man, the man who lives next to nature, and through his toil knows something of her ways and moods, than the artificial mime of ancient court or modern drawing-room. It was through the Odes that Confucius taught his own generation to understand the manners and customs and the simple feelings of the men of old. Here are no great poems written by highly cultivated men, but songs that came naturally from the hearts of all, concerning their little troubles, their hopes and fears, the business in which they were engaged. The farmer sings of his husbandry.

He gives us this picture of the workers over the land coming to clear the virgin soil of the grass and brushwood that cover it. "There they go in thousands, two and two, side by side, tearing the roots out of the soil; some to the marshlands, some where the dry paths wind through the meadows, and some by the river banks. There is the master inspecting all, with his sons ready at hand, followed by their households; there also are the neighbours who have come to help; there the hired servants. Now the feast has begun, sounds of revelry are heard; the husbands' hearts are full of love as they sit with their wives by their side. Now, they begin again patiently to prepare the southern lands, breaking the soil with the ploughshare. Many kinds of grain they sow; soon strange life will arise from every ear, when the young blades raise their heads from the ground. See the young blades arise in long

[p. 9]

unbroken lines that day by day grow and spear before us. Fertile is the swelling seed, and through it go the labourers who weed it over and over again. A little while and the reapers have come; the golden grain is stacked high, the straw innumerable is multiplied. There is sufficient to make the spirits glad, to offer to the shades of our fathers, and yield whatever the rites require; sufficiency for the kings and nobles to give mighty banquets, when at the fragrant feast both host and guest sit down together; there is enough when the feast is over to satisfy the aged poor and cheer them with a never-ending abundance. Not now alone, but from all time and in all lands, the earth repays a thousand-fold to those who toil."

Such is the song of husbandry three thousand years ago. What joyousness is here! What scenes of peace and simple festival of family love and delight in the land!

Again some officer in the days of good King Wan,  galloping along a clear road on the king's service, hammers out the splendid galloping song, called "King's Messenger," in the present book, to the beat of his galloping horses' hoofs. No such poem was elaborated in garden or grove where the poets clustered, and drank, and sang. It comes straight  from the heart of this nameless envoy of old, fiercely exulting in his own untiring energy and in the mettle of his splendid steeds. How many of these poems declare the joys of work bravely attempted--bravely done! These little sagas of blood and brain  can teach us more of life than all the threadbare

[p. 10]

moralities which serve as poetry in the modern day. How modern they are! Yes, indeed! as long as colour is colour, and life is life. As long as youth with its sublime folly will wait all night for the tryst that is never kept, these poems, the earliest collection of secular songs we know, will remain fresh and charm us to the end. These old writers, viewing nature at first hand and not through the medium of any books, wrote faithfully of what they felt and saw.

"With what delight does the eye wander over the surrounding landscape! Very gently the river glides along through the plain, which it makes beautiful with the long canal formed by its waters. To the south rise great mountains in the shape of an amphitheatre, while, on the further bank, reeds and pines, covered with a never-fading verdure, invite the fresh breath of the cooling winds. Happy places! those who dwell in you live like brothers. Never is the voice of discord heard among you. What glory shall be yours! The prince, whose heritage you are, hath chosen you for his abode. Already is the plan of his palace formed; proud walls arise, and grand terraces are building on the east and west. Haste to come, great prince! O haste to come; sports and pleasure wait upon thy coming. The solid foundations, which are now being laid with redoubled strokes of the hammer, display thy wisdom. Neither rains nor storms shall ever prevail against them. Never shall the insect which creeps or walks penetrate thy habitation. The guard who watches is sometimes surprised, the

[p. 11]

swiftest dart may err, the frightened pigeon forgets the use of its wings, and the pheasant with difficulty flies before the eagle; but before thee every obstacle vanishes. With what majesty do these colonnades rear their fronts! How immense are those halls! Lofty columns support the ceiling, the brightness of the day illuminates them and penetrates them on all sides. It is here that my prince reposes; it is here that he sleeps, upon long mats woven with great art."

Often the song is one that only a woman could have sung. Some lady of the harem of King Wan praises the queen, who is never jealous of the inferior wives, but cherishes them as some great tree cherishes the creepers that gather round it. Again, "the ripe plums are falling from the bough; only seven-tenths of them remain! If any desire to marry me, now has the fortunate time arrived!" In the second verse only three-tenths are left; in the third she had gathered them all into her basket: the lover has only to speak the word, and she will be his. Many of these odes are undoubtedly the work of women. The European idea that Chinese women are, and always have been, the closely prisoned slaves of their husbands, idle and soulless and ignorant, has been dispelled by Professor Giles in his interesting "Chinese Sketches" published by Kegan, Paul & Co. "In novels, for instance," he writes, "the heroine is always highly educated--composes finished verses, and quotes from Confucius; and it is only fair to suppose that such characters are not purely and wholly ideal. Besides, most

[p. 12]

young Chinese girls whose parents are well off are taught to read..." According to Legge, there was more freedom of movement allowed to women in the days when the odes were written and collected, before the custom of cramping the feet was introduced; consequently their minds were more able to expand from contact with the outer world, and better fitted for literary tasks. The names of the ladies Pan-Chieh-Yu and Fang Wei-I are well known to every student of Chinese literature.

Perhaps the great importance of the odes, first grasped by Confucius, and afterwards by the whole of China, lies in the fact that they are no mere abstract creations of an imaginative brain. Each one of these nameless poets writes about himself or herself; their sorrows, their aspirations, their outlook on their own times, contented or gloomy, are all chronicled herein. In the official odes we see the feudal princes coming to town to greet their sovereign lord. The state-carriages with their four-horse teams have gone to greet them. What gifts has the king to bestow on those he delights to honour? Bring forth the dark-coloured robes embroidered with the dragon, and the silken skirts with the hatchet design upon them. See, they are coming, you may tell by the dragon flags that wave before them--coming, by the hwuy-hwuy sound of the bells that reaches us. By the bright red buskins that cover the knees we know them. These are the princes!

No great poetry to be sure! no monolith of inspired travail by a giant race that may stand alone

[p. 13]

in the time-deserted regions of sand and silence! These are just the natural songs that float upward from the happy valleys and down the sedge-strewn banks of the wandering K'e. Above all, they are naive and bright as on their birthday, with that most precious quality of truth and unconscious art which never lets them tarnish or fade. The king is very wicked! The poor groom of the Chamber to His Majesty gives vent to his sorrow in song. He lets you know all about it. The royal naughtiness stands clearly revealed, not by any calico-tearing epithets such as a modern poet affrights the ears of a Sultan with, but just a gentle bland admonishment, a little dirge of political desolation and the knell of a falling dynasty.

I have put, or tried to put, these poems back into poetry. Four of these pieces have been exquisitely rendered by my friend Mr. Allen Upward, and speak for themselves. [**] As regards my own reasons for rendering Chinese poetry into English verse, I am content to shelter myself behind the great authority and judgment of Sir John Davis, who, in his "Poetry of the Chinese," contends that "verse must be the shape into which Chinese, as well as other poetry, must be converted, in order to do it mere justice." I will, however, take the opportunity of saying, in conclusion, that the great literatures of the world have been too long in the hands of mere scholars, to whom the letter has been all-important and the spirit

[p. 14]

nothing. The time has come when the literary man should stand forth and claim his share in the revelation of truth and beauty from other lands and peoples whom our invincible European ignorance has taught us to despise.

L. CRANMER-BYNG.

Footnotes

^5:* "Gems of Chinese Literature," by Herbert Giles (Quaritch).

^6:* "Confucianism and Taoism," by Sir Robert Douglas (S.K.C.K.)

^13:* Namely:--"The Prayer of Ching," p. 25; "Through Eastern Gates," p. 30; "The Pear-Tree," p. 34; "Blue Collar," p. 39.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

THE DESERTED WIFE

YOU came--a simple lad
 In dark blue cotton clad,
 To barter serge for silken wear;
 But not for silk you dallied there.
 Ah! was it not for me
 Who led you through the K'e,
 Who guided you
 To far Tun-K'ew?
 "It is not I who would put off the day;
 But you have none your cause to plead,"
 I said,--"O love, take heed,
 When the leaves fall do with me what you may."

I saw the red leaves fall,
 And climbed the ruined wall,
 Towards the city of Fuh-kwan
 I did the dim horizon scan.
 "He cometh not," I said,
 And burning tears were shed:
 You came--I smiled,
 Love--reconciled,
 You said, "By taper reed and tortoise-shell,
 I have divined, and all, O love, is well."

[p. 16]

[paragraph continues] "Then haste the car," I cried,
 "Gather my goods and take me to thy side."

Before the mulberry tree
 With leaves hath strewn the lea,
 How glossy-green are they! how rare!
 Ah! thou young thoughtless dove beware!
 Avoid the dark fruit rife
 With sorrow to thy life.
 And thou, whose fence
 Is innocence,
 Seek no sweet pleasuring with any youth!
 For when a man hath sinned, but little shame
 Is fastened to his name,
 Yet erring woman wears the garb of ruth.

When the lone mulberry tree
 With leaves bestrews the lea,
 They yellow slowly, slowly down
 From green to gold, from gold to brown.
 Three sombre years ago
 I fled with you, and lo,
 The floods of K'e
 Now silently
 Creep to the curtains of my little car.
 Through cloud and gloom I was your constant
      star;
 Now you have gone from sight,
 And love's white star roams aimless through
      the night.

[p. 17]

[paragraph continues] For three long years your wife,
 Toil was my part in life,
 Early from sleep I rose and went
 About my labour, calm, content;
 Nor any morn serene
 Lightened the dull routine.
 Early and late,
 I was your mate,
 Bearing the burdens that were yours to share.
 Fain of the little love that was my lot,
 Ah, kinsmen scorn me not!
 How should ye know when silence chills despair?

Old we should grow in accord,
 Old--and grief is my lord.
 Between her banks the K'e doth steer,
 And pine-woods ring the lonely mere.
 In pleasant times I bound
 My dark hair to the sound
 Of whispered vows
 'Neath lilac boughs,
 And little recked o'er broken faith to weep.
 Now the grey shadows o'er the marshland creep:
 The willows stir and fret:
 Low in the west the dull dun sun hath set.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

KING'S MESSENGER

GALLOPING, galloping, gallant steed;
 Six reins slackened and dull with sweat,
 Galloping, galloping still we speed,
 Seeking, counselling, onward set.

Galloping, galloping, piebald steed;
 Six reins, silken reins, start and strain,
 Galloping, galloping, still we speed,
 News--what news--from the King's domain.

Galloping, galloping, white and black;
 Six reins glossy and flaked with foam,
 Galloping, galloping, look not back!
 On for the King--for the King we roam.

Galloping, galloping, dappled grey;
 Six reins true to the hand alone,
 Galloping, galloping, night and day,
 Seeking, questioning, galloping, gone!

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

FLIGHT

COLD and keen the north wind blows,
   Silent falls the shroud of snows.
     You who gave me your heart
     Let us join hands and depart!
         Is this a time for delay?
             Now, while we may,
                   Let us away.

Wailingly the north wind goes,
 Wailing through a whirl of snows.
     You who gave me your heart
     Let us join hands and depart!
         Is this a time for delay?
            Now, while we may,
              Let us away.

Only the lonely fox is red,
 Black but the crow-flight overhead.
     You who gave me your heart,
     The chariot creaks to depart,
         Is this a time for delay?
            Now, while we may,
              Let us away.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

THE TOWER OF WAN

WaN drew a tower of bold ascent,
 A tower of lofty size.
 In crowds the zealous builders went,
 The walls began to rise.
 "Haste not," said he, when first the work began;
 But all the people were as sons of Wan.

The King was in the wondrous park,
 The does so sleek and brown
 Lay couched in fern; from dawn to dark
 White birds came glistening down;
 The King was by the pond whose waters hold
 A thousand carp with ruddy scales of gold.

Upon his posts the fretted board
 Is hung with drums and bells;
 What music chimes from their accord,
 What sound of laughter swells
 From the pavilion of the circling pool
 Where joy and Wan, the brother monarchs, rule

What harmony of bells and drums!
 What call of drums and bells!
 Beyond the flaming water comes
 What sound of happy spells.
 The blind musicians blind us with delight;
 While the deep lizard drums roll on till night.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

DRIFTING

TWO youths into their boats descend,
 Whose shadows on the waters sway;
 Ah! light hearts bravely sped away,
 My heavy heart forbodes the end.

Two youths into their boats descend,
 Two lives go drifting far from me;
 Between the willow glooms I see
 Death lurking at the river's bend.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

THE SLANDERERS

THE blue flies buzz upon the wing,
 From fence to fence they wander;
 O happy King! O courteous King!
 Give heed to no man's slander.

The noisy blue flies rumble round,
 Upon the gum-trees lighting;
 A tongue of evil hath no bound,
 And sets the realm a-fighting.

The clumsy blue flies buzzing round
 Upon the hazels blunder;
 O cursed tongue that knows no bound,
 And sets us two asunder.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

LOVE AND THE MAGISTRATE

WHEN the great carriage rumbles by,
 I see him in his robes of state,
 Calm, pitiless, sedate.
 Man of the cold far-piercing eye,
 O but I long for you,
 Right for you, wrong for you,
 Naught could keep us apart,
 But the cold eye reading my heart.

When the great carriage rumbles on,
 In robes of state carnation red
 I see the man of dread,
 Bright gleaming robes and glance of stone,
 O then I long for you,
 Right for you, wrong for you,
 Naught could keep us apart
 But the cold eye reading my heart.

Together we may never bide,
 Nor you and me one roof contain,
 But death shall not divide;
 The same close grave shall wed the twain.
 Say! am I cold to you?
 Nay! I will hold to you,
 By the bright sun I swear,
 O my life, my love, my despair.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

CITY OF CHOW

COLD from the spring the waters pass
 Over the waving pampas grass.
         All night long in dream I lie,
         Ah me! ah me! to awake and sigh--
         Sigh for the City of Chow.

Cold from the spring the rising flood
 Covers the tangled southernwood.
         All night long in dream I lie,
         Ah me! ah me! to awake and sigh--
         Sigh for the City of Chow.

Cold from its source the stream meanders,
 Darkly down through the oleanders.
         All night long in dream I lie,
         Ah me! ah me! to awake and sigh--
         Sigh for the City of Chow.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

I

  

THE PRAYER OF THE EMPEROR CHING

LET me be reverent, be reverent,
 Even as the way of Heaven is evident,
 And its appointment easy is to mar.

Let me not say, "It is too high above,"
 Above us and below us doth it move,
 And daily watches wheresoe'er we are.

It is but as a little child I ask,
 Without intelligence to do my task,
 Yet learning, month by month, and day by day.

I will hold fast some gleams of knowledge bright.
 Help me to bear my heavy burden right,
 And show me how to walk in wisdom's way.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

II

  

THE PRAYER OF THE EMPEROR CHING

EVEN as a little helpless child am I,
 On whom hath fallen the perplexed affairs
 Of this unsettled state. High loneliness
 And sorrow are my portion. Thou great Father,
 Thou kingly pattern of parental awe,
 Whose mind for ever in the courts beheld,
 Roaming, the royal image of thy sire,
 Night long and day long, I--the little child--
 Will so be reverent.

                         O ye great kings!
 Your crowned successor crowns you in his heart.
 Live unforgotten. Here, upon the verge
 Of the momentous years, I pause and trace
 The shining footsteps of my forefathers,
 And the far-distant goal that drew them on--
 Too distant for my range. Howe'er resolved
 I may go forward, lo! a thousand tracks
 Cause me to swerve aside. A little child--
 Only a little child--I am too frail
 To cope with the anxieties of state
 And cares of king-craft. Yet I will ascend

[p. 27]

[paragraph continues] Into my Father's room, and through the courts
 Below, for ever seeking, I will pass,
 To brush the skirts of inspiration
 And touch the sleeves of memory.

                                     O great
 And gracious Father, hear and condescend
 To guard, to cherish, to enlighten me.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

MAYTIME

DEEP in the grass there lies a dead gazelle,
 The tall white grass enwraps her where she fell.
      With sweet thoughts natural to spring,
      A pretty girl goes wandering
      With lover that would lead astray.

The little dwarf oaks hide a leafy dell,
 Far in the wilds there lies a dead gazelle;
 The tall white grass enwraps her where she fell,
      And beauty, like a gem, doth fling
      Bright radiance through the blinds of spring.
      "Ah, gently! do not disarray
      My kerchief! gently, pray!
      Nor make the watch-dog bark
      Under my lattice dark."

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

LADY OF THE LAGOON

BY the shores of that lagoon,
 Where the water-lily lies,
 Where the tall valerians rise
 Slender as the crescent moon,
 Goes Hea Nan...Ah, Hea Nan,
       Sleep brings me no relief:
       My heart is full of grief.

By the shores of that lagoon,
 Where the drowsy lotus lies,
 Where the tall valerians rise
 Brighter than the orbed moon,
 Shines Hea Nan...Ah, Hea Nan,
       I turn and turn all night,
       And dawn brings no respite.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

THROUGH EASTERN GATES

THROUGH eastern gates I wandered far,
 Where cloud-like beauties thronged the way;
 Although like clouds their faces are,
 My thoughts among them would not stay.
 She in rough silk and kerchief blue
 Gave me the only joy I knew.

I wandered by the curtain tower,
 Like flowering rushes were the maids;
 Although they match the rushes' flower,
 Soon from my mind their beauty fades.
 In humble silk and madder dye,
 She fills my heart with ecstasy.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

THE STRAGGLER

THERE is that little oriole
 At rest where the mound doth rise;
 Oh, but the way is long,
 Long that before me lies.
 There is no rest for me,
 None for my tired feet;
 Give me to drink and eat,
 Do what is best for me.
 Order an ambulance car,
 And carry me, carry me on.

There is that little oriole
 At rest where the mound doth bend;
 Oh, but I know no fear
 Save if the march will end.
 There is no rest for me,
 None for my tired feet;
 Give me to drink and eat,
 Do what is best for me.
 Order an ambulance car,
 And carry me, carry me on.

There is that little oriole
 At rest on the hillock grey;
 Oh, but I know no fear
 Save that I fall by the way.

[p. 32]

[paragraph continues] There is no rest for me,
 None for my tired feet;
 Give me to drink and eat,
 Do what is best for me.
 Order an ambulance car,
 And carry me, carry me on.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

THE HAPPY MAN

HE has perched in the valley with pines over-grown,
 This fellow so stout and so merry and free;
 He sleeps and he talks and he wanders alone,
 And none are so true to their pleasures as he.

He has builded his hut in the bend of the mound,
 This fellow so fine with his satisfied air;
 He wakes and he sings with no neighbour around,
 And whatever betide him his home will be there.

He dwells on a height amid cloudland and rain,
 This fellow so grand whom the world blunders by;
 He slumbers alone, wakes, and slumbers again,
 And his secrets are safe in that valley of Wei.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

THE PEAR-TREE

THIS shade-bestowing pear-tree, thou
 Hurt not, nor lay its leafage low;
 Beneath it slept the Duke of Shaou.

This shade-bestowing pear-tree, thou
 Hurt not, nor break one leafy bough;
 Beneath it stayed the Duke of Shaou.

This shade-bestowing pear-tree, thou
 Hurt not, nor bend one leafy bough;
 Beneath it paused the Duke of Shaou.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

PRINCELY VISITORS

WHITE birds went over the West--
 Young egrets, over the marshlands flying,
 My Lords came visiting, ermine-dressed,
 With the birds in their elegant beauty vieing.

In their States they have high renown,
 Of the city of Chow they are never tiring,
 And the rivers of night wind darkly down
 Past the towers of their fame still aspiring.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

THE NIGHTLONG TRYST

DOWN by the eastern gate
 The willow wood's astir;
 From dusk to dawn I wait
 Through the soundless hours for her,
 Till the morning star is shining.

Down by the eastern gate
 The willow-thicket pales;
 From dusk to dawn I wait,
 Till the last red lantern fails,
 And the morning star is shining.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

A WIFE'S MEMORIES

WITH taper rod of tall bamboo
 You angle in the K'e,
 Do I not go by dream to you
 Who cannot come to me?

To left the Ts'euen waters roam,
 The K'e flows on to right,
 Ah! never gleams the newer home
 Like that lost home to sight.

Leftward the Ts'euen stream beguiles,
 And rightward calls the K'e,
 Return, O light of happy smiles
 And girdle-gems, to me!

The oars of cedar rise and fall
 From boats of yellow pine,
 Would I might roam the banks where all
 The ghosts of girlhood shine!

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

THE PRINCES

THEY gather the beans, gather the beans,
 In their baskets square and round:
 The princes all are coming to court,
 And where shall their gifts be found?
       The coaches of state and their teams go by,
       What more for my lords have I?
 Dark coloured robes with a dragon fine,
 And silken skirts with the hatchet sign.

Clear bubbles the spring, bubbles the spring,
 Around they gather the cress:
 The princes all are coming to court,
 Their banners the winds caress.
       The dragon flag in the breezes swells,
       To the hwuy-hwuy sound of the bells.
 With two outside, the teams go past,
 These are the princes come at last.

Red covers the knee, covers the knee:
 Their buskins are red below.
 Lofty bearing and stately mien,
 Yonder my princes go.
       In such the Son of Heaven delights,
       The king shall renew their rights.
 May the pleasure and power for my lords increase,
 May the land yield corn and the years bring peace.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

BLUE COLLAR

O YOU with the collar of blue,
 My heart is longing for you.
 Though to call you I am not free,
 Wherefore not send to me?

O you with the girdle of blue,
 Long, long do I think of you.
 Though to seek you I am not free,
 Wherefore not come to me?

Ah, random and pleasure-drawn,
 To the View Tower you are gone;
 And a day without your sight
 Is like three months in its flight.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

  

A FRIEND FORGOTTEN

THE winds blow soft from the East,
 But the storm welters by.
 In the day of disaster and fear,
 It was all you and I.
 In the hour of your pride
 You have cast me aside.

The bland winds blown from the East
 Tornadoes pursue.
 In the hour of disaster and fear
 More than brother were you.
 In the hour of delight
 I am cast from your sight.

The winds come fair from the East
 On the hills overhead
 There is never a blade that is green,
 Not a leaf but is dead.
 My worth you forget,
 But my faults linger yet.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

THE EPHEMERAE

IN black and yellow are clad
 The wings of the ephemerae;
 But my heart is sad, is sad,
 Because they will not stay with me.

Many colours adorn
 The robes of the ephemerae;
 But my heart's forlorn, forlorn,
 Because they will not rest with me.

In robes of hempen snow
 Rise the ephemerae;
 But my heart is full of woe
 Because they will not bide with me.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

HAPPY IN HAOU

FISHES are there, by the score, I trow,
 Their large heads sleepily showing;
 The King is here, in the city of Haou,
 At ease while the wine-cup's flowing.

Fishes are there in the weeds enow,
 Their long tails lazily swaying;
 The King is here, in the city of Haou,
 Drinking, dreaming, delaying.

The fish lie under the willow bough
 That leans and shadows the rushes;
 The King is here, in the city of Haou,
 At peace, and the wine-cup blushes.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

THREE GIFTS

A royal gourd was given me,
 And in exchange an emerald I gave,
 No mere return for courtesy,
 But that our friendship might outlast the grave.

A princely peach was given me,
 And in exchange a ruby gem I gave,
 No mere exchange for courtesy,
 But that our friendship might outlast the grave.

A yellow plum was given me,
 And in exchange a sardonyx I gave,
 No mere return for courtesy,
 But that our friendship might outlast the grave.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

BRAVE THOUGHTS

GREEN is the upper robe,
 Green with a yellow lining;
 My sorrow none may probe,
 Nor can I cease repining.

Green is the upper robe,
 The lower garb is yellow;
 My sorrow none may probe,
 Nor any season mellow.

The silk was of emerald dye,
 Ah! this was all your doing;
 But I dream of an age gone by
 To keep my heart from rueing.

Fine linen or coarse, 'tis cold,
 But all I have to dress me;
 So I think of the men of old,
 And find brave thoughts possess me.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

ON THE BANKS OF HO

THE little boat of cypress rocks,
 Rocks in the midst of Ho;
 He was my lord, whose long dark locks
 Divided in their downward flow.
 Till death betide,
 His bride,
 I'll wed no other.
 O Heaven! O mother!
 Will you not understand your child?

The little boat of cypress rocks
 There by the side of Ho;
 He was my only one, whose locks
 Divided in their downward flow.
 Till death betide,
 His bride,
 I'll wed no other.
 O Heaven! O mother!
 Far from me be the thing defiled!
 Will you not understand your child?

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

SORROW

SHE sought her native land again.
 The swallow takes its ragged flight.
 We went together day and night,
 Till parting drew her from my sight
 And the tears fell down like rain.

She went her native land to seek.
 Now up, now down the swallow flies.
 And oh!--the last of tender ties,
 The form that fades from aching eyes
 And the tears coursing down my cheek.

Around, about the swallows dar
 She fared into a far countree,
 And when I vainly sought to see
 The empty landscape mocked at me,
 And great grief settled on my heart.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

  

BULWARKS OF EMPIRE

GOOD men are bulwarks; while the multitudes
 Are walls that ring the land; great states are screens;
 Each family a buttress; the pursuit
 Of righteousness secures repose; like towers
 Of strong defence the royal kinsmen stand
 Immune from peril. May they still remain
 Nor leave the king, a lonely citadel
 Abandoned to his enemies.

                              Give heed
 Unto the wrath of Heaven! nor presume
 To idle; but revere the Heavenly moods,
 Ephemeral though they seem. Be not of those
 That roam at random. Heaven understands
 And doth companion all the ways we go,
 And seeth all things clearly...

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

THE BRIDE COMETH

THE turtle-dove dwells in the magpie's nest.
 One cometh as a bride to be caressed;
 A hundred carriages have gone in quest.

The magpie's home the young dove hath possessed.
 This lady cometh as a life-long guest;
 A hundred chariots on the road have pressed.

The turtle-dove shall fill the magpie's nest.
 She travels far from home to love and rest;
 A hundred carriages her rank attest.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

BEFORE THE FORD

IF your heart be kind and true,
 I will ford the stream with you.
 If your fickle thoughts go straying,
 Come with me no more a-maying.
 Oh, you silly, silly swain!
 Better men than you remain.

If you love me, dear my lord,
 Bid me and I'll cross the ford.
 Should your roving thoughts forsake me,
 Thoughts more kind will captive make me.
 Oh, you silly, silly swain!
 Better men than you remain.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

GOOD KING WU

IN the city of Haou he built his hall,
 With circling waters round the wall:
 From north to south, from east to west
 There was never a tongue but called him blest.
 Great King Wu was a monarch true.

With divination deep, I trow,
 Afar he sought the sight of Haou.
 With tortoise-shell the site he chose,
 And tier by tier the city rose.
 Great King Wu was a monarch true.

By the waters of Fung white millet grew.
 Statesmen wise were the choice of Wu,
 The future reaped whate'er he planned;
 His son was lord of a grateful land.
 Good King Wu was a monarch true.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

FAINT HEART

I PRAY you, dear,
 My little hamlet leave,
 Nor break my willow-boughs;
 'Tis not that I should grieve,
 But I fear my sire to rouse.
 Love pleads with passion disarrayed,--
 "A sire's commands must be obeyed."

I pray you, dear,
 Leap not across my wall,
 Nor break my mulberry-boughs;
 Not that I fear their fall,
 But, lest my brother's wrath should rouse,
 Love pleads with passion disarrayed,--
 "A brother's words must be obeyed."

I pray you, dear,
 Steal not my garden down,
 Nor break my sandal-trees;
 Not that I care for these,
 But, oh! I dread the talk of town.
 Should lovers have their wilful way,
 Whatever would the neighbours say?

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

WITHOUT HER

THE moon comes forth in her brightness;
 Fair as the moon was she,
 That bright and beautiful lady
 Who lit the night for me.
 Would that I saw her now,
 With the stars around her brow.

The moon comes forth in her splendour;
 Fair through the void she burns,
 That pale and beautiful lady,
 My moon, no more returns;
 But under the alien skies
 She shines in a stranger's eyes.

The moon comes forth in her glory;
 Kind to the world is she.
 That kind and beautiful lady,
 Doth charm no night for me.
 Oh, when the dawn-star wanes
 For the sun to rend my chains!

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

THE FOREST LOVER

KeEN-KWAN the axles cried,
 As I drove to claim my bride.
 Hunger for her beauty presses,
 I am parched for her caresses;
 Though we lack good company,
 We shall revel--I and she.

Dense the forest in the plain,
 Where the long-tailed pheasants reign;
 Happy is the house that owns her,
 Where a lover's choice enthrones her.
 Pledge me while I praise you, dear!
 Love shall ever need you near.

Though I have but little wine,
 Love makes little cups divine.
 Though but one poor meal await us,
 Simple fare shall amply sate us;
 Though small worth is mine to bring,
 Gaily we will dance and sing.

Yon tall ridges I ascend
 And the stubborn firewood rend.
 When the riven oaks are ringing
 All my thoughts fly homeward winging;
 Though their green abysses hide,
 My whole heart is satisfied.

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] Yon dim mountains disappear,
 On the road the course is clear.
 Gathering hooves go loudly drumming,
 Reins like lute-strings join their thrumming;
 Till beside the open door,
 She is in my arms once more.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

THE HOUSEHOLDER'S LAMENT

THE marshland holds the carambola tree;
 Soft and pliant its branches be.
 With its careless beauty and tender sheen,
 The life of a tree is the life for me.

The marshland rears the carambola tree;
 All purple and red its blossoms be.
 In careless beauty and tender sheen,
 Would I were childless and bland like thee.

The marshland loves the carambola tree;
 Soft and sweet are the fruits I see.
 Clothed with beauty and sunlit sheen,
 The rateless and roofless life for me.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

  

UNAVAILING

HE stabs me with a scornful smile.
 Winds are wailing at the door.
 Scornful words and whispers vile,
 Ye have thrust me to the core.

Whirling dust the northwind blows.
 Surely he will seek his mate!
 But he neither comes nor goes,
 Through the long dumb hours that wait.

Blew the wind and veiled the sky;
 One hour's gleam, then clouds again.
 Sleep went trailing softly by,
 Left me to the old dull pain.

Clouds across the darkness sweep,
 Thunder rolls its monotone.
 Who shall put my heart to sleep?
 Heart that aches, and aches alone.

     
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

GREY DAWNS AND RED

COLD is the rain and cold the wind,
     The cock gives dawn shrill greeting;
 But a shadow steals across the blind,
     And oh! my heart is beating.

The rain drives down, the wind tears past,
     The cock shrills through the gloaming;
 But love is in the house at last,
     And sorrow flies his homing.

Though the world look dark through wind and rain,
     And the dismal cock's a-crowing;
 I'll sigh no more for the nights to wane,
     And its oh! for the red dawn's glowing.

Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury

    
The Book of Odes, by L. Cranmer-Byng, [1908], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

The following advertisements appeared at the end of the original book. They are included for completeness.

  

THE ORIENT LIBRARY

  

THE

  

WISDOM OF THE EAST

  

SERIES

  

Edited by L. CRANMER-BYNG and Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

THE object of the Editors of this Series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West, the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour. Finally, in thanking press and public for the very cordial reception given to the "Wisdom of the East" Series, they wish to state that no pains have been spared to secure the best specialists for the treatment of the various subjects at hand.

LONDON

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

(Please order through your Bookseller)

[p. 59]

Brahma-Knowledge: An Outline of the Philosophy of the Vedanta 

As set forth by the Upanishads and by S'ankara. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D., Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 2/- net.

The Sayings of Confucius 

A new Translation of the greater part of the Confucian Analects with Introduction and Notes by LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant in the Department of Oriental Books and Manuscripts of the British Museum. 2/- net.

Arabian Wisdom 

Selections and Translations from the Arabic by JOHN WORTABET, M.D. 1/- net.

The Persian Mystics

Jalalu'd-din Rumii

By F. Hadland Davis, 2/-net.

The Way of the Buddha

Selections from the Buddhist texts, together with the original Pali, with Introduction by HERBERT BAYNES, M.R.A.S. 2/- net.

Sadi's Scroll of Wisdom

By SHAIKH SA'DI. With Introduction by SIR ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, C.I.E. 1/- net.

Musings of a Chinese Mystic

Selections from the Philosophy of Chuang Tzu. With Introduction by LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant at the British Museum. 2/- net.

The Instruction of Ptah-Hotep and the Instruction of Ke'gemni

The Oldest Books in the World. Translated from the Egyptian with Introduction and Appendix by BATTISCOMBE G. GUNN. 1/- net.

The Wisdom of Israel: Being Extracts from the Babylonian Talmud and Midrash Rabboth

Translated from the Aramaic with an Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS. 1/- net.

[p. 60]

The Rose Garden of Sa'di

Selected and Rendered from the Persian with Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

Women and Wisdom of Japan

With Introduction by S. TAKAISHI. 1/- net.

The Classics of Confucius

I. The Book of History (Shu-King)

By W. GORN OLD. 1/- net.

II. The Book of Odes (Shi-King)

By L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

The Awakening of the Soul

From the Arabic of IBN TUFAIL. Translated with Introduction by PAUL BRoNNLE, Ph.D. 1/6 net.

The Religion of the Koran

With Introduction by SIR ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, C.I.E. 1/- net.

The Sayings of Lao Tzu

From the Chinese. Translated with Introduction by LIONEL GILES, of the British Museum. 1/- net.

The Duties of the Heart

By RABBI BACHYE. Translated from the Hebrew with Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS, Hollier Hebrew Scholar, U.C.L. 1/- net.

The Teachings of Zoroaster and the Philosophy of the Parsi Religion

Translated with Introduction by DR. S. A. KAPADIA, Lecturer, University College, London. 2/- net.

All literary communications to be addressed to the Editors of

THE ORIENT LIBRARY, c/o DR. S. A. KAPADIA, ORIENTAL SECRETARY, NORTHBROOK SOCIETY, 185 PICCADILLY, LONDON, W.

[p. 61]

EXTRACTS FROM A FEW PRESS OPINIONS

The Athenaeum.--"We wish that there were more of them; they are dreamy, lifelike, and fascinating."

St. James's Gazette.--"The quaint and picturesque little "Wisdom of the East Series."

Pall Mall Gazette.--"No translation of this important work has been made since the beginning of the eighteenth century."

The Academy.--"Slim, tastefully bound little volumes."

Manchester Courier.--"Worthy of close study by all who would penetrate to the depth of Eastern thought and feeling."

Literary Guide.--"We wish success to this little series of books."

Outlook.--"This Series is published to help in the process of renewing the spiritual and moral life of the West."

The Scotsman.--"This Series should not fail to please readers of the more studious sort."

Nottingham Press.--"This dainty little Volume is the fifth of the Series, all the earlier Volumes of which have been cordially welcomed by Press and Public alike."

Southport Guardian.--"This Series will find considerable favour with all Students of Eastern Literature and Eastern Philosophy."

The Northern Weekly.--"I must confess that I am attracted by the Literature of the East. This week I have been reading the dainty little books issued by the Orient Press."

Bristol Mercury.--"We commend these little books to all who imagine that there is no knowledge worth having outside Europe and America."

Glasgow Herald.--"This new Series has a definite and lofty aim, and is deserving of support. The books are small, cheap, and well adapted for the pocket. Every page is regularly refreshing and stimulating."

North Devon Journal.--"The difference between Eastern and Western modes of thought is pointedly exemplified by this Series."

Halifax Guardian.--"They are well worth perusal and are presented to the reader in that attractive form which the Orient Press has been happy enough to hit on."

Jewish Chronicle.--"No such near approach to an English translation has ever been made."

Christian Age.--"Meditation on the teaching of this little book cannot but be helpful to all its readers."

Field.--"Such books are valuable aids to the understanding of a far-off age and people, and have a great interest for the student of literature."

Irish Times.--"The volumes are charming in form, low in price, and excellent in matter."

Publishers' Circular.--"We unhesitatingly recommend them to all who can appreciate the ideal of goodness and holiness and the highest form of culture."

Public Opinion.--"These tiny books have much to commend them."

LONDON: JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

(Please order through your Bookseller)

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: bop.txt =====


    
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE BOOK OF POETRY

  

CHINESE TEXT WITH ENGLISH TRANSLATION

  

BY

  

JAMES LEGGE, D.D., LL.D.

  

THE CHINESE BOOK COMPANY

  

SHANGHAI, CHINA

  

[1931]

 

Original publication:

  

THE SHE KING;

  

OR,

  

THE BOOK OF ANCIENT POETRY,

  

TRANSLATED IN ENGLISH VERSE,

  

WITH ESSAYS AND NOTES.

  

By

  

JAMES LEGGE, D.D., LL.D.,

  

PROFESSOR OF CHINESE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,

  

FORMERLY OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  

LONDON:

  

TRUBNER & CO., 57 & 59, LUDGATE HILL.

  

[1876]

 

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was originally published prior to 1923. The Shanghai edition contains all of the poetry verbatim from the 1876 edition, which has much additional apparatus not included here. The Chinese text is also omitted in this etext for technical reasons.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

The following is the Preface to the 1876 edition. It is not included in the Shanghai edition.--JBH

  

PREFACE.

IN the third chapter of the Prolegomena the author has endeavoured to state clearly the principles on which the metrical version of the Book of China's ancient poetry, published in the present volume, has been made, and will only repeat here that his readers will find in it, in an English dress, the Chinese poems themselves, and not others composed by paraphrase from them. It remains for him to relate how he came to undertake the work, and the assistance that he has received in completing it.

While preparing his larger and critical work on the She, published at Hong-Kong in 1871, though, as he has stated in the chapter referred to, he did not think that the collection as a whole was worth the trouble of versifying; it often occurred to him that not a few of the pieces were well worth that trouble; and if he had had the time to spare, he would then have undertaken it. Occupied with other Chinese classics, the subject of versifying any portion of the She passed from his mind until he received in the spring of 1874, from his nephew, the Rev. John Legge, M.A., of Brighton in Victoria, Australia, a suggestion that he should bring out a metrical version of the whole Book. To encourage him to do so, his nephew promised his own assistance, and that of his brother, the Rev. James Legge, M.A., of Hanley, Staffordshire, while another helper might be found in the Rev. Alexander Cran, M.A., of Fairfield, near Manchester.

A plan for the versification of all the pieces was drawn out in harmony with this suggestion, and the principles on which the versions should be made were laid down. Various causes, however, operated to prevent each of his helpers from doing all the portion that had been assigned to him, and many of the versions which were sent had to be altogether set aside. Fully three-fourths of the volume are the author's own, while he had much to do in revising the other fourth. To all his three associates be tenders his most cordial thanks. Many of the pieces have a beauty which they would not have possessed but. for them; and several of them-of those especially from Australia-as they came to him, glowed with more of the fire of poetry than they now show.

To another gentleman he has also to acknowledge his great obligation. When he was beginning to see the end of his task, be asked his old Hong Kong friend, W. T. Mercer, Esq., M.A. Oxford, to read and revise his manuscript before it went to the press. He knew he could not have a kinder critic, nor an abler,-as all will say who are acquainted with Mr. Mercer's own volume of "Under the Peak; or, Jottings in Verse, during a lengthened residence in the Colony of Hong-Kong," published in 1869.

Mr. Mercer kindly acceded to the request, and went over every one of the pieces, pruning, correcting, and smoothing the versification, and making otherwise various suggestions. He recast some of the pieces in the first Part. The author has appended two of his recastings to his own versions, and 1. ii. V. should have been mentioned as entirely his. In other cases it was found advisable to remake the pieces. To Mr. Mercer also the Work is indebted, as the reader will perceive, for Latin versions of some of the pieces.

Two metrical versions in German of the old Chinese poems have existed for a good many years. The one was published at Altona, in 1833, with the title:--"Schi-King, Chinesisches Liederbuch, gesammelt von Confucius, dem Deutschen angeeiguet von Friedrich Ruckert;" the other at Crefeld, in 1844, with the title:--"Schi-King, oder Chinesische Lieder, gesammelt von Confucius. Neu und frei nach P. La Charme's lateinischer Uebertragung bearbeitet. Fur's deutsche Volk herausgegeben von Johann Cramer." Of these the former by Ruckert has much the greater merit, and the second translator had it constantly before him. The present version, however, is under no obligation to either, nor can a comparison be instituted between it and them. Cramer says that his version was "freely" made from Lacharme's Latin translation; nor had Ruckert any other original. Of the character of Lacharme's translation the author has spoken in the preface to his larger Work.

    122, King Henry's Road, London,
         April, 1876.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

I have included the first two parts of the Introduction from the 1876 edition.--JBH

  

PROLEGOMENA.

  

CHAPTER I.

THE EARLY HISTORY AND THE PRESENT TEXT OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.

  

SECTION I.

THE BOOK BEFORE CONFUCIUS; AND WHAT, IF ANY, WERE HIS LABOURS UPON IT.

1. SZE-MA TS'eN, in his memoir of Confucius, says:--The old poems amounted to more than 3000. Confucius removed those which were only repetitions of others, and selected those which would be serviceable for the inculcation of propriety and righteousness. Ascending as high as Seeh and How-tseih, and descending through the prosperous eras of Yin and Chow to the times of decadence under kings Yew and Le, he selected in all 305 pieces, which he sang over to his lute, to bring them into accordance with the musical style of the Shaou, the Woo, the Ya, and the Sung." This is the first notice which we have of any compilation of the ancient poems by Confucius, and from it mainly are derived all the subsequent statements on the subject.

In the History of the Classical Books in the Records of the Suy dynasty (A.D. 589--618), it is said:--"When odes ceased to be made and collected, Che, the Grand Music-master of Loo, arranged in order those which were existing, and made a copy of them. Then Confucius expurgated them; and going up to the Shang dynasty, and coming down to the State of Loo, he compiled altogether or 300 pieces."

Gow-yang Sew (A.D. 1006-1071) endeavours to state particularly what the work of expurgation performed by Confucius was. "Not only," says he, "did the sage reject whole poems, but from others he rejected one or more stanzas; from stanzas he rejected one or more lines; and from lines he rejected one or more characters."

Choo He (A.D. 1130-1200), whose own classical Work on the Book of Poetry appeared in A.D. 1178, declined to express himself positively on the question of the expurgation of the odes, but summed up his view of what Confucius did for them in the following words:--"Poems had ceased to be made and collected, and those which were extant were full of errors and wanting in arrangement. When Confucius returned from Wei to Loo, he brought with him the odes which he had gotten in other States and digested them, along with those which were to be found in Loo, into a collection of 300 pieces."

I have not been able to find evidence sustaining these representations, and propose now to submit to the reader the considerations which prevent me from concurring in them, and have brought me to the conclusions that, before the birth of Confucius, the Book of Poetry existed substantially the same as it was at his death, and that, while he may have somewhat altered the arrangement of its Books and odes, the principal service which he rendered to it was not that of compilation, but the impulse to the study of it which he communicated to his disciples. The discrepancy in the number of the odes as given in the above statements will be touched on in a note.

2. If we place Ts'een's composition of the memoir of Confucius in B.C. 100, nearly four hundred years will thus have elapsed between the death of the sage and any statement to the effect that he expurgated a collection of poems, or compiled previous that which we now have, consisting of a few over 300 pieces; and no writer in the interval, so far as we know, had affirmed or implied any such facts. But independently of this consideration, there is ample evidence to prove, first, that the poems current before Confucius were not by any means so numerous as Sze-ma Ts'een says, and, secondly, that the collection of 300 pieces or thereabouts, digested under the same divisions as in the present Classic, existed before the sage's time.

3. [i.] It would not be surprising, if, floating about and current among the people of China, in the 6th century before Christ, there had been even more than 3000 pieces of poetry. The marvel is that such was not the case. But in the "Narratives of the States," a Work attributed by some to Tso K'ew-ming, [*1] there occur quotations from 31 poems, made by statesmen and others, all anterior to Confucius; and of those poems it cannot be pleaded that more than two are not in the present Classic, while of those two one is an ode of it quoted under another name. Further, in the Tso Chuen, certainly the work of Tso K'ew-ming, and a most valuable supplement to Confucius' own Work of the Chun Ts'ew, we have quotations from not fewer than 219 poems; and of these only thirteen are not found in the Classic. Thus of 250 poems current in China before the supposed compilation of the Book of Poetry, 236 are found in it, and only 14 are absent. To use the words of Chaou Yih, a scholar of the present dynasty, of the period K'een-lung (A.D. 1736-1795), "If the poems existing in Confucius' time had been more than 3000, the quotations found in these two Books of poems now lost should have been ten times as numerous as the quotations from the 305 pieces said to have been preserved by him, whereas they are only between a twenty-first and twenty-second part of those from the existing pieces. This is sufficient to show that Ts'een's statement is not worthy of credit." I have made the widest possible induction from all existing Records in which there are quotations of poems made anterior to Confucius, and the conclusion to which I have been brought is altogether confirmatory of that deduced from the Works of Tso K'ew-ming. If Confucius did make any compilation of poems, he had no such work of rejection and expurgation to do as is commonly imagined.

[ii.] But I believe myself that he did no work at all to which the name of compilation can properly be applied, but simply adopted an existing collection of poems consisting of 305, or at most of 311 pieces. Of the existence

of the She, or Book of Poetry, before Confucius, digested under four divisions, and much in the same order as at present, there may be advanced the following proofs:--

First, in the "Official Book of Chow," we are told that it belonged to the grand-master " to teach the six classes of poems,--the Fung, with their descriptive, metaphorical, and allusive pieces, the Ya, and the Sung." Mr. Wylie says that the question of the genuineness of the Official Book may be considered as set at rest since the inquiry into it by Choo He, and that it is to be accepted as a work of the duke of Chow, or some other sage of the Chow dynasty. [*2] Without committing myself to any opinion on this point, as I find the passage just quoted in the Preface to the She (of which I shall treat in the next chapter), I cannot but accept it as having been current before Confucius; and thus we have a distinct reference to a collection of poems, earlier than his time, with the same division into Parts, and the same classification of the pieces in those Parts.

Second, in Part II. of the She, Book vi., Ode IX.,--an ode assigned to the time of king Yew, B.C. 780-770, we have the words,

"They sing the Ya and the Nan,
 Dancing to their flutes without error."

So early then as the 8th century before our era, there was a collection of poems, of which some bore the name of the Nan, which there is nothing to forbid our supposing to have been the Chow-nan and the Shaou-nan, forming the first two Books of the first Part of the present classic, often spoken of together as the Nan; and of which others bore the name of the Ya, being probably the earlier pieces which now compose a large portion of the second and third Parts.

Third, in the narratives of Tso K'ew-ming, under the 29th year of duke Seang, B.C. 543, when Confucius was only 8 or 9 years old, we have an account of a visit to the court of Loo by an envoy from Woo, an eminent states man of the time, and of great learning. We are told that, as he wished to hear the music of Chow, which he could do better in Loo than in any other State, they sang to him the odes of the Chow-nan and the Shaou-nan; those of P'ei, Yung, and Wei; of the Royal domain; of Ch'ing; of Ts'e; of Pin; of Ts'in; of Wei; of Tang; of Ch'in; of Kwei; and of Ts'aou. They sang to him also the odes of the Minor Ya and the Greater Ya; and they sang finally the pieces of the Sung. We have here existing in the boyhood of Confucius, before he had set his mind on learning, [*3] what we may call the present Book of Poetry, with its Fung, its Ya, and its Sung. The odes of the Fung were in 15 Books as now, with merely some slight differences in the order of their arrangement;--the odes of Pin forming the 9th Book instead of the 15th, those of Ts'in the 10th instead of the 11th, those of Wei the 11th instead of the 9th, and those of T'ang the 12th instead of the 10th. In other respects the She, existing in Loo when Confucius was a mere boy, appears to have been the same as that of which the compilation has been ascribed to him.

Fourth, in this matter we may appeal to the words of Confucius himself. Twice in the Analects he speaks of the odes as a collection consisting of 300 pieces, [*4] That Work not being made on any principle of chronological order, we cannot positively assign those sayings to any particular periods of Confucius' life; but it is, I may say, the unanimous opinion of the critics that they were spoken before the time to which Sze-ma Ts'een and Choo He refer his special labour on the Book of Poetry. The reader may be left, with the evidence which has been set before him, to form his own opinion on the questions discussed. To my own mind that evidence is decisive on the points.

The Book of Poetry, arranged very much as we now have it, was current in China long before the sage; and its pieces were in the mouths of statesmen and scholars, constantly quoted by them on festive and other occasions. Poems not included in it there doubtless were, but they were comparatively few. Confucius may have made a copy for the use of himself and his disciples; but it does not appear that he rejected any pieces which had been previously received, or admitted any which had not previously found a place in the collection.

 

4. Having come to the above conclusions, it seems superfluous to make any further observations on the statements adduced in the first paragraph. If Confucius expurgated no previous Book, it is vain to try and specify the nature of his ex purgation as Gow-yang Sew did. [*5] From Sze-ma Ts'een we should suppose that there were no odes in the She later than the time of king Le, whereas there are 12 of the time of king Hwuy, 13 of that of king Seang, and 2 of the time of king Ting. Even the Sung of Lee which are referred to by the Suy writer and Choo He are not the latest pieces in the Book. The statement of the former that the odes were arranged in order and copied by Che, the music-master of Loo, [*6] rests on no authority but his own;--more than a thousand years after the time of Confucius. I shall refer to it again, however, in the next chapter.

5. The question arises now of what Confucius really did for the Book of Poetry, if, indeed, he did anything at all. The only thing from which we can hazard the slightest opinion on the point we have from his own lips. In the Analects, IX. xiv., he tells us:--"I returned from Wei to Loo, and then the music was reformed, and the pieces in the Ya and the Sung all found their proper places." The return from Wei to Loo took place when the sage was in his 69th year, only five years before his death. He ceased from that time to take active part in political affairs, and solaced himself with music, the study of the Classics, the writing of the Ch'un Ts'ew, and familiar intercourse with those of his disciples who still kept about him. He reformed the music,--that to which the poems were sung; but wherein the reformation consisted we cannot tell. And he gave to the pieces of the Ya and the Sung their proper places. The present order of the Books in the Fung, slightly differing, we have seen, from that which was common in his boyhood, may also have now been determined by him.

As to the arrangement of the odes in the other Parts of the Work, we cannot say of what extent it was. What are now called the correct Ya precede the pieces called the Ya of a changed character or of a degenerate age; but there is no chronological order in their following one an other, and it will be seen, from the notes on the separate odes, that there are not a few of the latter class, which are illustrations of a good reign and of the observance of propriety, as much as any of the former. In the Books of the Sung again, the occurrence of the Praise songs of Loo between the sacrificial odes of Chow and Shang is an anomaly for which we try in vain to discover a reasonable explanation.

6. While we cannot discover, therefore, any peculiar labours of Confucius on the Book of Poetry, and we have it now, as will be shown in the next section, substantially as he found it already compiled to his hand, the subsequent preservation of it may reasonably be attributed to the admiration which he expressed for it, and the enthusiasm for it with which he sought to inspire his disciples. It was one of the themes on which he delighted to converse with them. [*7] He taught that it is from the odes that the mind receives its best stimulus. [*8] A man ignorant of them was, in his opinion, like one who stands with his face to wards a wall, limited In his views, and unable to advance. [*9] Of the two things which his son could specify as particularly enjoined on him by the sage, the first was that be should learn the odes. [*10] In this way Confucius, probably, contributed largely to the subsequent preservation of the Book of Poetry;--the preservation of the tablets on which the odes were inscribed, and the preservation of it in the memories of all who venerated his authority, and looked up to him as their master.

  

SECTION II.

THE BOOK OF POETRY FROM THE TIME OF CONFUCIUS TILL THE GENERAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE PRESENT TEXT.

1. OF the attention paid to the study of the Book of Poetry from the death of Confucius to the rise of the Ts'in dynasty, we have abundant evidence in the writings of his grandson Tsze-sze, of Mencius, and of Seun K'ing. One of the acknowledged distinctions of Mencius is his acquaintance with the odes, of which his canon for the study of them pre fixed to my larger volumes is a proof; and Seun K'ing survived the extinction of the Chow dynasty, and lived on into the times of Ts'in.

2. The Poems shared in the calamity which all the other classical Works, excepting the Yih, suffered, when the tyrant of Ts'in issued his edict for their destruction. But I have shown, in the prolegomena to vol. I., that only a few years elapsed between the execution of his decree and the establishment of the Han dynasty, which distinguished itself by its labours to restore the monuments of ancient literature. The odes were all, or very nearly all, recovered; [*11] and the reason assigned for this is, that their preservation depended on the memory of scholars more than on their inscription upon tablets and silk. We shall find reason to accept this statement.

3. Three different texts of the odes made their appearance early in the Han dynasty, known as the She of Loo, of Ts'e, and of Han; that is, the Book of Poetry was recovered from three different quarters.

[i.] Lew Hin's catalogue [*12] of the Works in the imperial library of the earlier Han dynasty commences, on the She King, with a Collection of the three Texts in 28 chapters, which is followed by two Works of commentary on the Text of Loo. The former of them was by a Shin P'ei, of whom we have some account in the Literary Biographies of Han. He was a native of Loo, and had received his own knowledge of the odes from a scholar of Ts'e, called Fow K'ew-pih. He was resorted to by many disciples, whom he taught to repeat the odes, but without entering into discussion with them on their interpretation. When the first emperor of the Han dynasty was passing through Loo, Shin followed him to the capital of that State, and had an interview with him. The emperor Woo, in the beginning of his reign (B.C. 139), sent for him to court when he was more than 80 years old; and he appears to have survived a considerable number of years beyond that advanced age. The Dames of ten of his disciples are given, all men of eminence, and among them K'ung Gan-kwoh. A little later, the most noted adherent of the school of Loo was a Wei Heen, who arrived at the dignity of prime minister, and published "the She of Loo in Stanzas and Lines." Up and down in the Books of Han and Wei are to be found quotations of the odes, which must have been taken from the professors of the Loo recension; but neither the text nor the writings on it long survived. They are said to have perished during the Tsin dynasty (A.D. 265-419). When the catalogue of the Suy library was made, none of them were existing.

[ii.] The Han catalogue mentions five different works on the She of Ts'e. This text was from a Yuen Koo, a native of Ts'e, about whom we learn, from the same chapter of Literary Biographies, that he was one of the Great scholars of the court in the time of he emperor King (B.C. 155-142), a favourite with him, and specially distinguished for his knowledge of the odes and his advocacy of orthodox Confucian doctrine. He died in the next reign of Woo, more than 90 years old; and we are told that all the scholars of Ts'e who got a name in those days for their acquaintance with the She sprang from his school. Among his disciples is the well known name of Hea-how Ch'e-ch'ang, who communicated his acquisitions to How Ts'ang, a native of the present Shan-tung province, and author of two of the Works in the Han catalogue. How had three disciples of eminence,--Yih Fung, Seaou Wang-che, and K'wang Hang. From them the Text of Ts'e was transmitted to others, whose names, with quotations from their writings, are scattered through the Books of Han. Neither text nor commentaries, however, had a better fate than the She of Loo. There is no mention of them in the catalogue of Suy. They are said to have perished even before the rise of the Tsin dynasty.

[iii.] The Text of Han was somewhat more fortunate. The Han catalogue contains the titles of four works, all by Han Ying, whose surname is thus perpetuated in the text of the She which emanated from him. His biography follows that of How Ts'ang. He was a native, we are told, of the province of Yen, and a "Great scholar" in the time of the emperor Wan (B.C. 178-156), and on into the reigns of King and Woo. "He laboured," it is said, "to unfold the meaning of the odes, and published an 'Explanation of the Text' and 'Illustrations of the She,' containing several myriads of characters. His text was somewhat different from the texts of the She of Loo and Ts'e, but substantially of the same meaning." Of course Han founded a school; but while almost all the writings of his followers soon perished, both the Works just mentioned continued on through the various dynasties to the time of Sung. The Suy catalogue contains the titles of his text and two Works on it; the Pang those of his text and his Illustrations; but when we come to the catalogue of Sung, published in the time of the Yuen dynasty, we find only the Illustrations, in 10 Books or chapters; and Gow-yang Sew tells us that in his time this was all of Han that remained. It continues, entire or nearly so, to the present day.

4. But while these three different recensions of the She all disappeared, with the exception of a single fragment, their unhappy fate was owing not more to the convulsions by which the empire was often rent, and the consequent destruction of literary monuments, such as we have witnessed in our own day in China, than to the appearance of a fourth Text which displaced them by its superior correctness, and the ability with which it was advocated and commented on. This was what is called the "Text of Maou. It came into the field later than the others; but the Han catalogue contains the She of Maou in 29 chapters, and a commentary on the text in 30. According to Ch'ing K'ang-shing, the author of this commentary was a native of Lee, known as Maou Hang or the Greater Maou, who was a disciple, we are told by Luh Tih-ming, of Seun K'ing. The Work is lost. He had communicated his knowledge of the She, however, to another Maou,--Maou Chang, or the Lesser Maou,--who was "a Great scholar" at the court of king Heen of Ho-keen. [*13] This king Heen was one of the most diligent labourers in the recovery of the ancient Books, and presented Maou's text and the Work of Hang at the court of the emperor King,--probably in B.C. 129. Chang himself published his "Explanations of the She," in 29 chapters, which still remain; but it was not till the reign of the emperor P'ing (A.D. 1-5) that Maou's recension was received into the imperial college, and took its place along with those of Lee, Ts'e, and Han.

The Chinese critics have carefully traced the line of scholars who had charge of Maou's text and explanations down to the reign of P'ing;--Kwan Ch'ang-k'ing, Heae Yen-neen, and Seu Gaou. To Seu Gaou succeeded Ch'in Keah, who was in office at the court of the usurper Wang Mang (A.D. 9-22). He transmitted his treasures to Seay Man-k'ing, who himself commented on the She; and from him they passed to the well-known Wei King-chung or Wei Hwang, of whom I shall have to speak in the next chapter. From this time the most famous scholars addicted themselves to Maou's text. Kea Kwei (A.D. 25-101) published a Work on the "Meaning and Difficulties of Maou's She," having previously compiled a digest of the differences between its text and those of the other three recensions, at the command of the emperor Ming (A.D. 58-75). Ma Yung (A.D. 69-165) followed with another commentary;--and we arrive at Ch'ing Heuen, or Ching K'ang-shing, who wrote his "Supplementary Commentary to the She of Maou," and his "Chronological Introduction to the She." The former of these two Works complete, and portions of the latter, are still extant. That the former has great defects as well as great merits, there can be no question; but it took possession of the literary world of China, and after the time of Ch'ing the other three texts were little heard of, while the names of the commentators on Maou's text and his explanations of it speedily become very numerous. Maou's grave is still shown near the village of Tsun-fuh, in the departmental district of Ho-keen.

5. Returning now to what I said in the 2nd paragraph, it will be granted that the appearance of three different and independent texts, immediately after the rise of the Han dynasty, affords the most satisfactory evidence of the recovery of the Book of Poetry, as it had continued from the time of Confucius. Unfortunately only fragments of them remain now; but we have seen that they were diligently compared by competent scholars with one another, and with the fourth text of Maou, which subsequently got the field to itself. In the body of the larger Work attention is called to many of their peculiar readings; and it is clear to me that their variations from one another and from Maou's text arose from the alleged fact that the preservation of the odes was owing to their being transmitted by recitation. The rhyme helped the memory to retain them, and while wood, bamboo, and silk were all consumed by the flames of Ts'in, when the time of repression ceased scholars would be eager to rehearse their stores. it was inevitable that the same sounds, when taken down by different writers, should in many cases be represented by different characters. Accepting the text as it exists, we have no reason to doubt that it is a near approximation to that which was current in the time of Confucius....

Footnotes

^1 "Wylie's Notes on Chinese Literature, p. 6. Tso K'ew-ming was not far removed from the era of Confucius.

^2 Notes on Chinese Literature, p. 4.

^3 Confucian Analects, II. iv, 1.

^4 Confucian Analects, II. ii.; XIII. v.

^5 Every instance pleaded by Sew in support of his expurgation of stanzas, lines, and characters has been disposed of by various scholars.

^6 When this Che lived is much disputed. From the references to him in Ana. VIII. xv., XVIII. ix., we naturally suppose him to have been a contemporary of Confucius.

^7 Analects, VII. xvii.

^8 Ana., VIII. viii.; XVII. ix.

^9 Ana., XVII. x.

^10 Ana., XVI. xiii.

^11 In the last section reference was made to the number of the odes, given by Confucius himself as 300. He might mention the round number, not thinking it worth while to say that they were 305 or 311. The Classic now contains the text of 305 pieces, and the titles of other 6. It is contended by Choo and many other scholars, that in Confucius' time the text of those six was already lost, or rather that the titles were names of tunes only. More likely is the view that the text of these pieces was lost after Confucius' death.

^12 Proleg., Vol. I. p. 4.

^13 The petty kingdom of Ho-keen embraced three of the districts in the present department of the same name in Chih-le, and one of the two districts of Shin Chow. King Heen's name was Tih.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

This is the table of contents from the Shanghai edition.--JBH

  

CONTENTS

           

       PART I. LESSONS FROM THE STATES

        

     
      BOOK

        

       PAGE

     
      I.

       THE ODES OF CHOU AND THE SOUTH

       <page 1>

     
      II.

       THE ODES OF SHAO AND THE SOUTH

       <page 11>

     
      III.

       THE ODES OF PEI

       <page 23>

     
      IV.

       THE ODES OF YUNG

       <page 48>

     
      V.

       THE ODES OF WEI

       <page 60>

     
      VI.

       THE ODES OF THE ROYAL DOMAIN

       <page 74>

     
      VII.

       THE ODES OF CHENG

       <page 85>

     
      VIII.

       THE ODES OF CH'I

       <page 105>

     
      IX.

       THE ODES OF WEI

       <page 116>

     
      X.

       THE ODES OF TANG

       <page 126>

     
      XI.

       THE ODES OF CH'IN

       <page 139>

     
      XII.

       THE ODES OF CH'EN

       <page 151>

     
      XIII.

       THE ODES OF KUEI

       <page 159>

     
      XIV.

       THE ODES OF TS'AO

       <page 163>

     
      XV.

       THE ODES OF PIN

       <page 168>

     
       

        

        

     
       

       PART II. MINOR ODES OF THE KINGDOM

        

     
      BOOK 

        

       PAGE

     
      I.

       THE DECADE OF LU MING

       <page 182>

     
      II.

       THE DECADE OF PAI HUA

       <page 203>

     
      III.

       THE DECADE OF T'UNG KUNG

       <page 211>

     
      IV.

       THE DECADE OF CH'I FU

       <page 226>

     
      V.

       THE DECADE OF HSIAO MIN

       <page 250>

     
      VI.

       THE DECADE OF PEI SHAN

       <page 273>

     
      VII.

       THE DECADE OF SANG HU

       <page 295>

     
      VIII.

       THE DECADE OF TU JEN SHIH

       <page 316>

     
       

       [p. iv]

        

     
       

        

        

     
       

       PART III. GREATER ODES OF THE KINGDOM

        

     
      BOOK

        

       PAGE

     
      I.

       THE DECADE OF KING WEN

       <page 331>

     
      II.

       THE DECADE OF SHENG MIN

       <page 358>

     
      III.

       THE DECADE OF TANG

       <page 386>

     
       

        

        

     
       

       PART IV. ODES OF THE TEMPLE AND THE ALTAR

        

     
      BOOK

        

       PAGE

     
      I.

       THE SACRIFICIAL ODES OF CHOU

        

     
       

       SECTION I. THE DECADE OF CH'ING MIAO

       <page 433>

     
       

       SECTION II. THE DECADE OF CHEN KUNG

       <page 441>

     
       

       SECTION III. THE DECADE OF MIN YU HSIAO TZU

       <page 450>

     
      II.

       THE PRAISE ODES OF LU

       <page 462>

     
      III.

       THE SACRIFICIAL ODES OF SHANG

       <page 478>

     
   

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE BOOK OF POETRY

  

PART I

  

LESSONS FROM THE STATES

  

BOOK I. THE ODES OF CHOU AND THE SOUTH

  

I

The Kuan Chu; mainly allusive. Celebrating the virtue of the bride of King Wen, his quest for her, and welcoming her to his palace.

[1]Hark! from the islet in the stream the voice
 Of the fish hawks that o'er their nest rejoice!
 From them our thoughts to that young lady go,
 Modest and virtuous, loth herself to show.
 Where could be found, to share our prince's state
 So fair, so virtuous, and so fit a mate?

[2]See how the duckweed's stalks, or short or long,
 Sway left and right, as moves the current strong!
 So hard it was for him the maid to find!
 By day, by night, our prince with constant mind [p. 2]
 Sought for her long, but all his search was vain.
 Awake, asleep, he ever felt the pain
 Of longing thought, as when on restless bed,
 Tossing about, one turns his fevered head.

[3]Here long, there short, afloat the duckweed lies;
 But caught at last, we seize the longed-for prize.
 The maiden modest, virtuous, coy, is found;
 Strike every lute, and joyous welcome sound.
 Ours now, the duckweed from the stream we bear,
 And cook to use with other viands rare.
 He has the maiden, modest, virtuous, bright;
 Let bells and drums proclaim our great delight.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Ko T'an; narrative. Celebrating the industry and dutifulness of King Wen's queen.

[1]Sweet was the scene. The spreading dolichos
 Extended far, down to the valley's depths,
 With leaves luxuriant. The orioles
 Fluttered around, and on the bushy trees [p. 3]
 In throngs collected,--whence their pleasant notes
 Resounded far in richest melody.

[2]The spreading dolichos extended far,
 Covering the valley's sides, down to its depths,
 With leaves luxuriant and dense. I cut
 It down, then boiled, and from the fibers span
 Of cloth, both fine and coarse, large store,
 To wear, unwearied of such simple dress.

[3]Now back to my old home, my parents dear
 To see, I go. The matron I have told,
 Who will announcement make. Meanwhile my clothes,
 My private clothes I wash, and rinse my robes.
 Which of them need be rinsed? and which need not?
 My parents dear to visit, back I go.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

III

The Chuan Erh; narrative. Lamenting the absence of a cherished friend, probably of a husband.

[1]Though small my basket, all my toil
   Filled it with mouse-ears but in part.
 I set it on the path, and sighed
   For the dear master of my heart.

[2]My steeds, o'ertasked, their progress stayed,
   When midway up that rocky height.
 Give me a cup from that gilt vase,
   When shall this longing end in sight?

[3]To mount that lofty ridge I drove,
   Until my steeds all changed their hue.
 A cup from that rhinoceros' horn
   May help my longing to subdue.

[4]Striving to reach that flat-topped hill,
   My steeds, worn out, relaxed their strain;
 My driver also sank oppressed:
   I'll never see my lord again!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

IV

The Chiu Mu; allusive. Celebrating T'ai Ssu's freedom from jealousy, and offering fervent wishes for her happiness.

[1]In the south are the trees whose branches are bent,
 And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
   All the dolichos' creepers fast cling.
 See our princely lady, from whom we have got
 Rejoicing that's endless! May her happy lot
   And her honors repose ever bring!

[2]In the south are the trees whose branches are bent,
 And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
   All the dolichos' creepers are spread.
 See our princely lady, from whom we have got
 Rejoicing that's endless! Of her happy lot
   And her honors the greatness ne'er fade!

[3]In the south are the trees whose branches are bent,
 And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
   All the dolichos' creepers entwine.
 See our princely lady, from whom we have got
 Rejoicing that's endless. May her happy lot
   And her honors complete ever shine!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

V

The Chung Ssu; metaphorical. The fruitfulness of the locust; supposed to celebrate Tai Ssu's freedom from jealousy.

[1]Ye locusts, winged tribes,
   Gather in concord fine;
 Well your descendants may
   In numerous bright hosts shine!

[2]Ye locusts, winged tribes,
   Your wings in flight resound;
 Well your descendants may
   In endless lines be found!

[3]Ye locusts, winged tribes,
   Together cluster strong;
 Well your descendants may
   In swarms forever throng!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The T'ao Yao; allusive. Praise of a bride going to her future home.

[1]Graceful and young the peach tree stands;
   How rich its flowers, all gleaming bright!
 This bride to her new home repairs;
   Chamber and house she'll order right. [p. 7]

[2]Graceful and young the peach tree stands;
   Large crops of fruit it soon will show.
 This bride to her new home repairs;
   Chamber and house her sway shall know.

[3]Graceful and young the peach tree stands,
   Its foliage clustering green and full.
 This bride to her new home repairs;
   Her household will attest her rule.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The T'u Chueh; allusive, or narrative. Praise of a rabbit catcher as fit to be a prince's mate.

[1]Careful he sets his rabbit nets all round;
 Clang, clang his blows upon the pegs resound.
 Stalwart the man and bold! his bearing all
 Shows he might be his prince's shield and wall.

[2]Careful he is his rabbit nets to place,
 Where many paths of rabbits' feet bear trace.
 Stalwart the man and bold! 'tis plain to see
 He to his prince companion good would be.

[3]Careful he is his rabbit nets to spread,
 Where in the forest's depth the trees give shade.
 Stalwart the man and bold! fit his the part
 Guide to his prince to be, and faithful heart.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

  

VIII

The Fou I; narrative. The song of the plantain gatherers.

[1]We gather and gather the plantains;
   Come gather them anyhow.
 Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
   And here we have got them now.

[2]We gather and gather the plantains;
   Now off the ears we must tear.
 Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
   And now the seeds are laid bare.

[3]We gather and gather the plantains,
   The seeds in our skirts are placed.
 Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
   Ho! safe in the girdled waist.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Han Kuang; allusive and metaphorical. The virtuous manners of the young women about the Han and Kiang rivers.

[1]High and compressed, the southern trees
   No shelter from the sun afford.
 The girls free ramble by the Han,
   But will not hear enticing word. [p. 9]
     Like the broad Han are they,
       Through which one cannot dive;
     And like the Kiang's long stream,
       Wherewith no raft can strive.

[2]Many the fagots bound and piled;
   The thorns I'd hew still more to make.
 As brides, those girls their new homes seek;
   Their colts to feed I'd undertake.
     Like the broad Han are they,
       Through which one cannot dive;
     And like the Kiang's long stream,
       Wherewith no raft can strive.

[3]Many the fagots bound and piled;
   The southernwood I'd cut for more.
 As brides, those girls their new homes seek;
   Food for their colts I'd bring large store.
     Like the broad Han are they,
       Through which one cannot dive;
     And like the Kiang's long stream,
       Wherewith no raft can strive.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10]

  

X

The Ju Fen; mainly narrative. The affection of the wives on the Ju, and their solicitude about their husbands' honor.

[1]Along the raised banks of the Ju,
   To hew slim stein and branch I wrought,
 My lord away, my husband true,
   Like hunger pang my troubled thought!

[2]Along the raised banks of the Ju,
   Branch and fresh shoot confessed my art.
 I've seen my lord, my husband true,
   And still he folds me in his heart.

[3]As the toiled bream makes red its tail,
   Toil you, sir, for the royal house,
 Amidst its blazing fires, nor quail:--
   Your parents see you pay your vows.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

The Lin Chih Chih; allusive. Celebrating the goodness of the offspring and descendants of King Wen.

[1]As the feet of the lin, which avoid each living thing,
 So our prince's noble sons no harm to men will bring.
             They are the lin! 

[2]As the front of the lin, never forward thrust in wrath, [p. 11]
 So our prince's noble grandsons of love tread the path.
             They are the lin! 

[3]As the horn of the lin, flesh-tipped, no wound to give,
 So our prince's noble kindred kindly with all live.
             They are the lin! 

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK II. THE ODES OF SHAO AND THE SOUTH

  

I

The Ch'iao Ch'ao; allusive: Celebrating the marriage of a princess to the prince of another state.

[1]      In the magpie's nest
       Dwells the dove at rest.
 This young bride goes to her future home;
 To meet her a hundred chariots come.

[2]      Of the magpie's nest
       Is the dove possest.
 This bride goes to her new home to live;
 And escort a hundred chariots give. [p. 12]

[3]      The nest magpie wove
       Now filled by the dove.
 This bride now takes to her home her way;
 And this numerous cars her state display.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Ts'ai Fan; narrative. The industry and reverence of a prince's wife, assisting him in sacrificing.

[1]Around the pools, the islets o'er,
   Fast she plucks white southernwood,
 To help the sacrificial store;
   And for our prince does service good.

[2]Where streams among the valleys shine,
   Of southernwoods she plucks the white;
 And brings it to the sacred shrine,
   To aid our prince in solemn rite.

[3]In headdress high, most reverent, she
   The temple seeks at early dawn.
 The service o'er, the headdress see
   To her own chamber slow withdrawn.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

III

The Ts'ao Ch'ung; narrative. The wife of some great officer bewails his absence on duty, and longs for the joy of his return.

[1]Shrill chirp the insects in the grass;
   All about the hoppers spring.
 While I my husband do not see,
   Sorrow must my bosom wring.
     O to meet him!
     O to greet him!
 Then my heart would rest and sing.

[2]Ascending high that southern hill,
   Turtle ferns I strove to get.
 While I my husband do not see,
   Sorrow must my heart beset.
     O to meet him!
     O to greet him!
 Then my heart would cease to fret.

[3]Ascending high that southern hill,
   Spinous ferns I sought to find.
 While I my husband do not see,
   Rankles sorrow in my mind.
     O to meet him!
     O to greet him!
 Then my heart would peace be shrined.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

IV

The Ts'ai Pin; narrative. The diligence and reverence of the young wife of an officer, doing her part in sacrificial offerings.

[1]She gathers fast the large duckweed,
   From valley stream that southward flows;
 And for the pondweed to the pools
   Left on the plains by floods she goes.

[2]The plants, when closed her toil, she puts
   In baskets round and baskets square.
 Then home she hies to cook her spoil,
   In pans and tripods ready there.

[3]In sacred chamber this she sets,
   Where the light falls down through the wall.
 'Tis she, our lord's young reverent wife,
   Who manages this service all.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

V

The Kan T'ang; narrative. The love of the people for the memory of the duke of Shao makes them love the trees beneath which he had rested.

[1]O fell not that sweet pear tree!
   See how its branches spread.
     Spoil not its shade,
     For Shao's chief laid
   Beneath it his weary head.

[2]O clip not that sweet pear tree!
   Each twig and leaflet spare.
     'Tis sacred now,
     Since the lord of Shao,
   When weary, rested him there.

[3]O touch not that sweet pear tree!
   Bend not a twig of it now.
     There long ago,
     As the stories show,
   Oft halted the chief of Shao.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16]

  

VI

The Hsing Lu; narrative and allusive. A lady resists an attempt to force her to marry, and argues her cause.

[1]The dew thick on the wet paths lay;
 Thither at early dawn my way
 I might have ta'en; but I said, "Nay.
 The dew is thick, at home I'll stay."

[2]You say that sparrow has a horn.--
   How could it else bore through your house?
 You say this trial is a proof
   That I exchanged betrothal vows.
 But though you've made me here appear in court,
 Yet at betrothal what you did fell short.

[3]You say the rat's teeth are complete.--
   How could it else bore through your wall?
 You say this trial proves my vows
   Of plighted troth were perfect all.
 But though to court you've forced me here to come,
 My will is firm;--I'll not with you go home.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

VII

The Kao Yang; narrative. The easy dignity of the officers at some court.

[1]Arrayed in skins of lamb or sheep,
   With five silk braidings all of white,
 From court they go, to take their meal,
   All self-possessed, with spirits light.

[2]How on their skins of lamb or sheep
   The five seams wrought with white silk show!
 With easy steps, and self-possessed,
   From court, to take their meal, they go.

[3]Upon their skins of lamb or sheep
   Shines the white silk the seams to link.
 With easy steps and self-possessed,
   They go from court to eat and drink.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

VIII

The Yin Ch'i Lei; allusive. A lady's admiration of her husband absent on public service, and her longing for his return.

[1]Grand in the south the thunder rolls,
   Beyond that lofty hill.
 Why must he go, nor dare to stay
   Brief space at rest and still?
 Absent my noble lord I mourn,
 May he return! May he return!

[2]Grand in the south the thunder rolls
   Along that mountain's side.
 Why must he go from this, nor dare
   Brief time at rest to bide?
 Absent my noble lord I mourn,
 May he return! may he return!

[3]Grand in the south the thunder rolls,
   Around that mountain's base.
 Why must he go from this, nor dare
   Indulge himself a space?
 Absent my noble lord I mourn,
 May he return! may he return!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

IX

The Piao Yu Mei; narrative. Anxiety of a young lady to get married.

[1]Ripe, the plums fall from the bough;
 Only seven tenths left there now!
 Ye whose hearts on me are set,
 Now the time is fortunate!

[2]Ripe, the plums fall from the bough;
 Only three tenths left there now!
 Ye who wish my love to gain,
 Will not now apply in vain!

[3]No more plums upon the bough!
 All are in my basket now!
 Ye who me with ardor seek,
 Need the word but freely speak!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Hsiao Hsing; allusive. The thankful submission to their lot of the inferior members of a harem.

[1]  Behold those starlets small,
     How three or five the east illume! [p. 20]
     Swiftly we came when fell the gloom,
   And now at dawn the hall
 Of the harem we leave, nor dare gainsay
 Our lot which grants us here no longer stay.

[2]  Behold those starlets small,
     Orion and the Pleiads bright!
     Swiftly we came as failed the light,
   And here brought to the hall
 Our coverlets and sheets. Now we return,
 Nor our inferior lot presume to mourn.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

XI

The Chiang Yu Ssu; allusive. Jealousy cured; the restoration of good feeling in a harem.

[1]See how the Chiang's great branches flow,
 Here leave its stream, and there back go!
 When first our lady came as bride,
 She would not have us by her side.
 She would not have us by her side;
 But soon a better course she tried. [p. 21]

[2]The islets part the Chiang's broad course,
 Which soon resumes its wonted force.
 When first as bride our lady came,
 To be with us she thought it shame.
 To be with us she thought it shame;
 Erelong she knew she was to blame.

[3]The T'o streams, from the river led,
 Flow devious, and rejoin its bed.
 When first we saw our lady here,
 She would not deign us to come near.
 She would not deign us to come near;
 But to a song she changed her sneer.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII

The Yeh Yu Ssu Chun; allusive and narrative. A virtuous young lady resists the attempts of a seducer.

[1]In the wild lies an antelope dead,
   Wrapt up in a mat of white grass.
 With her thoughts of the spring comes a maid,
   Whom a treacherous fop watches pass.

[2]Scrubby oaks grow the forest around;
   In the wild there lies stretched a dead deer,
 Close and tight with the white matting bound.
   As a gem see the maiden appear. [p. 22]

[3]"Hold thy hand, and beware, sir," she cries.
   "Be thou civil, and haste not to wrong.
 Meddle not with my handkerchief's ties.
   Do not make my dog bark. Pass along."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII

The Ho Pi Nung I; allusive. The marriage of one of the royal princesses.

[1]Of flowers in clusters large and gay,
 How bright the sparrow plum's display!
 In reverent harmony on glide
 The chariots of the royal bride.

[2]These flowers their clusters large and gay,
 As of the peach or plum display.
 This grandchild of the peaceful king
 Joy to the marquis' son shall bring.

[3]As threads of silk together twine,
 To form the angler's faithful line;
 So may the union close abide
 Of gallant prince and royal bride!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

XIV

The Tsou Yu; narrative. Celebrating some prince in the south for his benevolence.

[1]Five boars collect where grow the rushes rank and strong;
 He only sends one arrow all the five among.
             Oh! the Tsou Yu is he!

[2]Five pigs collect where grows the mugwort rank and strong;
 He only sends one arrow all the five among.
             Oh! the Tsou Yu is he!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK III. THE ODES OF P'EI

  

I

The Pai Chou; mostly narrative. An officer of worth bewails the neglect and contempt with which he was treated.

[1]It floats about, that boat of cypress wood,
   Now here, now there, as by the current borne.
 Nor rest nor sleep comes in my troubled mood;
   I suffer as when painful wound has torn
   The shrinking body. Thus I dwell forlorn, [p. 24]
   And aimless muse, my thoughts of sorrow full.
     I might with wine refresh my spirit worn;
   I might go forth, and, sauntering try to cool
 The fever of my heart; but grief holds sullen rule.

[2]My mind resembles not a mirror plate,
   Reflecting all th' impressions it receives.
 The good I love, the bad regard with hate;
   I only cherish whom my heart believes.
   Colleagues I have, but yet my spirit grieves,
 That on their honor I cannot depend.
     I speak, but my complaint no influence leaves
   Upon their hearts; with mine no feelings blend;
 With me in anger they, and fierce disdain contend.

[3]My mind is fixed, and cannot, like a stone,
   Be turned at will indifferently about;
 And what I think, to that, and that alone,
   I utterance give, alike within, without;
   Nor can like mat be rolled and carried out.
 With dignity, in presence of them all,
     My conduct marked, my goodness who shall scout?
   My foes I boldly challenge, great and small,
 If there be aught in me they can in question call. [p. 25]

[4]How full of trouble is my anxious heart!
   With hate the blatant herd of creatures mean
 Ceaseless pursue. Of their attacks the smart
   Keeps my mind in distress. Their venomed spleen
   Aye vents itself; and with insulting mien
 They vex my soul; and no one on my side
     A word will speak. Silent, alone, unseen,
   I think of my sad case; then opening wide
 My eyes, as if from sleep, I beat my breast, sore-tried.

[5]Thy disk, O sun, should ever be complete,
   While thine, O changing moon, doth wax and wane.
 But now our sun hath waned, weak and effete,
   And moons are ever full. My heart with pain
   Is firmly bound, and held in sorrow's chain,
 As to the body cleaves an unwashed dress.
     Silent I think of my sad case; in vain
   I try to find relief from my distress.
 Would I had wings to fly where ills no longer press!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

II

The Lu I, metaphorical and allusive. The complaint, sad but resigned, of a neglected wife.

[1]When the upper robe is green,
 With a yellow lining seen,
 There we have a certain token
 Right is wronged and order broken.
 How can sorrow from my heart
 In a case like this depart?

[2]Color green the robe displays;
 Lower garment yellow's blaze.
 Thus it is that favorite mean
 In the place of wife is seen.
 Vain the conflict with my grief;
 Memory denies relief.

[3]Yes, 'twas you the green who dyed,
 You who fed the favorite's pride.
 Anger rises in my heart,
 Pierces it as with a dart.
 But on ancient rules lean I,
 Lest to wrong my thoughts should fly. [p. 27]

[4]Fine or coarse, if thin the dress,
 Cold winds always cause distress.
 Hard my lot, my sorrow deep,
 But my thoughts in check I keep.
 Ancient story brings to mind
 Sufferers who were resigned.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Yen Yen; allusive and narrative. Chuang Chiang relates her grief at the departure of Tai Kuei, and celebrates that lady's virtue.

[1]With wings, not level, spread,
   About the swallows stir.
 Homeward the lady sped,
   And I escorted her.
 And when away from sight she passed,
 Like rain, my tears came falling fast.

[2]The swallows fly about,
   Now up, now down, they dart.
 She to her home set out,
   And I was loth to part.
 Her form when distance from me kept,
 Long time I stood, and silent wept. [p. 28]

[3]Above, beneath, then cry
   The flying swallows vent.
 Homeward she passed, and I
   Far with her southwards went.
 Her form when distance from me bore
 With bitter grief my heart was sore.

[4]This lady Chung loved me
   With feeling true and deep.
 Docile and good was she,
   Nor failed the light to keep.
 Unworthy me her deed and word
 Taught to respect our former lord.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Jih Yueh; narrative. Chuang Chiang complains of, and appeals against, the bad treatment which she received from her husband.

[1]  O sun so bright, O moon so fair,
     This lower earth that light,
   Behold this man, so bold to dare
     Transgress the ancient right.
 How shall he fix his restless mind?
 Would he not then to me be kind? [p. 29]

[2]  O sun, O moon, whose shining vault
     O'erspreads this earth below,
   Behold this man, with willful fault,
     Kindness refuse to show.
 His restless mind how shall he turn?
 He could not then my fondness spurn.

[3]  O sun, O moon, in upper sphere,
     That from the east come forth,
   This man speaks phrases sounding fair,
     But all of little worth.
 Were but his mind to goodness set,
 He could not me so much forget.

[4]  O sun so bright, O moon so fair,
     That from the east forth come;
   O parents dear, whose tender care
     Ne'er comes in this new home;
 If fixed his mind, 'gainst reason sage
 He could not thus my heart outrage.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

V

The Chung Feng; metaphorical and allusive. Chuang Chiang bemoans the supercilious treatment which she received from her husband.

[1]Fierce is the wind and cold;
     And such is he.
 Smiling he looks, and bold
     Speaks mockingly.
 Scornful and lewd his words,
     Haughty his smile.
 Bound is my heart with cords
     In sorrow's coil.

[2]As cloud of dust wind-blown,
     Just such is he.
 Ready he seems to own,
     And come to me.
 But he comes not nor goes,
     Stands in his pride.
 Long, long, with painful throes,
     Grieved I abide.

[3]Strong blew the wind; the cloud
     Hastened away.
 Soon dark again, the shroud
     Covers the day.
 I wake, and sleep no more
     Visits my eyes.
 His course I sad deplore,
     With heavy sighs. [p. 31]

[4]Cloudy the sky, and dark;
     The thunders roll.
 Such outward signs will mark
     My troubled soul.
 I wake, and sleep no more
     Comes to give rest.
 His course I sad deplore,
     In anguished breast.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The Chi Ku; narrative. Soldiers of Wei bewail their separation from their families, and anticipate that it will be final.

[1]List to the thunder and roll of the drum!
   See how we spring and brandish the dart!
 Some raise Ts'ao's walls; some do field work at home;
   But we to the southward lonely depart.

[2]Our chief, Sun Tzu-chung, agreement has made,
   Our forces to join with Chen and with Sung.
 When shall we back from this service be led?
   Our hearts are all sad, our courage unstrung. [p. 32]

[3]Here we are halting, and there we delay;
   Anon we soon lose our high-mettled steeds.
 The forest's gloom makes our steps go astray;
   Each thicket of trees our searching misleads.

[4]For death as for life, at home or abroad,
   We pledged to our wives our faithfulest word.
 Their hands clasped in ours, together we vowed,
   We'd live to old age in sweetest accord.

[5]This march to the south can end but in ill;
   Oh! never shall we our wives again meet.
 The word that we pledged we cannot fulfill;
   Us home returning they never will greet.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The K'ai Feng; metaphorical and allusive. Seven sons of some family in Wei blame themselves for the restless unhappiness of their mother.

[1]On that jujube tree the wind,
 From the south, blows soft and kind,
 Till each twig, in inmost place,
 Swells with life, and shines with grace.
 O how great the toil and care
 'Twas our mother's lot to bear! [p. 33]

[2]On that jujube tree the wind,
 From the south, blows soft and kind,
 Till its branches all are seen
 Bright and rich in living green.
 Wise our mother is and good;
 Goodness we have never showed.

[3]See that cool and crystal spring,
 How its waters comfort bring,
 Welling forth the city near,
 All who dwell in Chun to cheer!
 Pained our mother is and tried,
 As if help we seven denied.

[4]In their yellow plumage bright,
 Lovely gleam those birds to sight,
 And their notes fall on the ear,
 Rich and, oh! so sweet to hear.
 Seven sons we, without the art
 To compose our mother's heart!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

VIII

The Hsiung Chih; allusive and narrative. A wife deplores the absence of her husband, and celebrates his virtue.

[1]Away the startled pheasant flies,
   With lazy movement of his wings.
 Borne was my heart's lord from my eyes;--
   What pain the separation brings!

[2]The pheasant, though no more in view,
   His cry, below, above, forth sends.
 Alas! my princely lord, 'tis you,--
   Your absence, that my bosom rends.

[3]At sun and moon I sit and gaze,
   In converse with my troubled heart.
 Far, far from me my husband stays!
   When will he come to heal its smart?

[4]Ye princely men, who with him mate,
   Say, mark ye not his virtuous way.
 His rule is--covet nought, none hate;--
   How can his steps from goodness stray?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

IX

The P'ao Yu K'u Yeh, allusive and narrative. Against the licentious manners of Wei.

[1]Its bitter leaves still hang upon the gourd;
 Deep is the water where we cross the ford.
 Conditions these which well might make them pause,
 But bent are they to break the heavenly laws!
 "We'll cross," they say; "if deep, clothes on go through;
 If shallow, holding up our clothes will do."

[2]To overflowing full the ford appears;
 The female pheasant's cry salutes their ears.
 Now will they pause, nor tempt the foaming stream.
 In vain the warning; more intent they seem.
 "The depth," they say, "our axles will not wet,
 And by her cry the pheasant calls her mate."

[3]In early morn, when 'gins to dawn the day,
 In spring, the ice not yet dissolved away,
 The gentleman, who home his wife would bring,
 Presents the goose, whose notes harmonious ring.
 Such is the rule that virtue's law lays down;
 And such the rule which I will ever own. [p. 36]

[4]The boatman beckons, waving oft his hand;
 And with him others cross, but I here stand.
 Others may cross, but not with them I go;
 I wait my friend, the proper time to show.
 I dare not rush to gratify mere lust;
 By virtue's law my lusts control I must.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Ku Feng; metaphorical, allusive, and narrative. The plaint of a wife supplanted by another, and rejected by her husband.

[1]    The east wind gently blows,
     With cloudy skies and rain.
 'Twixt man and wife should ne'er be strife,
     But harmony obtain.
     Radish and mustard plants
     Are used, though some be poor;
 While my good name is free from blame,
     Don't thrust me from your door.

[2]    I go along the road,
     Slow, with reluctant heart.
 Your escort lame to door but came,
     There glad from me to part. [p. 37]
     Sow thistle, bitter called,
     As shepherd's-purse is sweet;
 With your new mate you feast elate,
     As joyous brothers meet.

[3]    Part clear, the stream of Ching
     Is foul beside the Wei.
 You feast elate with your new mate,
     And take no heed of me.
     Loose mate, avoid my dam,
     Nor dare my basket move!
 Person slighted, life all blighted,
     What can the future prove?

[4]    The water deep, in boat,
     Or raft-sustained, I'd go;
 And where the stream did narrow seem,
     I dived or breasted through.
     I labored to increase
     Our means, or great or small;
     When 'mong friends near, death did appear,
 On knees to help I'd crawl. [p. 38]

[5]    No cherishing you give,
     I'm hostile in your eyes.
 As peddler's wares for which none cares,
     My virtues you despise.
     When poverty was nigh,
     I strove our means to spare;
 You, now rich grown, me scorn to own;
     To poison me compare.

[6]    The stores for winter piled.
     Are all unprized in spring.
 So now, elate with your new mate,
     Myself away you fling.
     Your cool disdain for me
     A bitter anguish hath.
 The early time, our love's sweet prime,
     In you wakes only wrath.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

The Shih Wei; narrative. The officers of some state, who were refugees and in distress in Wei, exhort their ruler to return with them.

[1]At this low ebb! At this low ebb!
   Why not, O prince, return to Li? [p. 39]
 But for your sake, why bide we here,
   Houseless beneath the dew to be?

[2]At this low ebb! At this low ebb!
   Why not to Li go back again?
 But for your person, how should we
   Here in the mire so long have lain?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII

The Mao Ch'iu; allusive and narrative. The refugee ministers of Li complain of those of Wei for not assisting them.

[1]  On that high sloping mound,
     With joints now parted wide,
   The plants of dolichos
     Show here we long abide.
 Wei's nobles, whom we uncles style,
 Why thus delay on us to smile?

[2]  They rest and do not stir;--
     Do they allies expect?
   Wherefore protract the time?
     Why us so much neglect?
 Some reason they could surely plead
 For conduct, strange in this our need. [p. 40]

[3]  In chariots of the west,
     Hither from danger borne,
   In Wei we live depressed,
     Our fox furs frayed and worn.
 Ye nobles, uncles, sooth to say,
 For us no sympathy display.

[4]  A remnant small of Li,
     Driven from our proper home;
   Children dispersed, we hoped
     That help from Wei would come.
 Alas! though grand the robes you wear,
 You stop your ears against our prayer.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII

The Chien Hsi; narrative and allusive. Half in scorn, half in sorrow, an officer of Wei tells of the mean services in which he was employed.

[1]With mind indifferent, things I easy take.
 In every dance I prompt appearance make:--
 Then, when the sun is at his topmost height;
 There, in the place that courts the public sight. [p. 41]

[2]With figure large I in the courtyard dance.
 And the duke smiles, when he beholds me prance.
 A tiger's strength I have; the steeds swift bound;
 The reins as ribbons in my hands are found.

[3]See how I hold the flute in my left hand;
 In right the pheasant's plume, waved like a wand;
 With visage red, where rouge you think to trace,
 While the duke pleased, sends down the cup of grace!

[4]Hazels on hills; the ling in meadow damp;--
 Each has its place, while I'm a slighted scamp.
 My thoughts go back to th' early days of Chou,
 And muse upon its chiefs, not equaled now.
 O noble chiefs, who then the west adorned,
 Would ye have thus neglected me and scorned?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIV

The Ch'uan Shui; allusive and narrative. A daughter of the house of Wei, married in another state, expresses her longing to revisit Wei.

[1]As the streamlet from its spring
   Flows into the river Ch'i,
 So my daily thoughts on wing [p. 42]
   Fly, my native Wei, to thee;
 For I long with cousins there
 Counsel sweet and love to share.

[2]For a night, at Tzu I stayed;
   Drank the cup to Ni when come;
 Parents, brothers, farewell bade;--
   Such the fate on leaving home.
 Parents are not now alive;
 Aunts and sister still survive.

[3]Lo! I hasten home again,
   Let the rushing chariot wheel
 Pause at Kan, and part at Yen,
   Pebbles flashing to its steel.
 Does my heart go far astray,
 Panting for its native Wei?

[4]By the Fei-ch'uan's winding stream
   Daily sighing thought will stray.
 Hsu and Ts'ao in memory gleam,
   Broken glints of childhood's day.
 Spring, my horses! Speed, my wheels!
 Gone the grief my bosom feels!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

XV

The Pei Men; metaphorical and narrative. An officer of Wei sets forth, rather jestingly, his hard lot, and his silence under it in submission to Heaven.

[1]My way leads forth by the gate on the north;
   My heart is full of woe.
 I hav'n't a cent, begged, stolen, or lent,
   And friends forget me so.
 So let it be! 'tis Heaven's decree.
 What can I say,--a poor fellow like me?

[2]The king has his throne, sans sorrow or moan;
   On me fall all his cares,
 And when I come home, resolved not to roam,
   Each one indignant stares.
 So let it be! 'tis Heaven's decree.
 What can I say,--a poor fellow like me?

[3]Each thing of the king, and the fate of the state,
   On me come more and more.
 And when, sad and worn, I come back forlorn,
   They thrust me from the door.
 So let it be! 'tis Heaven's decree.
 What can I say,--a poor fellow like me?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

XVI

The Pei Feng; metaphorical and narrative. Some one of Wei presses his friends to leave the country with him at once, in consequence of the prevailing oppression and misery.

[1]As when the north winds keenly blow,.
 And all around fast falls the snow,
 The source of pain and suffering great,
 So now it is in Wei's poor state.
   Let us join hands and haste away,
     My friends and lovers all.
   'Tis not a time will brook delay;
     Things for prompt action call.

[2]As when the north winds whistle shrill,
 And drifting snows each hollow fill,
 The source of pain and suffering great,
 So now it is in Wei's poor state.
   Let us join hands, and leave for aye,
     My friends and lovers all,
   'Tis not a time will brook delay;
     Things for prompt action call.

[3]We look for red, and foxes meet;
 For black, and crows our vision greet.
 The creatures, both of omen bad,
 Well suit the state of Wei so sad. [p. 45]
   Let us join hands and mount our cars,
     My friends and lovers all.
   No time remains for wordy jars;
     Things for prompt action call.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVII

The Ching Nu; narrative. A gentleman deplores his disappointment in not being met by a lady according to engagement, and celebrates her gifts and beauty.

[1]O sweet maiden, so fair and retiring,
   At the corner I'm waiting for you;
 And I'm scratching my head, and inquiring
   What on earth it were best I should do.

[2]Oh! the maiden, so handsome and coy,
   For a pledge gave a slim rosy reed.
 Than the reed is she brighter, my joy;
   On her loveliness how my thoughts feed!

[3]In the pastures a t'i blade she sought,
   And she gave it, so elegant, rare.
 Oh! the grass does not dwell in my thought,
   But the donor, more elegant, fair.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

XVIII

The Hsin T'ai; allusive and narrative. Satirizing the marriage of Duke Hsuan and Hsuan Chiang.

[1]The New tower, fresh and bright, they show,
 Where its vast volume rolls the Ho;--
     For bride a palace rare.
 To Wei she came, a mate to find;
 She sought a husband young and kind,
     But found this misshaped bear.

[2]There stands the New tower grand and high,
 Where with still stream the Ho flows by;--
     For bride a palace rare.
 To Wei she came, a mate to find;
 She sought a husband young and kind,
     But found this misshaped bear.

[3]As when the net for fish they set,
 And lo! a goose ensnared they get,
     They stamp with sudden ire;
 So might she stamp who came to wed
 The genial son, and in his stead
     Got but the humpbacked sire.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

  

XIX

The Erh Tsu Ch'eng Chou; narrative. Surmises as to the death of two sons of Duke Hsuan.

[1]The two youths went into their boats,
 Whose shadow on the water floats.
     What evil to them came?
 Anxious and wondering, long we muse;
 Our hearts are tossed with tossing views.
     Some one must be to blame.

[2]Into their boats the two youths passed,
 And on the stream were carried fast.
     What was there to alarm?
 With longing thought we fain would trace,
 The secret of their ill-starred race.
     Did they not come to harm?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

BOOK IV. THE ODES OF YUNG

  

I

The Po Chou; allusive. Protest of a widow against being urged to marry again.

[1]In the mid Ho that cypress boat floats free,
 While friends a second marriage press on me.
 I see my husband's youthful forehead there,
 And on it the twin tufts of falling hair.
 Rather than wed again I'll die, I swear!
 O mother dear, O Heaven supreme, why should
 You not allow my vow, and aid my purpose good?

[2]Near to the bank that cypress boat floats free,
 While friends a second marriage press on me.
 He was my only one, with forehead fair,
 And on it the twin tufts of falling hair.
 Till death to shun the evil thing I swear!
 O mother dear, O Heaven supreme, why should
 You not allow my vow, and aid my purpose good?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

II

The Ch'iang Yu T'zu; allusive. The things done in the harem of the palace of Wei were too shameful to be told.

[1]As grows on wall the Tribulus,
   And 'gainst the brush retains its hold;
 So let what's in the harem done
   By us without remain untold.
 What must be told would tongue defile
 With things unfit for speech, and vile.

[2]As grows on wall the Tribulus,
   Which vainly to remove we try;
 So let what's in the harem done
   By us without unspoken lie.
 If on details we condescend,
 The narrative would have no end.

[3]As grows on wall the Tribulus,
   And cannot in the sheaf be tied;
 So let what's in the harem done
   By us without untouched abide.
 If truth were in the tale laid bare,
 How foul a scene were painted there!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

III

The Chun Tzu Chieh Lao; narrative. Contrast between the beauty and splendor of Hsuan Chiang and her viciousness.

[1]Pledged to her husband, his alone to be;
   With headdress high, cross pins, and jewels rare;
 Her movements graceful, elegant, and free;
   As mountain stately, with imposing air;
   Majestic as a river, large and fair;
 Her robes the various figured forms display.
   Fit seems it she such pictured robes should wear!
 But, lady, vain is all your grand array;
 No claim to it can you, in virtue wanting, lay.

[2]Her pheasant-figured robe resplendent shines,
   Her hair, jet-black, cloudlike surmounts her head;
 Her own, no false locks with it she entwines.
   Then see her ear plugs, of the precious jade;
   Her comb pin, of the finest ivory made;
 And her high forehead, shining pure and white. [p. 51]
   Like visitant come down from heaven, arrayed
 In fashion thus, for sacrificial rite,--
 Well may we goddess call her, and no earthly wight.

[3]At court now see her, on occasions great,
   To meet the ruler, or guests entertain!
 As rich and splendid is her robe of state,
   With muslin 'neath it of the finest grain,
   Which takes the place of warmer garment plain.
 Her eyes are clear, with forehead broad and high,
   Which the full temples on each side sustain.
 With woman such as this how few can vie!
 The beauty of the land, she charms the gazing eye!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Sang-chung; narrative. A. gentleman boasts of his intimacy and intrigues with various noble ladies.

[1]The gold thread to gather I'm going,
   Where in Wei it spreads over the tree;
 But my thoughts forever are flowing
   To the beauty who captive holds me,-- [p. 52]
 To the eldest Chiang. Yes, it is she!
   Freely did she agree in Sang-chung,
   She would come to me here in Shang-kung,
 And then company keep with me on to the Ch'i.

[2]For the wheat about Wei I'm going
   To the north where it grows in each part.
 But my thoughts forever are flowing
   To the beauty who rules in my heart,--
 To the eldest I. Yes, it is she!
   Freely did she agree in Sang-chung,
   She would come to me here in Shang-kung,
 And then company keep with me on to the Ch'i.

[3]For the mustard plant I am going
   Where in Wei it grows over the east.
 But my thoughts forever are flowing
   To the beauty on whose love I feast,--
 To the eldest Yung. Yes, it is she!
   Freely did she agree in Sang-chung,
   She would come to me here in Shang-kung,
 And then company keep with me on to the Ch'i.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

V

The Shun Chih Pen Pen; allusive. Against Hsuan Chiang and Chao Po, as worse than beasts.

[1]How bold the quails together rush,
   Each fighting for his mate!
 How strong the magpies, battling fierce
   Upon the same debate!
 This man, without a trait that's good,
   Is stained by vicious crime;
 Yet him as brother I regard:--
   Alas! woe worth the time!

[2]How strong the magpies, battling fierce,
   Each one to keep his mate!
 How fierce the quails together rush,
   Upon the same debate!
 This woman, with no trait that's good,
   Is stained by vicious crime,
 Yet her I hail as marchioness:--
   Alas! woe worth the time!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The Ting Chih Fang Chung; narrative. The praise of Duke Wen: his diligence, foresight, sympathy with the people, and prosperity.

[1]At dusk the Ting star passed on to the west,
 And field work for the year was laid to rest.
 At Ch'u the duke his palace took in hand, [p. 54]
 And by the sun fixed how its walls should stand.
 All round about he planted many a tree,--
 Hazels and chestnuts, t'ung and tzu, and i,
 And varnish trees. The grove would yield erelong
 Abundant wood for lutes, to aid the voice of song.

[2]He climbed those ruined walls, thence to inspect
 The site he wished for Ch'u-ch'iu to select.
 His glance the land from Ch'u to T'ang mapped out
 Noting the hills and smaller heights about,
 He then came down, the mulberry trees to view,
 And judged the soil, and learned its nature true.
 These things once done, he asked the tortoise shell,
 Answer auspicious got,--and all succeeded well.

[3]Thereafter, when there fell the copious showers,
 He often called his groom, and in the hours
 Of early dawn afield by starlight drove
 Among the laborers, and to cheer them strove.
 And many ways he had, not this alone,
 In which his character distinguished shone,
 To duty bound, assiduous in his cares;--
 And blessing came,--three thousand steeds and mares.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

VII

The Ti Tung; metaphorical and narrative. Against lewd connections.

[1]A rainbow in the east invites the gaze,
 But none a finger to it dares to raise.
 All view it with dislike; but viler she,
 Who hastes to marry 'gainst propriety!
 When from their early homes young women go,
 Parents and brothers they nigh cease to know.
 Important rules for step like this are made,
 And to surly rules obedience should be paid.

[2]When rainbows in the west at morn appear,
 By morning's close the sky from rain is clear;
 So fleeting are the joys of lawless love;
 Licentious pleasures evanescent prove.
 When from their early homes young women go,
 Parents and brothers they nigh cease to know.
 Important rules for step like this are made,
 And to such rules obedience should be paid.

[3]Ah! think of this young girl whose willful heart
 Is bent on marriage as her only part.
 She wrongs herself, to the right course untrue,
 Which every virtuous woman should pursue. [p. 56]
 She blames her lot, and, wanton, will not own
 Heaven's ordering of it on the parents thrown.
 For marriage ties the wisest rules are made,
 And to such rules obedience should be paid.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Hsiang Shu; allusive. A man without propriety is not equal to a rat.

[1]Behold a rat! Its skin has glossy sheen!
 Then mark that man's demeanor, poor and mean!
 Bearing of bearing void!--what means it? This:--
 'Twere better death than longer life were his!

[2]Behold a rat! Its teeth can sharply bite!
 Then mark deportment careless of what's right!
 Manners thus careless of what's right declare
 'Twere well the man himself for death prepare.

[3]Behold a rat! How small its limbs, and fine!
 Then mark the course that scorns the proper line!
 Propriety's neglect may well provoke
 A wish the man would quickly court death's stroke.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

IX

The Kan Mao; narrative. The zeal of the officers of Wei to welcome men of worth.

[1]Where Chun's suburbs lie remote,
 From the staffs the oxtails float.
 High the staffs, and each one bright
 With its silken bandlets white!
 Four cars drawn by steeds of fire
 Welcome guest whom. all desire.
 Admirable, what will he
 Give to meet such courtesy?

[2]In Chun's suburbs near the town,
 Fly the falcon banners, blown
 From the staffs that rise around,
 All with bands of white silk bound.
 Five cars drawn by horses strong
 Wait the guest who comes along.
 Courteous, worthy,--what shall he
 Pay for all this courtesy?

[3]Now the walls of Chun we see;
 Feather'd streamers flutter free
 From the flagstaffs strong and stout,
 "Girt by silken bands about. [p. 58]
 Six cars drawn by steeds of fame
 Well attest the guest's high name.
 Sage profound, what can he say
 That such welcome will repay?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Tsai Ch'ih; narrative. The baroness Mu of Hsu complains of not being allowed to go to Wei to condole with the marquis on the desolation of his state, and appeal to some great Powers on its behalf.

[1]  I wished to urge my steeds, and drive
     To Wei, to share my brother's grief,
   Not slacking till we should arrive
     And halt at Ts'ao, and find relief.
 Another went, o'er hill, through stream, cross plain;
 Here in deep sorrow I must still remain.

[2]What I wished for you denied;
 Here in Hsu I must abide.
 And in your decision's spite
 I must hold my purpose right. [p. 59]
 You, unkind, my purpose spurn;--
 Not to Wei can I return.
 I must slight your views as nought,
 For I cannot quench my thought.

[3]  I'll climb the sides of that steep mound,
     And pluck the lilies growing there.
   Thoughts in my woman's heart abound,
     And every thought might blossom bear.
 In Hsu the people all my purpose blame;
 Their childish, hasty thoughts cause me no shame.

[4]I would through the land have gone,
 Passed where fields of rich wheat shone,
 Prayer have made to Ch'i's great state,
 Help have sought for Wei's sore strait.
 Nobles who o'er Wei preside,
 Zeal like this you should not chide.
 Hundreds are the plans you make;
 Best the course I wished to take!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

  

BOOK V. THE ODES OF WEI

  

I

The Ch'i Ao; allusive. The praise of Duke Wu--his assiduous cultivation of himself; his dignity; his accomplishments.

[1]How rich the clumps of green bamboo,
   Around each cove of Ch'i!
 They lead my thoughts to our Duke Wu;--
   Of winning grace is he!
 As knife and file make smooth the bone,
 As jade by chisel wrought and stone,
   Is stamp upon him set.
 Grave and of dignity serene;
 With force of will as plainly seen;
 Accomplished, elegant in mien;
   Him we can ne'er forget.

[2]Strong grow the clumps of green bamboo,
   Around each cove of Ch'i.
 They lead my thoughts to our Duke Wu;--
   Of winning grace is he!
 His ear plugs are of pebbles fine; [p. 61]
 And gems like stars bright glittering shine,
   All o'er his cap of state.
 Grave and of dignity serene;
 With force of will as plainly seen;
 Accomplished, elegant in mien;
   Him we can ne'er forget.

[3]How thick the clumps of green bamboo,
   Around each cove of Ch'i.
 They lead my thoughts to our Duke Wu;--
   Of winning grace is he!
 Pure as the finest tin or gold,
 And as the scepter princes hold
   So strong, while mild in mood!
 See him in car with lofty side,
 Magnanimous and free from pride.
 His words to jest are oft allied,
   But never are they rude.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

II

The K'ao P'an; narrative. A happy recluse.

[1]By the stream in the vale his hut he has reared,
   That man tall and stout, looking free from all cares.
 He lives all alone; he sleeps, wakes, and then talks;--
   And ne'er to forget what he prizes, he swears.

[2]In the bend of the mound his hut he has reared,
   That man tall and stout, gay and lightsome of heart.
 He lives all alone; he sleeps, wakes, and then sings;--
   He swears from this spot he will never depart.

[3]There on that level height his hut he has reared,
   That man tall and stout, who himself so contains.
 He lives all alone; he sleeps, wakes, sleeps again;--
   He swears he'll ne'er tell what in his mind reigns.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 63]

  

III

The Shih Jen; narrative. Chuang Chiang as she appeared on her arrival in Wei. Her great connections; her beauty; her equipage; the riches of Ch'i.

[1]  The lady was of figure large and tall.
     In broidered robe, hid 'neath a garment plain,
   A bride, she came from Ch'i's high palace hall,
     In Wei, as wife of our great lord to reign.
     'Gainst her of no inferior birth the stain
   Could be alleged, sister of Ch'i's great heir.
     Of other grand alliances a train
   She could display, for her two sisters fair
 The highest dignity in Hsing and T'an did wear.

[2]  Like blades of white grass were her fingers fine;
     Her skin like purest ointment hard congealed;
   Her neck like larvae on the tree which shine
     So long and white. Her opening lips revealed
     Her even teeth, behind their screen concealed,
   Like melon seeds. Her front cicada-square,
   Displayed her eyebrows curved upon its field,
     Like horns of silkworm moth; and dimples rare,
 With dark and lucid eyes, showed face beyond compare. [p. 64]

[3]  When, on her coming, near the city wall,
     She halted in the cultured fields, each eye
   Viewed with delight her figure large and tall.
     Her team of mettled steeds their bits tossed high,
   Round which was twined red cloth in rich supply.
   Then in her carriage she went on in state,
    Its pheasant screens oft followed by the cry,
   "Early retire from court, ye nobles great;
 The marquis leave unfired, to cherish this fit mate."

[4]  Where out of Ch'i into our state she passed,
     Its banks all green with rush and sedges rank,
   Northwards the Ho rolled on the waters vast
     Of its majestic stream, while in it sank
     With plashing sound the nets, which dripping, drank,
   The toiling fishers dropt into the wave,
     'Mong shoals of sturgeon, both the large and lank.
   Her sister ladies shone in dresses brave,
 And martial looked the officers, who escort gave.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

IV

The Meng; narrative, with the other elements interspersed. A woman, who had formed an improper connection, now cast off, relates and bemoans her sad case.

[1]A simple-looking lad you seemed,
   When first you met my eye,
 By most a traveling merchant deemed,
   Raw silk for cloth to buy.
 But your true aim was to propose
   That I should go with you;
 And through the Ch'i I went quite free,
   Until we reached Tun-ch'iu.
 'Twas then I said, "It is not I,
   Who would the time delay;
 Your go-between I have not seen,
   I must not run away.
 I pray, sir, do not angry be;
   In autumn be the day."

[2]When autumn came, then climbed I oft
   That ruined wall, and gazed
 Towards Fu-kuan, my heart all soft,
   With expectation raised. [p. 66]
 When you came not, my hapless lot
   With streams of tears I mourned.
 At last your longed-for form I saw,
   And tears to smiles were turned.
 With words I strove to tell my love,
   While you averment made
 That shell and seeds good answer gave
   "No more delay," I said.
 "Your carriage bring; I'll go at once,
   My goods all in it laid."

[3]When on the mulberry tree the leaves
   All hang in glossy state,
 The sight is fair. O dove, beware;
   Its fruits intoxicate.
 Ah! thou, young maiden, too wilt find
   Cause for repentance deep,
 If, by a lover's arts seduced,
   Thyself thou fail to keep.
 A gentleman who hastes to prove
   The joys of lawless love,
 For what is done may still atone;
   To thee they'll fatal prove.
 Thou'lt try in vain excuse to feign,
   Lost like the foolish dove. [p. 67]

[4]When sheds its leaves the mulberry tree,
   All yellow on the ground,
 And sear they lie. Such fate have I
   Through my rash conduct found.
 Three years with you in poverty
   And struggles hard I've passed;
 And now with carriage curtains wet,
   Through flooded Ch'i. I haste.
 I always was the same, but you
   A double mind have shown.
 'Tis you, sir, base, the right transgress;
   Your conduct I have known.
 Aye changing with your moods of mind,
   And reckless of my moan.

[5]Three years of life I was your wife,
   And labored in your house;
 I early rose, late sought repose,
   And so fulfilled my vows.
 I never did, one morning's space,
   My willing work suspend, [p. 68]
 But me thus cruelly you treat,
   And from your dwelling send.
 All this my brothers will not own,
   At me they'll only jeer,
 And say I reap as I have sown;
   Reply they will not hear.
 In heart I groan, and sad bemoan
   My fate with many a tear.

[6]Together were we to grow old;--
   Old now, you make me pine.
 The Ch'i aye flows within its banks,
   Its shores the lake confine.
 But you know neither bank nor shore,
   Your passions ne'er denied.
 Back to my happy girlhood's time,
   With hair in knot still tied,
 I wildly go; I'll never know
   Its smiles and chat again.
 To me you clearly swore the faith,
   Which now to break you're fain.
 Could I foresee so false you'd be?
   And now regret is vain.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

V

The Chu Kan; narrative. A daughter of the house of Wei, married in another state, expresses her longing to revisit Wei.

[1]With long and tapering rods,
   You angle in the Ch'i.
 I think of you, dear friends,
   Here far removed from Wei.

[2]Ch'uan-yuan upon the left,
   Ch'i on the right I view.
 But married far away,
   To home I bade adieu.

[3]Those streams, this on the right,
   That on the left, appear.
 The laugh that shows your teeth,
   Your tinkling gems, I hear.

[4]I watch the cedar oars
   On Ch'i, and boats of pine.
 O might I travel there,
   And soothe this heart of mine!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

VI

The Huan Lan; allusive. Picture of a conceited young man of rank.

[1]Feeble as branch of sparrow gourd, this youth,
 Wears spike at girdle, as if he, forsooth,
 Were quite a man; but though the spike he wears,
 He knows not us at whom he proudly stares.
 How easy and conceited is his mien!
 How drop his girdle ends, full jaunty seen!

[2]Like leaf of sparrow gourd, that coxcomb young,
 With archer's thimble at his girdle hung!
 He wears the thimble, but he's not the swell
 To lord it over us who know him well.
 How easy and conceited is his mien!
 How drop his girdle ends, full jaunty seen!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Ho Kuang; narrative. Other things more difficult to overcome than distance may keep one from a place.

[1]They tell me that the Ho is wide;--
   With a few reeds I could cross through.
 They tell me Sung is distant far;--
   Rising on tiptoe Sung I view. [p. 71]

[2]They tell me that the Ho is wide;--
   A little boat it will not bear.
 They tell me Sung is distant far;--
   Ere morning fades I might be there.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Po Hsi; narrative and metaphorical. A wife mourns over the protracted absence of her husband on the king's service.

[1]How martial looks my noble man,
   The hero of the land!
 See him in chariot lead the van,
   His halberd in his hand!

[2]Since eastward on his course he sped,
   My hair neglected flies.
 I might anoint and wash my head,
   But not to meet his eyes.

[3]For rain, for rain, the people cry,
   But brightly shines the sun;
 So for my absent lord long I,
   Head pained, and heart undone. [p. 72]

[4]Where shall I Lethe's lily find,
   Behind my house to set?
 I think of him with aching mind,
   For how can I forget?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Yu Hu; metaphorical. A woman expresses her desire for a husband.

[1]Lonely, suspicious, is that fox,
   At that dame cross the Ch'i.
 Like him that man, for whom I'm sad!
   No lower dress has he.

[2]Lonely, suspicious, is that fox,
   At that deep ford of Ch'i.
 Like him that man, for whom I'm sad!
   No girdle sash has he!

[3]Lonely, suspicious, is that fox,
   There, on the bank of Ch'i.
 Like him that man, for whom I'm sad!
   No clothes at all has he!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

X

The Mu Kua; metaphorical. Small gifts of kindness should be responded to with greater; while friendship is more than any gift.

[1]A tree gourd they gave me in compliment,
   And I in return gave a lovely chu gem,
 'Twas not in return for the compliment;--
   I wished to make lasting my friendship with them.

[2]A peach they presented in compliment,
   And I in return gave a lovely yao gem.
 'Twas not in return for the compliment;--
   I wished to make lasting my friendship with them.

[3]A plum they presented in compliment,
   And I in return gave a lovely ch'i stone.
 'Twas not in return for the compliment;--
   Our friendship to knit was my motive alone.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 74]

  

BOOK VI. THE ODES OF THE ROYAL DOMAIN

  

I

The Shu Li; narrative. An officer describes his melancholy and reflections on seeing the desolation of the old capital of Chou.

[1]Where the palaces rose grand,
 When Chou nobly ruled the land,
 Millets, some with drooping head,
 Some, just coming into blade,
 All around abundant grew.
 Slow the fields I wandered through,
 Moved in heart such sight to view.
 Friends who knew me understood.
 What induced my saddened mood.
 Those who did not know me said,
 There I search for something made.
 O thou azure Heaven, remote,
 Who this desolation wrought?

[2]Where the palaces rose grand,
 When Chou nobly ruled the land,
 Millets, drooping, heavy here,
 There just coming into ear,
 All around abundant grew. [p. 75]
 Slow the fields I wandered through,
 Drunk with grief such sights to view.
 Friends who knew me understood
 What induced my saddened mood.
 Those who did not know me said,
 There I search for something made.
 O thou azure Heaven, remote,
 Who this desolation wrought?

[3]Where the palaces rose grand,
 When Chou nobly ruled the land,
 Millets, heavy, drooping low,
 Some the bursting grain that show,
 All around abundant grew.
 Slow the fields I wandered through,
 Breath nigh stopt such scene to view.
 Friends who knew me understood
 What induced my saddened mood.
 Those who did not know me said,
 There I search for something made.
 O thou azure Heaven, remote,
 Who this desolation wrought?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

II. Scotice

The Chun Tzu Yu Yi; narrative. The feelings of a wife on the prolonged absence of her husband on service, and her longing for his return.

[1]The gudeman's awa, for to fecht wi' the stranger,
   An' when he'll be back, oh! my hert canna tell.
 The hens gae to reist, an' the beests to their manger,
   As hameward they wend frae their park on the hill.
     But hoo can I, thus left alane,
     Help thinking o' my man that's game?

[2]The gudeman's awa, for to fecht wi' the stranger,
   An' lang will it be ere he see his fireside.
   The hens gae to reist, an' the beests to their manger,
 As the slantin' sunbeams throu the forest trees glide,
     Heaven kens the lanesome things I think.
     Heaven sen' my man his meat an' drink!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

  

III. Scotice

The Chun Tzu Yang Yang; narrative. The husband's satisfaction, and the wife's joy, on his return.

[1]The gudeman's come hame, an' his face weers a bloom,
   His organ o' reeds he hads in his left han';
 An' his richt han' ca's me to come till his room:--
   It's siccan a joy; it's mair nor I can stan'.

[2]The gudeman's come hame, an' he's pleesed I'll engage,
   His gran' fether screen he hads in his left han';
 An' his richt han' ca's me to come till the stage:--
   It's siccan a joy; it's mair nor I can stan'.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Yang Chih Shui; allusive. The troops of Chou, kept on duty in Shin, murmur at their separation from their families.

[1]    Fretted the waters seem,
     Yet gently flows the stream;--
 Unable a fagot to bear.
     Guarding Shin here we roam,
     Wives and children at home,
 All absent our toils who should share. [p. 78]
     We think of them ever;
     Thought parts from them never;--
 What month shall we homeward repair?

[2]    Fretted the waters seem,
     Yet gently flows the stream;--
 A bundle of thorns twill not bear.
     Guarding Fu here we roam,
     Wives and children at home,
 All absent our toils who should share.
     We think of them ever;
     Thought parts from them never;--
 What month shall we homeward repair?

[3]    Fretted the waters seem,
     Yet gently flows the stream;
 The reed bundle powerless to bear.
     Guarding Hsu here we roam,
     Wives and children at home,
 All absent our toils who should share.
     We think of them ever;
     Thought parts from them never;--
 What month shall we homeward repair?

[p. 79]

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Chung Ku Yu T'ui; allusive. The sad case of a woman forced to separate from her husband by the pressure of famine.

[1]The valleys show the motherwort,
   Now scorched in each dry spot.
 Behold a wife driven forth from home,
   Beneath hard famine's lot!
 She sadly sighs, she sadly sighs,
 From husband torn and dearest ties.

[2]The valleys show the motherwort,
   Now scorched where tall it rose.
 Behold a wife driven forth from home,
   By stern misfortune's blows!
 We hear her groans, we hear her groans,
 As she her hapless fate bemoans.

[3]The valleys show the motherwort,
   Scorched in each dampest place.
 Behold a wife driven forth from home--
   Bewail in vain her ease!
 Her tears aye flow, her tears aye flow;
 How'er she grieve, ne'er ends her woe!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

  

VI

The T'u Yuan; metaphorical. An officer of Chou declares his weariness of life because of the growing miseries of the state, and of the way in which men of principle suffered, while worthless men escaped.

[1]  Caught is the pheasant in the net,
   That vainly for the hare is set.
   So those who duty promptly do
   Find cause their loyal zeal to rue,
   While one whose ends are base and mean
   Contrives from harm himself to screen.
   When I was in my youthful prime,
   Without commotion passed the time;
   But since those happy days were o'er,
   Numerous the ills that press us sore:--
 I would that I might sleep, and rise no more!

[2]  Caught is the pheasant in the snare,
   Avoided by the cautious hare.
   So those who duty promptly do
   Find cause their loyal zeal to rue,
   While one whose ends are base and mean
   Contrives from harm himself to screen.
   When I was in my youthful prime,
   No strange events e'er marked the time;
   But now those days have passed away,
   And sorrows meet us day by day:--
 I would that I might sleep, and sleep for aye! [p. 81]

[3]  Into the trap the pheasant flies,
   Which the hare shuns with cautious eyes.
   So those who duty promptly do
   Find cause their loyal zeal to rue,
   While one whose ends are base and mean
   Contrives from harm himself to screen.
   When I was in my youthful prime,
   No toilsome tasks distressed the time;
   But in these latter days of life,
   Our miseries are waxen rife:
 O for the sleep unbroke by sound of strife!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Ko Lei; allusive. A wanderer from Chou, separated from his kin, mourns over his lot.

[1]Around the creepers thickly spread,
   On the borders of the Ho.
 My native soil no more I tread;
   Into exile forth I go.
     Far removed from kindred all,
     Father I a stranger call.
     Though so called, he does not brook,
     Kindly upon me to look.

[2]Around the creepers thickly spread,
   On the green banks of the Ho. [p. 82]
 My native soil no more I tread;
   Into exile forth I go.
     Far removed from kindred all,
     Mother I a stranger call.
     Though so called, she does not deign
     Me as child to entertain.

[3]Around the creepers thickly spread,
   On the bank lips of the Ho.
 My native soil no more I tread;
   Into exile forth I go.
     Far from all who bear my name,
     Elder brother I would claim
     In a stranger, but he spurns
     Such a claim, and from me turns.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Ts'ai Ko; narrative. A lady longs for the society of the object of her affection.

[1]He's there, the dolichos among!
 Only one day from sight away,--
 To me it seems as three months long!

[2]He's there, among the southernwood!
 Only one day from sight away,--
 It seems three seasons' solitude! [p. 83]

[3]Among the mugwort he appears!
 Only one day from sight away,--
 To me it seems as three fully years!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Ta Ch'e; narrative. The influence of a severe and virtuous magistrate in repressing licentiousness.

[1]He rolls along in carriage grand,
   His robes are bright with green,--
 His robes of rank, as on the bank
   The tender sedge is seen.
 Thinking I always am of thee,
   Thinking with fond desire;
 But dreading his severity,
   I must repress the fire.

[2]With slow and heavy sound his car,--
   His car of state, moves on.
 O'er his dress spread, the colors red
   Shine like carnation stone.
 Thinking I always am of thee;
   The fondest thoughts have I.
 The fear of him alone holds me,
   Or to thine arms I'd fly. [p. 84]

[3]Our fate may be, while still alive,
   Always apart to dwell;
 But when we're dead, we shall be laid
   In the same earthen cell.
 If haply thou should'st say that I
   Am not in this sincere,
 I swear its truth by that day's eye,
   Whose piercing glance I fear.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Ch'iu Chung Yu Ma; narrative. A woman longs for the presence of her lovers, who, she thinks, are detained from her by another woman.

[1]Where the hemp grows on the mound,
   There some one keeps Tsu-chieh;
   There some one keeps Tsu-chieh:--
 Why comes not he to me with a bound?

[2]On the mound where grows the wheat,
   There some one keeps Tzu-kuo;
   There some one keeps Tzu-kuo:--
 Why comes not he with me here to eat?

[3]On the mound plum trees have place.
   There some one keeps those youths;
   There some one keeps those youths:--
 O for their chiu-stones girdle to grace!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

  

BOOK VII. THE ODES OF CHeNG

  

I

The Tzu I; narrative. The people of the capital express their admiration of, and regard for, Duke Wu of Cheng.

[1]The black robes well your form befit;
   When they are worn we'll make you. new.
 Now for your court! oh! there we'll sit,
   And watch how you your duties do.
 And when we to our homes repair,
 We'll send to you our richest fare,
 Such is the love to you we bear!

[2]Those robes well with your virtue match;
   When they are worn we'll make you new.
 Now for your court! There will we watch,
   Well pleased, how you your duties do.
 And when we to our homes repair,
 We'll send to you our richest fare,
 Such is the love to you we bear! [p. 86]

[3]Those robes your character beseem;
   When they are worn we'll make you new.
 Now for your court! oh! there we deem
   It pleasure great your form to view.
 And when we to our homes repair,
 We'll send to you our richest fare,
 Such is the love to you we bear!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Chiang Chung Tzu; narrative. A. lady begs her lover to let her alone, and not excite the suspicions of her parents and others.

[1]My worthy Chung, I pray,
 Do not in such a way
 Into my hamlet bound,
 My willow trees to wound.
 For them I do not care,
 But you my parents scare.
   'Tis their words I fear.
     You, Chung, have my heart;
   But their words severe
     Will cause me to smart. [p. 87]

[2]My worthy Chung, I pray,
 Do not in such a way
 Come leaping o'er my wall,
 And make the branches fall
 From my mulberry tree.
 That does not trouble me,
 But my brothers all see.
   'Tis their words I fear.
     You, Chung, have my heart;
   But their words severe
     Will cause me to smart.

[3]My worthy Chung, I pray,
 Do not in such a way
 Into my garden jump,
 My sandal trees to thump.
 For them I do not care,
 But people grow aware
 What 'tis that brings you there.
   'Tis their words I fear.
     You, Chung, have my heart;
   But their words severe
     Will cause me to smart.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

  

III

The Shu Yu T'ien; narrative. The admiration with which Shu Tuan was regarded.

[1]To the hunt Shu has gone,
 And people there are none
   Remaining in the street.
 Perhaps a few you'll find;
 But none like Shu so kind,
   So graceful, will you meet.

[2]To the chase Shu has gone,
 And people there are none
   Left feasting in the street.
 If find a few you could,
 Yet none like Shu so good,
   So graceful, would you meet.

[3]To the fields Shu has gone,
 And people there are none
   Careering through the street.
 Some riders though you told,
 Yet none like Shu so bold,
   So graceful, would you meet.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

IV

The Ta Shu Yu T'ien; narrative. Celebrating the charioteering, daring, and archery of Shu Tuan.

[1]Our Shu a-hunting forth has gone;
 In four-horsed chariot grand he shone.
 As ribbon in his grasp each rein;
 With measured steps, like dancers twain,
   The outside horses flew.
 They now have reached the marshy ground;
 At once the flames break out around.
 With naked arm and chest Shu stands;
 A tiger fierce his nervous hands
   Grapple and soon subdue.
 He then presents it to the duke,
 While all with wonder on him look.
 But, Shu, try not such sport again.
 What grief were ours if you were slain!
   Your daring we should rue.

[2]Our Shu a-hunting drove away,
 His four steeds all of color bay.
 The outsides followed close behind [p. 90]
 The insides, finest of their kind,
   Like wild geese on the wing.
 They now have gained the marshy ground;
 At once the flames blaze all around.
 Few archers can with Shu compare;
 A charioteer of cunning rare,
   The steeds before him spring.
 Now they dash on in course direct;
 Now they're brought up and quickly checkt.
 Forth flies the arrow, fleet and stark,
 Nor fails to hit its proper mark,
   His left hand following.

[3]Our Shu a-hunting drove away,
 His four steeds all of color gray.
 With heads in line the insides sped;
 The outsides followed like the head
   Succeeded by the arms.
 They now have reached the marshy ground;
 One blaze of flame wraps all around;
   Soon cease the hunt's alarms.
 Shu's steeds before him slowly move;
 His skill the arrows cease to prove.
 Straightway the quiver's lid is closed,
 And in its case the bow reposed.
   How his fine bearing charms!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

  

V

The Ch'ing Jen; narrative. The useless maneuvering of an army of Cheng on the frontiers.

[1]The men of Ch'ing in Peng all idle lie.
   The general's chariot with its mail-clad team
   Moves restlessly, and, rising from it, gleam
 The tasseled spears, one 'bove the other high.
   So aimless roam the troops about the Ho!

[2]The men of Ch'ing all round in Hsiao are spread,
   Although the chariot, with its mail-clad team,
   Looks martiallike, and, rising from it, gleam
 The hooked spears, one high, one low displayed;
   Yet aimless look they all about the Ho!

[3]The men of Ch'ing have moved to Chou. Proud pace
   The mail-clad team, whose driver on the left
   Wheels round the chariot, and the spearman deft
 Displays his spear; 'tween them the general's face
   Looks pleased;--'tis mimic war upon the Ho!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

VI

The Kao Ch'iu; narrative. Celebrating some officer of Cheng for his elegant appearance and integrity.

[1]How glossy is the lambkin's fur,
   Smooth to the touch, and fair to view!
 In it arrayed, that officer
   Rests in his lot, to virtue true.

[2]With leopard cuffs, the lambkin's fur
   Seems made for wearer strong in fight.
 It well becomes that officer,
   Whom none will see swerve from the right.

[3]Splendid his robe of lambkin's fur,
   With its three decorations grand!
 It well beseems that officer,
   The pride and glory of our land.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Tsun Ta Lu; narrative. Old friendship should not be hastily broken off.

[1]Along the great highway,
   I hold you by the cuff.
 O spurn me not, I pray,
   Nor break old friendship off. [p. 93]

[2]Along the highway worn,
   I hold your hand in mine.
 Do not as vile me scorn;
   Your love I can't resign.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII. Scotice

The Nu Yueh Chi Ming; narrative. A pleasant picture of domestic life. A wife sends her husband from her side to his hunting, expresses her affection, and encourages him to cultivate virtuous friendships.

[1]Says oor gudewife, "The cock is crawin'."
 Quoth oor gudeman, "The day is dawin'."
 "Get up, gudeman, an' tak a spy;
 See gin the mornin' star be high,
 Syne tak a saunter roon' aboot;
 There's rowth o' dyukes and geese to shoot.

[2]"Lat flee, and bring them hame to me,
 An' sic a dish as ye sail pree.
 In comin' times as ower the strings
 Your noddin' heed in rapture hings,
 Supreme ower care, nor fasht wi' fears,
 We'll baith grow auld in worth and years, [p. 94]

[3]"An' when we meet the friends ye like,
 I'll gie to each some little fyke;--
 The lasses beads, trocks to their brithers,
 An' auld-warld fairlies to their mithers.
 Some knickknack lovin' hands will fin'
 To show the love that dwalls within.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Yu Nu T'ung Ch'e; narrative. The praise of some lady.

[1]There by his side in chariot rideth she,
 As lovely flower of the hibiscus tree,
 So fair her face; and when about they wheel,
 Her girdle gems of chu themselves reveal.
 For beauty all the house of Chiang have fame;
 Its eldest daughter,--she beseems her name.

[2]There on the path, close by him, walketh she,
 Bright as the blossom of hibiscus tree
 And fair her face; and when around they flit,
 Her girdle gems a tinkling sound emit.
 Among the Chiang she has distinguished place,
 For virtuous fame renowned, and peerless grace.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 95]

  

X

The Shan Yu Fu Su; allusive. A lady mocking her lover.

[1]On mountain grows the mulberry tree;
   The lotus flower in meadow damp.
 It is not Tzu-tu that I see,
   But only you, you foolish scamp!

[2]Polygonums the damp meads cover;
   To lofty pines on mountains view.
 It is not Tzu-ch'ung comes as lover;
   You artful boy, 'tis only you!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

The T'o Hsi; metaphorical. An appeal from the inferior officers of Cheng to their superiors on the sad condition of the state.

[1]Ye withered leaves, ye withered. leaves,
     Blown by the wind away!
 So tossed is Cheng. My spirit grieves
     To see its sad decay.
 Ye uncles, nobles of the land,
 Reform the state; we'll by you stand! [p. 96]

[2]Ye withered leaves, ye withered leaves,
   By winds so wildly tossed!
 What grief my mourning heart receives
   From Cheng thus foully lost!
 Uncles, your starting note we wait;
 We'll follow and reform the state.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII

The Chiao T'ung; narrative. A woman scorning her lover.

[1]O dear! that artful boy
   Refuses me a word!
 But, sir, I shall enjoy
   My food, though you're absurd!

[2]O dear! that artful boy
   My table will not share!
 But, sir, I shall enjoy
   My rest, though you're not there!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

  

XIII

The Ch'ien Shang; narrative. A lady's declaration of her attachment to her lover, whom she addresses, however, in a defiant manner.

[1]If you, good sir, continue to be kind,
   I'll hold my garments up the Chen to cross.
 If you prefer 'bout me to change your mind,
   Is there no other to replace your loss?
     Of all the foolish youths I've seen,
     Most foolish you I well may ween.

[2]If you, good sir, continue to be kind,
   I'll hold my garments up the Wei to cross.
 If you prefer 'bout me to change your mind,
   Is there no other to replace your loss?
     Of all the foolish youths I've seen,
     Most foolish you I well may ween.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIV

The Feng; narrative. A woman regrets lost opportunities, and would welcome a fresh suitor.

[1]Handsome the suitor was and stout,
 Who for me in the lane looked out:
 I should have gone with him I doubt. [p. 98]

[2]Can I that suitor's form forget,
 Who for me in the hall did wait?
 That I held off I now regret.

[3]I'm here, my broidered upper robe
   Concealed beneath a garment plain.
 As lovely is my lower robe,
   With the same guard 'gainst travel stain.
 O sir, O sir, come and me hence convey;
 Your waiting chariot I shall not delay!

[4]I'm here, my broidered lower robe
   Concealed beneath a garment plain.
 As lovely is my upper robe,
   With the same guard 'gainst travel stain.
 O sir, O sir, if you would only come,
 At once your chariot should convey me home!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XV

The Tung Men Chih Shan; narrative, A woman thinks of her lover's residence, and complains that he does not come to her.

[1]By th' eastern gate, flat lies the ground,
   And madder there grows on the slope.
 Hard by my lover's house is found;
   He keeps away, and mocks my hope. [p. 99]

[2]Where chestnuts grow, near th' eastern gate,
   There stands a row, where is your home.
 My heart turns aye to you, its mate,
   But ah! to me you never come!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVI

The Feng Yu; narrative. A wife is consoled, in circumstances of gloom, by the arrival of her husband.

[1]Cold is the wind, fast falls the rain,
   The cock aye shrilly crows.
 But I have seen my lord again;--
   Now must my heart repose.

[2]Whistles the wind, patters the rain,
   The cock's crow far resounds.
 But I have seen my lord again,
   And healed are my heart's wounds.

[3]All's dark amid the wind and rain,
   Ceaseless the cock's clear voice!
 But I have seen my lord again;--
   Should not my heart rejoice?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

XVII

The Tzu Chin; narrative. A lady mourns the indifference and absence of her student lover.

[1]You student, with the collar blue,
   Long pines my heart with anxious pain.
 Although I do not go to you,
   Why from all word do you refrain?

[2]O you, with girdle strings of blue,
   My thoughts to you forever roam!
 Although I do not go to you,
   Yet why to me should you not come?

[3]How reckless you, how light and wild,
   There by the tower upon the wall!
 One day, from sight of you exiled,
   As long as three long months I call.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVIII

The Yang Chih Shui; allusive. One party asserts good faith to another, and protests against people who would make them doubt each other.

[1]    Fretted its waters seem,
   Yet gently flows the stream:--
 A bundle of thorns 'twill not bear. [p. 101]
     Our brethren are so few;
     There are but I and you:--
 Let nothing our friendship impair.
     People's words don't believe;
     They are meant to deceive:--
 Their purpose is but to ensnare.

[2]    Fretted its waters seem,
     Yet gently flows the stream:--
 A bundle of wood 'twill not bear.
     Our brethren are so few;
     There are only we two:--
 Let nothing our friendship impair.
     Trust not the people's breath;
     They don't deserve your faith:--
 Their purpose is but to ensnare.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIX

The Ch'u Ch'i Tung Men; narrative. A man's praise of his own poor wife, contrasted with flaunting beauties.

[1]My path forth from the east gate lay,
 Where cloudlike moved the girls at play.
 Numerous are they, as clouds so bright,
 But not on them my heart's thoughts light. [p. 102]
 Dressed in a thin white silk, with coiffure gray,
 Is she, my wife, my joy in life's low way.

[2]  Forth by the covering wall's high tower,
   I went, and saw, like rush in flower,
   Each flaunting girl. Brilliant are they,
   But not with them my heart's thoughts stay.
 In thin white silk, with headdress madder-dyed,
 Is she, my sole delight, 'foretime my bride.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XX

The Yeh Yu Man Ts'ao; narrative and allusive. A lady rejoices in an unlawful connection which she had formed.

[1]On the moor, where thickly grew
 Creeping grass, bent down with dew,
 There a handsome man drew nigh,
 'Neath whose forehead, broad and high,
 Gleamed his clear and piercing eye.
 'Twas by accident we met;
 Glad was I my wish to get. [p. 103]

[2]Where the grass creeps o'er the moor,
 With the dew all covered o'er,
 There the finest man found I,
 'Bove whose clear and piercing eye,
 Rose his forehead, broad and high.
 Chance gave us a meeting rare,
 And we both were happy there.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXI

The Chen Wei; narrative. A festivity of Cheng, and advantage taken of it for licentious assignations.

[1]  Of the Chen and the Wei
     Onward the broad stream pours.
   Women and men go by,
     With valerian flowers.
   To gentleman a lady says,
   "Have you been there to see the plays?"
   "I've been," he says, and she replies,
   "Let's go again, and feast our eyes.
   The ground beyond the Wei you'll find
   Large, and for pleasure well designed." [p. 104]
   So gentlemen and ladies wend
   Their way, in sport the day to spend,
 And to each other oft small peonies extend.

[2]  Of Chen and Wei along
     The lucid waters flow,
   And on their banks a throng
     Of men and women go.
   To gentleman a lady says,
   "Have you been there to see the plays?"
   "I've been," says he, and she replies,
   "Let's go again and feast our eyes.
   The ground beyond the Wei you'll find
   Large, and for pleasure well designed."
   So gentlemen and ladies wend
   Their way, in sport the day to spend,
 And to each other oft small peonies extend.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 105]

  

BOOK VIII. THE ODES OF CH'I

  

I

The Chi Ming; narrative. A model marchioness stimulating her husband to rise early, and attend to his duties at court.

[1]His lady to the marquis says,
   "The cock has crowed; 'tis late.
 Get up, my lord, and haste to court.
   'Tis full; for you they wait."
 She did not hear the cock's shrill sound,
 Only the blue flies buzzing round.

[2]Again she wakes him with the words,
   "The east, my lord, is bright.
 A crowded court your presence seeks;
   Get up, and hail the light."
 'Twas not the dawning light which shone,
 But that which by the moon was thrown.

[3]He sleeping still, once more she says,
   "The flies are buzzing loud.
 To lie and dream here by your side
   Were pleasant, but the crowd
 Of officers will soon retire;
 Draw not on you and me their ire!"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

  

II

The Hsuan; narrative. Frivolous and vainglorious compliments interchanged by the hunters of Ch'i.

[1]"How agile you are!" 'Twas thus that I spoke,
   What time near to Nao together we drew.
 Two boars three years old from cover then broke,
   And we in our chariots after them flew.
 The chase being over, you said with a bow,
 "If agile am I, as active art thou!"

[2]"How fine is your skill!" So said I to you;
   'Twas when near to Nao we met on the way.
 That moment two males attracted our view,
   And at them we dashed, to make them our prey.
 The chase being over, you said with a bow,
 "If skillful am I, not less so art thou!"

[3]"How you know your art!" I said to you then,
   When south of Mount Nao together we came.
 That moment two wolves came under our ken,
   And hotly we drove, well pleased with the game.
 The chase being over, you said with a bow,
 "If I know my art, as artful art thou!"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

III

The Chu; narrative. A bride describes her first meeting with her bridegroom.

[1]He waited 'tween the gate and screen,
 With ear-plug strings of white silk seen.
 The plugs themselves had hua stones' sheen.

[2]He waited in the court and stood,
 With ear-plug strings of silk green-hued.
 The plugs themselves were yung stones good.

[3]There in the hall he stood and stayed.
 Of yellow silk his plug strings made.
 The plugs of fine ying gems displayed.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Tung Fang Chih Jih; narrative. The licentious intercourse of the people of Ch'i.

[1]When the sun is in the east,
   That lovely girl I see. [p. 108]
 In my chamber she appears;
   There fronting me is she.
 She treads upon my footsteps,
   And quickly comes to me.

[2]When the moon is in the east,
   That lovely girl I see.
 'Twixt door and screen she passes;
   'Twixt screen and door is she.
 She treads upon my footsteps,
   And hastes away from me.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Tung Fang Wei Ming; narrative and metaphorical. The irregularity and disorder of the court of Ch'i; as seen especially in the time of giving the morning audience.

[1]I was putting my clothes on upside down,
   Before the eastern sky was clear.
 I was putting my clothes on upside down,
   When a call to the court came here.

[2]I was putting my clothes on upside down,
   Ere showed the east the rising flame.
 I was putting my clothes on upside down,
   When from the court an order came. [p. 109]

[3]On garden fence, made but of willow wands,
   E'en reckless fellows look with fear.
 Our prince can't tell the night from dawn;--
   Too soon, or late, his calls appear!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The Nan Shan; allusive. On the disgraceful connection between Wen Chiang, the marchioness of Lu, and her brother;--against Hsiang of Ch'i and Huan of Lu.

[1]There where the south hill rises high and great
   A male fox sits, suspicious and alone.
 Ch'i's daughter went to Lu, to wed her mate;
   The pathway, plain and easy, is well known.
 From you, her brother, thus away she went;
 Why further think of her, like fox intent?

[2]The dolichos five kinds of shoes supplies,
   Made always so that two shall form a pair.
 On caps they match the strings that serve for ties,
   The same in length, not differing a hair. [p. 110]
 The road to Lu all plain and easy lies,
   By which Ch'i's daughter joined her husband there.
 Since she has traveled that way leaving you,
 Why do you her continue to pursue?

[3]Hemp seed to sow, this is the course we take,--
   The acres lengthwise and across we dress.
 Taking a wife, the thing at once we make
   Known to our parents, and their leave possess.
 Since, prince of Lu, Ch'i's daughter thus you took;--
 Why on her evil ways indulgent look?

[4]How do we act when firewood we would split?
   'Tis through the ax in hand that we succeed.
 Taking a wife, this form we must admit,--
   Without the go-between we cannot speed.
 When you brought home your wife, all this was done;--
 Why let her now to such excesses run?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 111]

  

VII

The Fu T'ien; metaphorical. The folly of pursuing objects beyond one's strength.

[1]The weeds will but the ranker grow,
   If fields too large you seek to till.
 To try to gain men far away
   With grief your toiling heart will fill.

[2]If fields too large you seek to till,
   The weeds will only rise more strong.
 To try to gain men far away
   Will but your heart's distress prolong.

[3]Things grow the best when to themselves
   Left, and to nature's vigor rare.
 How young and tender is the child,
   With his twin tufts of falling hair!
 But when you him erelong behold,
   That child shall cap of manhood wear!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Lu Ling; narrative. The admiration in Ch'i of hounds and hunters.

[1]Ling-ling go the hounds; ling-ling the hounds go.
 Their master is kindly and good, as we know. [p. 112]

[2]With double rings furnished, on go the hounds;
 In goodness and grace their master abounds.

[3]Three rings at their necks, they rush to the chase;
 Their master is famous for power and for grace.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Pi Kou; metaphorical. The bold licentious freedom of Wen Chiang in returning to Ch'i;--against Duke Chuang of Lu, her son.

[1]Rent is the basket at the dam,
   Where bream and kuan abound;
 As useless is the prince of Lu,
   In vigor wanting found.
 Ch'i's daughter now to Chi comes back,
   Her followers as a cloud;
 Her son should hold her fast in Lu,
   Her wickedness to shroud.

[2]Rent is the basket at the dam,
   Where bream and tench abound;
 As useless is the prince of Lu,
   In vigor wanting found.
 Back comes Ch'i's daughter, with a shower
   Of followers at her side, [p. 113]
 Her son should hold her fast in Lu,
   Her wanton ways to hide.

[3]Rent is the basket at the dam;
   Fish in and out can go;
 As useless is the prince of Lu,
   And vigor fails to show.
 Back comes Ch'i's daughter, with a stream
   Of followers behind;
 Her son should hold her fast in Lu,
   From such lewd ways confined.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Tsai Ch'u; narrative. The open shamelessness of Wan Chiang in her meeting with her brother.

[1]  On comes her chariot, fast and loud,
     With screen of bamboos finely wove,
   And leather bright, vermilion-hued--
     Ch'i's daughter hastes to lawless love.
 To this from Lu the road is smooth and plain;--
 'Twas but last night she started with her train.

[2]  Her four black steeds are beautiful;
     Soft are the reins the driver holds. [p. 114]
   The road from Lu is smooth and plain;--
     Ch'i's daughter's heart its joy unfolds.
 Full of complacency is she; nor shame
 Abashes her, nor fear of evil name.

[3]  Broad flow the waters of the Wen,
     And crowds of travelers go by.
   The road from Lu is smooth and plain;--
     She looks around with careless eye.
 That many see her gives her no concern;
 Her thoughts to her licentious fancy turn.

[4]  On sweep the waters of the Wen;
     More numerous are the travelers now.
   The road from Lu is smooth and plain;--
     Ch'i's daughter shows her brazen brow.
 At ease and proud, she holds her onward way,
 Careless of what all think of her display.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

The I Chieh; narrative. Lament over Duke Chuang of Lu, notwithstanding his beauty of person, elegance of manners, and skill in archery.

[1]A grand man is the prince of Lu,
   With person large and high.
 Lofty his front, and suited to
   The fine glance of his eye! [p. 115]
 Swift are his feet. In archery
   What man with him can vie?
 With all these goodly qualities,
   We see him and we sigh!

[2]Renowned through all the land is he,
   The nephew of our lord.
 With clear and lovely eyes, his grace
   May not be told by word.
 All day at target practice,
   He'll never miss the bird.
 Such is the prince of Lu, and yet
   With grief for him we're stirred!

[3]All grace and beauty he displays,
   High forehead, and eyes bright.
 And dancing choice! His arrows all
   The target hit aright.
 Straight through they go, and every one
   Lights on the selfsame spot.
 Rebellion he could well withstand,
   And yet we mourn his lot!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 116]

  

BOOK IX. THE ODES OF WEI

  

I

The Ko Chu; narrative. The extreme parsimoniousness even of wealthy men in Wei.

[1]Thin cloth of dolichos supplies the shoes,
   In which some have to brave the frost and cold.
 A bride, when poor, her tender hands must use,
   Her dress to make, and the sharp needle hold.
 This man is wealthy, yet he makes his bride
 Collars and waistbands for his robes provide.

[2]Conscious of wealth, he moves with easy mien;
   Politely on the left he takes his place;
 The ivory pin is at his girdle seen;
   His dress and gait show gentlemanly grace.
 Why do we brand him in our satire here?
 'Tis this,--his niggard soul provokes the sneer.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 117]

  

II

The Fen Chu Ju; allusive. Against the parsimoniousness of the officers of Wei.

[1]  Where near the Fen damp is the ground,
   The sorrel gatherers are found,
     To eke their scanty food.
   Such arts that officer displays,
   (Whose elegance exceeds all praise;)
     In him they are not good.
 Charged with the cars of state, we look to find
 His conduct show a higher style of mind.

[2]  On the Fen's banks the poor are found,
   Who pluck the mulberry leaves around,
     A little gain to make.
   In grace and beauty like a flower,
   That officer himself doth lower,
     Such small mean ways to take.
 The cars of state to marshal is his charge;--
 Strange such high post his mind should not enlarge!

[3]Where the Fen bends to join the Ho,
   For ox-lip leaves the people go,
     Some nourishment to find. [p. 118]
   That officer we gemlike call,
   Yet shrinks he not from ways as small,
     To greed too much inclined.
 The ruler's kindred he has for his care;--
 Should he not show a loftier character?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Yuan Yu T'ao; allusive. An officer tells his grief because of the misgovernment of the state, and how he was misunderstood.

[1]A fruit, small as the garden peach,
   May still be used for food.
 A state, though poor as ours, might thrive,
   If but its rule were good.
 Our rule is bad, our state is sad,
   With mournful heart I grieve.
 All can from instrument and voice
   My mood of mind perceive.
 Who know me not, with scornful thought,
   Deem me a scholar proud.
 "Those men are right," they fiercely say,
   "What mean your words so loud?" [p. 119]
 Deep in my heart my sorrows lie,
   And none the cause may know.
 How should they know, who never try
   To learn whence comes our woe?

[2]The garden jujube, although small,
   May still be used for food.
 A state, though poor as ours, might thrive,
   If but its rule were good.
 Our rule is bad, our state is sad,
   With mournful heart I grieve.
 Methinks I'll wander through the land,
   My misery to relieve.
 Who know me not, with scornful thought,
   Deem that wild views I hold.
 "Those men are right," they fiercely say,
   "What mean your words so bold?"
 Deep in my heart my sorrows lie,
   And none the cause may know.
 How can they know, who never try
   To learn whence comes our woe?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

  

IV

The Chih Hu; narrative. A young soldier on service solaces himself with the thought of home.

[1]To the top of that tree-clad hill I go,
   And towards my father I gaze,
 Till with my mind's eye his form I espy,
   And my mind's ear hears how he says:
 "Alas for my son on service abroad!
   He rests not from morning till eve.
 May he careful be, and come back to me!
   While he is away, how I grieve!"

[2]To the top of that barren hill. I climb,
   And towards my mother I gaze,
 Till with my mind's eye her form I espy,
   And my mind's ear hears how she says:
 "Alas for my child on service abroad!
   He never in sleep shuts an eye.
 May he careful be, and come back to me!
   In the wild may his body not lie!" [p. 121]

[3]Up the lofty ridge I, toiling, ascend,
   And towards my brother I gaze,
 Till with my mind's eye his form I espy,
   And my mind's ear hears how he says:
 "Alas! my young brother, serving abroad,
   All day with his comrades must roam.
 May he careful be, and come back to me,
   And die not away from his home!"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Shih Mou Chih Chien; narrative. The straits of the peasantry of Wei.

[1]Among their ten acres of mulberry trees,
 The planters move idly about at their ease.
 "Ho! back," says a courtier, "and let us join these!"

[2]Beyond their ten acres of mulberry trees,
 The planters move idly about at their ease.
 "Away," says a courtier, "and join us with these!"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

  

VI

The Fa T'an; allusive. Against the idle and greedy ministers of the state. Contrast between them and a stalwart woodman.

[1]K'an-k'an upon the sandal trees
   The woodman's strokes resound.
 Then on the bank he lays the trunks
   His ax brings to the ground;
 The while the stream goes rippling by,
   Its waters cool and clear.
 You work not so, O Wei's great men,
   From me the truth now hear.
 You sow no seed; no harvest tasks
   Your soft hands take in charge;
 And yet each boasts three hundred farms,
   And stores the produce large.
 You never join the hunt's halloo,
   Nor dare to share its toils;
 Yet lo! your wide courtyards are seen
   Hung round with badgers' spoils.
 I must conclude that woodman rude
   A man of higher style.
 To eat the bread of idleness
   He feels would stamp him vile. [p. 123]

[2]K'an-k'an upon the sandalwood
   The woodman's strokes resound,
 Then by the river's side he lays
   What fit for spokes is found;
 The while the river onward flows,
   Its waters clear and smooth.
 You work not so, O Wei's great men,
   From me now hear the truth.--
 You sow no seed; no harvest tasks
   Your dainty fingers stain;
 And yet each boasts three million sheaves;--
   Whence gets he all that grain?
 You never join the hunt's halloo,
   Nor brave its ventures bold;
 Yet lo! your wide courtyards display
   Those boars of three years old.
 I must conclude that woodman rude
   A man of higher style.
 To eat the bread of idleness
   He feels would stamp him vile. [p. 124]

[3]K'an-k'an resound the woodman's strokes
   Upon the sandalwood;
 Then on the river's lip he lays
   What for his wheels is good;
 The while the river onward flows,
   Soft rippled by the wind.
 That you don't work, O Wei's great men,
   Is thus brought to my mind.
 You sow no seed; no harvest tasks
   Your soft hands undertake;
 Yet grain each boasts, three hundred bins;--
   Who his that grain did make?
 You never join the hunt's halloo,
   Your feeble courage fails;
 Yet lo! your wide courtyards display
   Large strings of slaughtered quails.
 I must conclude that woodman rude
   A man of higher style.
 To eat the bread of idleness
   He feels would stamp him vile.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

  

VII

The Shih Shu; metaphorical. Against the oppression and extortion of the government of Wei.

[1]Large rats, large rats, let us entreat
 That you our millet will not eat.
 But the large rats we mean are you,
 With whom three years we've had to do,
 And all that time have never known
 One look of kindness on us thrown.
 We take our leave of Wei and you;
 That happier land we long to view.
 O happy land! O happy land!
 There in our proper place we'll stand.

[2]Large rats, large rats, let us entreat
 You'll not devour our crops of wheat.
 But the large rats we mean are you,
 With whom three years we've had to do;
 And all that time you never wrought
 One kindly act to cheer our lot.
 To you and Wei we bid farewell,
 Soon in that happier state to dwell.
 O happy state! O happy state!
 There shall we learn to bless our fate. [p. 126]

[3]Large rats, large rats, let us entreat
 Our springing grain you will not eat.
 But the large rats we mean are you,
 With whom three years we've had to do.
 From you there came not all that while
 One word of comfort 'mid our toil.
 We take our leave of you and Wei;
 And to those happier coasts we flee.
 O happy coasts, to you we wend!
 There shall our groans and sorrows end.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK X. THE ODES OF T'ANG

  

I

The Hsi So; narrative. The cheerfulness and discretion of the people of Chin, and their tempered enjoyment at fitting seasons.

[1]The cricket appears in the hall,
   And towards its close draws the year.
 Then let us to-day to pleasure give way,
   Ere the days and months disappear. [p. 127]
 But duty should have our first thought;
   Indulgence we strictly must bound.
 Take heed lest the joy our reason destroy;--
   The good man looks out and around.

[2]The cricket appears in the hall,
   And the year is fast passing on.
 Then let us to-day to pleasure give way,
   Ere the days and months shall be gone.
 But some things our care still demand;
   Against all excess we must guard.
 Take heed lest the joy our reason destroy:
   The good man thinks no toil too hard.--

[3]The cricket appears in the hall;
   The need for our carts is all o'er.
 Then let us to-day to pleasure give way,
   Ere the days and months be no more.
 But first think of griefs that may come;
   Between the extremes keep the mean.
 Take heed lest the joy our reason destroy:--
   The good man is calm and serene.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

  

II

The Shan Yu Ch'u; allusive. The folly of not enjoying the good things which we have, and letting death put them into the hands of others.

[1]The thorny elms on the mountains grow,
 And the white elms rise where the grounds are low.
 You have suits of robes which you never wear;
 You have steeds and cars you are fain to spare.
 All these another will have by and by,
 For the time will come when you shall die.

[2]The k'ao trees thrive on the mountain's brow,
 And the new trees rise where the grounds are low.
 Unwatered your courts, your rooms are unwept;
 Your drums and your bells all silent are kept.
 All these another shall have by and by,
 For the time will come when you shall die.

[3]The varnish trees on the mountains grow,
 And the chestnuts rise where the grounds are low.
 Why not, at the feast, your lute gayly play,
 To add to your joy, and lengthen the day.
 Another's your house will be by and by,
 For the time will come when you shall die.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

III

The Yang Chih Shui; allusive. Rebellion plotted against the Marquis of Chin by the chief of Ch'u-wu and his partisans.

[1]  'Midst the fretted waters
     The white rocks grandly stand.
   To Wu we'll follow you,
     With white silk robe in hand,
   And collar of red hue,
     Your master to invest,
   And hail him lord of Chin,
     Of the whole state possest.
 The sight of him, our princely lord,
 Will joy to all our hearts afford.

[2]  'Midst the fretted waters
     The white rocks glist'ning stand.
   To Ku we'll follow you,
     With white silk robe in hand,
   And collar of red hue,
     And broidered. axes fine,
   Your master to invest
 As chief of T'ang's great line.
 When him, our princely lord, we see,
 From every pain we shall be free. [p. 130]

[3]'Midst the fretted waters
   The white rocks grandly show.
 Your orders we have heard,
 But not a single word
   Shall any from us know.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Chiao Liao; allusive and metaphorical. Supposed to celebrate the power and prosperity of Huanshu, and to predict the growth of his family.

[1]                What clusters so rare
                 The pepper plants bear!
 A measure, luxuriant and large, they would fill.
                 As much without peer
                 Is this hero here!
 Sing hey for the shoots of the pepper plant still!

[2]                What clusters so rare
                 The pepper plants bear!
 Luxuriant and large, both your hands they would fill.
                 So generous and great
                 This chief of our state!
 And it's hey for the far-shooting pepper plant still!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

V

The Ch'ou Mou; allusive. Husband and wife express their delight at their unexpected union.

[1]  Round and round the fagots I've bound,
     And the Heart in heaven shines clear.
   Oh! that I such an evening have found!
     That this good man should be here!
       O me! O me!
 With a husband like this I have nothing to fear.

[2]  Round and round the grass we have bound;
     And the corner shines the Heart.
   Strange that we such an evening have found!
     Thus to meet and never to part!
       O joy! O joy!
 That this meeting should come without scheming or art!

[3]  Round and round the thorns I have bound;
     From the door the Heart I see.
   Oh! that I such an evening have found!
     That this Beauty is come to me!
       O me! O me!
 That this lady so lovely mine only should be!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

VI

The Ti Tu; allusive. Lament of an individual bereaved of his brothers and relatives, or forsaken by them.

[1]A russet pear tree rises all alone,
 But rich the growth of leaves upon it shown?
 I walk alone, without one brother left,
 And thus of natural aid am I bereft.
 Plenty of people there are all around,
 But none like my own father's sons are found.
 Ye travelers, who forever hurry by,
 Why on me turn the unsympathizing eye?
 No brother lives with whom my cause to plead;--
 Why not perform for me the helping deed?

[2]A russet pear tree rises all alone,
 But rich with verdant foliage o'ergrown.
 I walk alone, without one brother's care,
 To whom I might, amid my straits, repair.
 Plenty of people there are all around,
 But none like those of my own name are found.
 Ye travelers, who forever hurry by,
 Why on me turn the unsympathizing eye?
 No brother lives with whom my cause to plead;--
 Why not perform for me the helping deed?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 133]

  

VII

The Kao Ch'iu; narrative. The people of some great officer complain of his hard treatment of them, while they declare their loyalty.

[1]You, of the leopard's cuff and lambkin's fur,
   To us have been a governor unkind;
 But we look back on many an ancestor,
   And stay, when we another chief might find.

[2]Unsympathizing, violent, and rough
   With us poor folks from day to day are you.
 Man of the lambkin fur and leopard cuff,
   What keeps us here but hearts that still beat true?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Pao Yu; allusive or metaphorical. The men of Chin, called out to warfare by the king's order, mourn over the consequent suffering of their parents, and long for their return to their ordinary agricultural pursuits.

[1]The wild geese fly the bushy oaks around,
 With clamor loud. Su-su their wings resound,
 As for their feet poor resting place is found. [p. 134]
 The king's affairs admit of no delay;
 Our millets still unsown, we haste away.
 No food is left our parents to supply;
 When we are gone, on whom can they rely?
 O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,
 When shall our homes receive us from the war?

[2]The wild geese on the bushy jujube trees
 Attempt to settle, and are ill at ease;--
 Su-su their wings go flapping in the breeze.
 The king's affairs admit of no delay;
 Our millets still unsown, we haste away.
 How shall our parents their requirements get?
 How in our absence shall their wants be met?
 O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,
 When shall our homes receive us from the war?

[3]The bushy mulberry trees the geese in rows
 Seek eager, and to rest around them close,--
 With rustling loud, as disappointment grows.
 The king's affairs admit of no delay;
 To plant our rice and maize we cannot stay.
 How shall our parents find their wonted food?
 When we are gone, who will to them be good?
 O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,
 When shall our homes receive us from the war?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 135]

  

IX

The Wu I; narrative. A request to the king's envoy for the acknowledgment of Duke Wu as marquis of Chin.

[1]State robes can he be said to want?
   His robes the seven high symbols show.
 But let him have them by your grant:--
   That peace and fortune will bestow.

[2]State robes can he be said to want?
   The symbols six his robes display.
 But let him have them by your grant,
   And that will lasting peace convey.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Yu Ti Chih Tu; metaphorical. Some one regrets the poverty of his circumstances, which prevented him from gathering around him companions whom he admired.

[1]On the left of the way, a russet pear tree
 Stands there all alone,--a fit image of me.
 There is that princely man! O that he would come,
 And in my poor dwelling with me be at home!
 In the core of my heart do I love him, but say,
 Whence shall I procure him the wants of the day. [p. 136]

[2]At the bend in the way a russet pear tree
 Stands there all alone,--a fit image of me.
 There is that princely man! O that he would come.
 And rambling with me be himself here at home!
 In the core of my heart I love him, but say,
 Whence shall I procure him the wants of the day.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

The Ko Sheng; allusive and narrative. A wife mourns the death of her husband, refusing to be comforted, and will cherish his memory till her own death.

[1]The dolichos over the thorn tree grows;
 Its shoots o'er the waste the convolvulus throws:--
   Thus finds its proper aid each plant.
 He whom I loved, my husband, from me gone,
 I sadly mourn my lot, and dwell alone,
   Doomed thus my heart's support to want.

[2]The dolichos twines round the jujube tree;
 The tombs with convolvulus covered we see:--
   Each plant thrives in its proper place
 He whom I loved, the husband of my heart,
 Is here no more, and I remain apart,
   Nor can my life's strength now embrace. [p. 137]

[3]Bright in our room was the pillow of horn,
 And coverlet broidered the couch to adorn,
   When first in one was blent our fate.
 The husband of my heart, whom I admired,
 Is here no more, and I must live retired,
   And for each morning lonely wait.

[4]Each day a day of the long summer light,
 Each night as long as the dark winter night;--
   Shall I in solitude here pine.
 A hundred years will seem their course to run
 Ere of this mortal life the time is done,
   And him within the tomb I join.

[5]Each night as long as the dark winter night,
 Each day a day of the long summer light;--
   To me no comfort e'er will come.
 My life will seem to last a hundred years,
 Till in my death its welcome close appears,
   And to his chamber I go home.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII

The Ts'ai Ling; metaphorical. Against giving ear to slanderers.

[1]When told to Shou-yang's top to go,
   The ling plants there to take,
 The speaker false at once you'd know,
   Nor heed the words he spake. [p. 138]
 And so, when men their stories feign,
   To credit them be slow.
 Put them aside, put them aside;
   Belief should slowly grow.
 'Tis thus the stories told by men
   Subside, nor farther go.

[2]When told to search round Shou-yang's base,
   Sow thistles there to find,
 The search you'd think a hopeless case,
   Nor would the counsel mind.
 And so, when men their stories feign,
   Do not approve in haste.
 Put them aside, put them aside;
   Assent should be repressed.
 'Tis thus the stories told by men
   Soon unregarded rest.

[3]When told on th' east of Shou-yang hill
   For mustard plants to try,
 You'd know the quest would speed but ill,
   And let the words pass by.
 And so, when men their stories feign,
   No hearing to them lend.
   Put them aside, put them aside,
 Your faith loth to extend.
 'Tis thus the stories told by men
   Come shortly to an end.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

  

BOOK XI. THE ODES OF CH'IN

  

I

The Ch'e Lin; narrative and allusive. Celebrating the growing opulence and style of some lord of Ch'in, and the pleasures and freedom of his court.

[1]His many chariots rush along,
 Drawn by white-fronted steeds and strong.
 When audience now we wish to gain,
 His eunuchs' aid we must obtain.

[2]The varnish trees on hillsides grow,
 And chestnuts on the lands below.
 When access to the prince we've found,
 We sit and hear the lutes' sweet sound.
 If we seize not this joy to-day,
 Old age will have us for its prey.

[3]The mulberries on the hillsides grow,
 And willows where the grounds are low.
 When to the prince our way we've made
 We sit and hear the organs played.
 If we pass by this joy to-day,
 Old age will bear us all away.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 140]

  

II

The Ssu T'ieh; narrative. Celebrating the growing opulence of the lords of Ch'in, as seen in their hunting.

[1]Our ruler to the hunt proceeds;
 And black as iron are his steeds
 That heed the charioteer's command,
 Who holds the six reins in his hand.
 His favorites follow to the chase,
 Rejoicing in his special grace.

[2]The season's males, alarmed, arise,--
 The season's males, of wondrous size.
 Driven by the beaters, forth they spring,
 Soon caught within the hunters' ring.
 "Drive on their left," the ruler cries;
 And to its mark his arrow flies.

[3]The hunting done, northward he goes;
 And in the park the driver shows
 The horses' points, and his own skill
 That rules and guides them at his will.
 Light cars, whose teams small bells display,
 The long and short-mouthed dogs convey.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 141]

  

III

The Hsiao Jung; narrative. The lady of an officer absent on an expedition against the tribes of the west gives a glowing description of his chariot, and praises himself, expressing, but without murmuring, her regret at his absence.

[1]Before my mind's eye stands my lord's short car,
 In which he dares the risks of savage war:--
 Its pole, whose end turns upward, curving round,
 And in five places shines, with leather bound;
 The slip rings and the side straps; the masked place,
 Where gilt rings to the front unite the trace;
 The mat of tiger's skin; the naves so long;
 The steeds, with left legs white, and piebalds, strong.
 Such my lord's car! He rises in my mind,
 Lovely and bland, like jade of richest kind;
 Yet there he lives, in his log hut apart:--
 The very thought confuses all my heart.

[2]The driver with the six reins guides along
 The horses, with their shining coats, and strong:--.
 One inside dappled, one bay with black mane;
 Black-mouthed and bay, and black, the outer twain. [p. 142]
 Shields, dragon-figured, rise up side by side,
 Shelter in front 'gainst missiles to provide.
 Gilt buckles with the carriage front connect
 The inner reins by which the insides are checkt.
 I see my lord, thus in his carriage borne,
 With his mild form the frontier towns adorn.
 What time can be for his return assigned?
 Ah me! his figure ever fills my mind!

[3]With measured steps move the mail-covered team.
 The trident spears, with gilded shaft ends gleam.
 The feather-figured shield, of beauty rare,
 He holds before him, all his foes to dare.
 The bow case, made of tiger's skin, and bright
 With metal plates, lies ready for the fight.
 It holds two bows which bamboo frames secure,
 And keep unhurt, to send the arrows sure.
 To him thus busy all my thoughts are borne,
 Both when I rest at night and rise at morn.
 He, my good lord, is tranquil and serene,
 His virtuous fame more prized, the more he's seen.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

IV

The Chien Chia; narrative. Some one tells how he sought another, whom it seemed easy to find, and yet could not find him.

[1]Reed and rush are dark and green;
 As hoarfrost the white dew is seen.
 Him, the man I have in mind,
 By this water I should find.
 Searching, up the stream I haste,
 On a long and toilsome quest.
 Downwards then I turn, and see!
 In the midstream standeth he.
 He is there but far removed;
 Vain has all my searching proved.

[2]Reed and rush luxuriant rise;
 Still undried the white dew lies.
 Him, the man I have in mind,
 On the stream's edge I should find.
 Upwards first my course I keep,
 Though the way is rough and steep. [p. 144]
 Downwards then, and what to see?
 In the midstream standeth he,
 On the islet, far removed;--
 Vain has all my searching proved.

[3]Reed and rush grow thick and tall;
 Ceases not the dew to fall.
 Him, the man I have in mind,
 On the stream's bank I should find.
 Upwards first I go along,
 But the hard path leads me wrong.
 Downwards then my steps I turn,
 And in midstream him discern,
 On the island, far removed;--
 Vain has all my searching proved.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Chung Nan; allusive. Celebrating the growing opulence of some ruler of Ch'in, and admonishing, while praising, him.

[1]What trees grow on the Chung-nan hill?
   The white fir and the plum.
 In fur of fox, 'neath broidered robe,
   Thither our prince is come. [p. 145]
 His face glows with vermilion hue.
 O may he prove a ruler true!

[2]What find we on the Chung-nan hill?
   Deep nook and open glade.
 Our prince shows there the double chi
   On lower robe displayed.
 His pendant holds each tinkling gem.
 Long life be his, and deathless fame!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The Huang Niao; allusive. Lament for three worthy brothers of Ch'in who were buried alive in the same grave with Duke Mu.

[1]They flit about, the yellow birds,
   And rest upon the jujubes find.
 Who buried were in Duke Mu's grave,
   Alive to awful death consigned?

'Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
   'Twas sad the first, Yen-hsi, to see.
 He stood alone; a hundred men
   Could show no other such as he. [p. 146]
 When to the yawning grave he came,
   Terror unnerved and shook his frame.

Why thus destroy our noblest men,
   To thee we cry, O azure Heaven!
 To save Yen-hsi from death, we would
   A hundred lives have freely given.

[2]They flit about, the yellow birds,
   And on the mulberry trees rest find.
 Who buried were in Duke Mu's grave,
   Alive to awful death consigned?

'Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
   'Twas sad the next, Chung-hang, to see.
 When on him pressed a hundred men,
   A match for all of them was he.
 When to the yawning grave he came,
   Terror unnerved and shook his frame.

Why thus destroy our noblest men,
   To thee we cry, O azure Heaven!
 To save Chung-hang from death, we would
   A hundred lives have freely given. [p. 147]

[3]They flit about, the yellow birds,
   And rest upon the thorn trees find.
 Who buried were in Duke Mu's grave,
   Alive to awful death consigned?

'Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
   'Twas sad the third, Chen-hu, to see.
 A hundred men in desperate fight
   Successfully withstand could he.
 When to the yawning grave he came,
   Terror unnerved and shook his frame.

Why thus destroy our noblest men,
   To thee we cry, O azure Heaven!
 To save Chen-hu from death, we would
   A hundred lives have freely given.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Ch'en Feng; allusive. A wife tells her grief because of the absence of her husband, and his forgetfulness of her.

[1]The falcon swiftly seeks the north,
 And forest gloom that sent it forth.
 Since I no more my husband see,
 My heart from grief is never free.
 O how is it, I long to know,
 That he, my lord, forgets me so? [p. 148]

[2]Bushy oaks on the mountain grow,
 And six elms where the ground is low.
 But I, my husband seen no more,
 My sad and joyless fate deplore.
 O how is it, I long to know,
 That he, my lord, forgets me so?

[3]The hills the bushy wild plums show,
 And pear trees grace the ground below.
 But, with my husband from me gone,
 As drunk with grief, I dwell alone.
 O how is it, I long to know,
 That he, my lord, forgets me so?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Wu I; narrative. The people of Ch'in declare their readiness, and stimulate one another, to fight in the king's cause.

[1]Say you you have no clothes to wear?
 My long robes let me with you share.
 The king his armies has called out;
 Then let us hail the battle shout.
 My lance and spear I will prepare,
 And as your comrade with you fare. [p. 149]

[2]Say you you have no clothes to wear?
 Come and my undergarments share.
 The king his armies has called out;
 Then let us hail the battle shout.
 My spear and lance I will prepare,
 And to the field with you will fare.

[3]Say you you have no clothes to wear?
 My lower clothing you shall share.
 The king his armies has called out;
 Then let us hail the battle shout.
 Buff coat I'll get, and weapons keen,
 And with you on the march be seen.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Wei Yang; narrative. The feelings with which Duke K'ang of Ch'in escorted his uncle, Duke Wen, to Chin, and his parting gifts.

[1]I escorted my uncle to Chin,
   Till the Wei we crossed on the way.
     Then I gave as I left
     For his carriage a gift
   Four steeds, and each steed was a bay. [p. 150]

[2]I escorted my uncle to Chin,
   And I thought of him much in my heart.
     Pendant stones, and with them
     Of fine jasper a gem,
   I gave, and then saw him depart.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Ch'uan Yu; narrative, Some parties, probably refugees, complain of the diminished respect and attention paid to them.

[1]He lodged us in a spacious house,
   And plenteous was our fare.
 But now at every frugal meal
   There's not a scrap to spare.
 Alas! alas that this good man
   Could not go on as he began!

[2]Four dishes on the mat the grain
   For every meal supplied.
 The change is great, from every meal
   We rise unsatisfied.
 Alas! alas that this good man
   Could not go on as he began!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 151]

  

BOOK XII. THE ODES OF CH'eN

  

I

The Yuan Ch'iu; narrative. The dissipation and pleasure seeking of the officers of Ch'en.

[1]How gay and volatile you are,
   When upon Yuan Ch'iu's top you stand!
 Kindly you are indeed, but want
   All that would men's respect command.

[2]How at the foot of Yuan Ch'iu's height
   Your blows upon the drum resound!
 In winter and in summer, there
   With egret's plume in hand you're found.

[3]To Yuan Ch'iu as you move along,
   You beat your sounding earthenware.
 In winter and in summer both,
   Your fan of egret's plumes you bear.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 152]

  

II

The Tung Men Chih Fen; narrative. Wanton associations of the young people of Ch'en.

[1]The white elms by the east gate grow,
   And clumps of oaks crown Yuan Ch'iu's head;
 There Tzu-chung's daughter oft we see,
   Dancing about beneath their shade.

[2]On a bright morning they have fixed,
   To seek the plain that southward lies.
 Then from her task of twisting hemp,
   See! dancing through the mart she hies.

[3]The morning fair, young men and girls
   Together go. You hear a youth
 Say to his mate, "O sunflower bright,
   Pledge me with pepper stalk your truth!"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Heng Men; narrative. The contentment and happiness of a poor recluse.

[1]My only door some pieces of crossed wood,
   Within it I can rest enjoy. [p. 153]
 I drink the water wimpling from the spring;
   Nor hunger can my peace destroy.

[2]Purged from. ambition's aims, I say, "For fish,
   We need not bream caught in the Ho;
 Nor, to possess the sweets of love, require
   To Ch'i, to find a Chiang, to go.

[3]"The man contented with his lot, a meal
   Of fish without Ho carp can make;
 Nor needs, to rest in his domestic joy,
   A Tzu of Sung as wife to take."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Tung Men Chih Ch'ih; allusive. The praise of some virtuous and intelligent lady.

[1]To steep your hemp, you seek the moat,
   Where lies the pool, th' east gate beyond.
 I seek that lady, good and fair,
   Who can to me in song respond. [p. 154]

[2]To steep your grass-cloth plants, you seek
   The pool that near the east gate lies.
 I seek that lady, good and fair,
   Who can with me hold converse wise.

[3]Out by the east gate, to the moat,
   To steep your rope rush, you repair.
 Her pleasant converse to enjoy,
   I seek that lady, good and fair.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Tung Men Chih Yang; allusive. The failure of an assignation.

[1]Where grow the willows near the eastern gate,
   And 'neath their leafy shade we could recline,
 She said at evening she would me await,
   And brightly now I see the day star shine!

[2]Here where the willows near the eastern gate
   Grow, and their dense leaves make a shady gloom,
 She said at evening she would me await.
   See now the morning star the sky illume!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 155]

  

VI

The Mu Men; allusive. On some evil person who was going on obstinately to his ruin.

[1]Where through the gate in to the tombs we go,
 Thick jujube trees, the ax requiring, grow.
 Like them that man, who ill befits his place,
 And through the state is reckoned a disgrace!
 All know him bad, but to his course he'll hold,
 So long to evil has the man been sold.

[2]Where through the gate in to the tombs we turn,
 Owls perched upon the plum trees we discern.
 Such omen well may to that man belong,
 Whom to admonish I now sing this song.
 No welcome will the admonition find;
 When overthrown, my words he'll call to mind.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Fang Yu Ch'iao Ch'ao; allusive. A lady laments the alienation of her lover by means of evil tongues.

[1]The magpies' nests are on the bank;
 On heights the lovely pea grows rank; [p. 156]
 While withered my heart is and blank.
   Who wiled my love away?

[2]The temple path its fine tiles shows;
 On heights the ribbon plant bright grows;
 While my breast heaves with sorrow's throes.
   Who led his heart astray?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Yueh Ch'u; allusive. A gentleman tells all the excitement of his desire for the possession of a beautiful lady.

[1]The moon comes forth, bright in the sky;
 A lovelier sight to draw my eye
   Is she, that lady fair.
 She round my heart has fixed love's chain,
 But all my longings are in vain.
   'Tis hard the grief to bear.

[2]The moon comes forth, a splendid sight;
 More winning far that lady bright,
   Object of my desire!
 Deep-seated is my anxious grief;
 In vain I seek to find relief,
   While glows the secret fire. [p. 157]

[3]The rising moon shines mild and fair;
 More bright is she, whose beauty rare
   My heart with longing fills.
 With eager wish I pine in vain;
 O for relief from constant pain,
   Which through my bosom thrills!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Chu Lin; narrative. The intrigue of Duke Ling with the lady of Chu Lin.

[1]What to Chu Lin takes his car?
 Hsia Nan is the leading star.
 Not for Chu Lin does he go;
 Hsia Nan 'tis who draws him so.

[2]Oft his purpose to go there
 At the court he will declare:--
 "Yoke for me my goodly team;
 I to-night in Chu will dream.
 With those colts my way I'll make,
 Morning meal at Chu to take."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 158]

  

X

The Tse P'o; allusive. A gentleman's admiration of and longing for a certain lady.

[1]There where its shores the marsh surround,
 Rushes and lotus plants abound.
 Their loveliness brings to my mind
 The lovelier one that I would find.
 In vain I try to ease the smart
 Of wounded love that wrings my heart.
 In waking thought and likely dreams,
 From every pore the water streams.

[2]All round the marsh's shores are seen
 Valerian flowers and rushes green.
 But lovelier is that Beauty rare,
 Handsome and large, and tall, and fair.
 I wish and long to call her mine,
 Doomed with the longing still to pine.
 Nor day nor night e'er brings relief;
 My inmost heart is full of grief.

[3]Around the marsh, in rich display,
 Grow rush and lotus flowers, all gay. [p. 159]
 But not with her do they compare,
 So tall and large, majestic, fair.
 Both day and night, I nothing speed;
 Still clings to me the aching need.
 On side, on back, on face, I lie,
 But vain each change of posture try.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK XIII. THE ODES OF KUEI

  

I

The Kao Ch'iu; narrative. Some officer of Kuei laments over the frivolous character of his ruler, fond of displaying his robes, instead of attending to the duties of government.

[1]In lamb's-fur robe you lounge about,
   Hold court in fox fur clad.
 Such habits wake my anxious thought;--
   My weary heart is sad.
 When thus you slight each rule of dress,
   Must not your rule be bad?

[2]Aimless you roam in lamb's-fur robe,
   In fox fur grace the hall. [p. 160]
 Such habits wake my anxious thought,
   And fill my heart with gall.
 When thus you slight the laws of dress,
   You'll heed no laws at all.

[3]Your glossy lamb's fur in the sun
   Gleams as with ointment's sheen.
 'Tis this that wakes my anxious thought,
   My heart's core pierces keen.
 That thus you slight the laws of dress,
   Is sorry sign I ween.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Su Kuan; narrative. Some one deplores the decay of filial feeling, as seen in the neglect of the mourning habit.

[1]O that I saw the mourning robe of white,
   Assumed when two years from the death are o'er,
 And earnest mourner's form, to leanness worn!
   Not seeing this, my heart with grief is sore.

[2]O that I saw the lower robe to match
   This cap of white! I'd with the wearer go,
 And live with him, my heart eased of its smart,--
   Its sadness gone, such mourner true to know. [p. 161]

[3]O that I saw the white knee covers worn,
   Suiting the cap and skirt! I should feel bound
 To him whose lasting grief so sought relief.
   The sympathy would heal my heart's deep wound.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Shih Yu Ch'ang Ts'oo; narrative. Some one, groaning under the oppression of the government, wishes he were an unconscious tree.

[1]Where the grounds are wet and low,
 There the trees of goat-peach grow,
 With their branches small and smooth,
 Glossy in their tender youth.
 Joy it were to me, O tree,
 Consciousness to want like thee.

[2]Where the grounds are wet and low,
 There the trees of goat-peach grow.
 Soft and fragrant are their flowers,
 Glossy from the vernal showers.
 Joy it were to me, O tree,
 Ties of home to want like thee. [p. 162]

[3]Where the grounds are wet and low,
 There the trees of goat-peach grow.
 What delicious fruits they bear,
 Glossy, soft, of beauty rare!
 Joy it were to me, O tree,
 Household cares to want like thee.?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Fei Feng; narrative and allusive. Some one tells his sorrow for the decay of the power of Chou.

[1]  Not for the stormy wind,
   Nor rushing chariots' roar,
 But when I view the road to Chou,--
   I'm pained to my heart's core.

[2]  Not for the whirlwind's sweep,
   Nor car's unsteady roll,
 But when I view the road to Chou,--
   Deep sadness dulls my soul.

[3]  For one who fish can cook,
   His boilers I would clear;
 So him whose heart beats westward true,
   With these good words I cheer.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

BOOK XIV. THE ODES OF TS'AO

  

I

The Fou Yu; metaphorical. Against some parties in the state, occupied with frivolous pursuits, and oblivious of important matters.

[1]Like splendid robes appear the wings
   Of the ephemeral fly;
 And such the pomp of those great men,
   Which soon in dust shall lie!
 I grieve! Would they but come to me!
   To teach them I should try.

[2]The wings of the ephemeral fly
   Are robes of colors gay;
 And such the glory of those men,
   Soon crumbling to decay!
 I grieve! Would they but rest with me,
   They'd learn a better way!

[3]The ephemeral fly bursts from its hole,
   With gauzy wings like snow;
 So quick the rise, so quick the fall,
   Of those great men we know!
 I grieve! Would they but lodge with me,
   Forth they would wiser go.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 164]

  

II

The Hou Jen; allusive and metaphorical. Lament over the favor shown to worthless officers at the court of Ts'ao. And the discountenance of good men.

[1]Each warden of the gates appears,
 With lancers and with halberdiers,
   As well befits his place;
 But these three hundred men, who shine
 Grand in their red knee covers fine,
   Only the court disgrace.

[2]Like pelicans, upon the dam
 Which stand, and there their pouches cram,
   Unwet the while their wings,
 Are those who their rich dress display,
 But no befitting service pay,
   Intent on meanest things.

[3]Like pelicans which eager watch
 Upon the dam, their prey to catch,
   And spare to wet the beak,
 Are those who richest favors share,
 But take no part in toil or care,
   Nor the state's welfare seek. [p. 165]

[4]Like grass luxuriant on its side,
 While morning mists the south hill hide,
   These creatures seem to grow;
 But men of worth, like virtuous maid,
 Lovely but poor, denied wealth's aid,
   No recognition know.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Shih Chiu; allusive. The praise of some one, some earl, probably of Ts'ao, uniformly of virtuous conduct and of extensive influence.

[1]See in the mulberry tree the turtledove
 Her seven young tending with untiring love.
 Like her is he, our lord, whose virtuous aim
 His movements, all to rule exact, proclaim.
 His movements, all to rule exact, attest
 His heart to virtue bound within his breast.

[2]The mulberry tree still gives the dove to sight,
 But to the plum her young have taken flight.
 So is that princely man to virtue bound,
 Who ever with his 'silken sash is found. [p. 166]
 In silken girdle loves he to appear,
 And bonnet made from skin of spotted deer.

[3]Behold the dove upon the mulberry tree,
 While on the jujube her seven young we see.
 In soul so steadfast is that princely man,
 Whose course for fault of flaw we vainly scan.
 His movements without fault or flaw beget
 Good order for his rule throughout the state.

[4]See on the mulberry tree the dove still sit,
 And on the hazel all her young ones flit.
 So on his aim that princely man is set,
 Who rectifies the people of our state.
 His laws to all affairs such order give;--
 Ten thousand years in vigor may he live!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Hsia Ch'uan; metaphorical and allusive. The misery and misgovernment of Ts'ao makes the writer think of Chou and of its former vigor and prosperity.

[1]Down from the spring the chilling waters pass,
 And overflow the bushy wolf-tail grass;--
   Fit emblem of our state unblest. [p. 167]
 In the dark night, restless, I wake and sigh,
 And to my thoughts Chou's capital comes nigh,
   When through its kings the land had rest.

[2]The bushy southernwood is flooded o'er,
 By the cold waters from that spring which pour;--
   Fit emblem of our state unblest.
 In the dark night, restless, I wake and sigh,
 And to my thoughts Chou's capital comes nigh,
   When through its kings the land had rest.

[3]The bushy plants, whose stalks serve to divine
 Beneath the waters of that cold spring pine;--
   Fit emblem of our state unblest.
 In the dark night, restless, I wake and sigh,
 And to my thoughts Chou's capital comes nigh,
   When through its kings the land had rest.

[4]Of old there fell the fertilizing rains,
 And brightly shone the millet on our plains;--
   The land knew no oppression hard.
 The states the king's authority obeyed,
 And to each lord, for loyal service paid,
   The chief of Hsun dispensed reward.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 168]

  

BOOK XV. THE ODES OF PIN

  

I

The Ch'i Yueh; narrative. Life in Pin in the olden time; the provident arrangements there to secure the constant supply of food and raiment,--whatever was necessary for the support and comfort of the people.

[1]The seventh month sees the Ho go down the sky,
 And in the ninth, the stores warm clothes supply.
 Our first month's days, the wind blows cold and shrill;
 Our second's days, winds hushed, the air is chill.
 But for those clothes, and garments made of hair,
 At the year's end, how badly all would fare!
 Our third month's days, their plows in hand they take,
 And all the fourth the fields their home they make.
 I with my wife and children take my way,
 And to the southern acres food convey
 For those who toil. Appears th' inspector then,
 Surveys the fields, and cheers the working men. [p. 169]

[2]The seventh month sees the Ho go down the sky,
 And in the ninth, the stores warm clothes supply.
 The warmth begins when come the days of spring,
 And then their notes we hear the orioles sing.
 See the young women, with their baskets high,
 About the mulberry trees their labors ply!
 The softest leaves, along the paths, they seek,
 To feed their silkworms, newly hatched and weak.
 For such, as longer grow the days of spring,
 In crowds they haste white southernwood to bring.
 'Mongst them are some who grieve with wounded heart;--
 To wed young lords, from parents soon they part!

[3]The seventh month sees the Ho down westward go;
 The eighth, the reeds and sedges thickly grow.
 The months the silkworms' eggs are hatched, they break
 The mulberry branches, thus their leaves to take; [p. 170]
 And where those branches stretch out far and high,
 Hatchets and axes on them boldly ply,
 While younger trees only their leaves supply.
 In the seventh month, the shrike's notes shrilly sound,
 And on the eighth, twisting the hemp they're found.
 Their woven fabrics, dark or yellow dyed,
 Are valued highly o'er a circle wide.
 Our brilliant red, the triumph of our art,
 For young lords' lower robes is set apart.

[4]In the fourth month, the snakeroot bursts the ear;
 The shrill cicadas in the fifth we hear.
 When comes the eighth, the ripened grain they crop,
 And in the tenth the leaves begin to drop.
 In our first month for badgers quest they make;
 The wildcat also and the fox they take:--
 These last the furs for young lords to supply.
 Our second month, there comes the hunting high,
 When great and small attend our ruler's car, [p. 171]
 And practice all the exercise of war.
 The hunters get the younger boars they find;
 Those three years old are to the prince assigned.

[5]The locust in the fifth month beats its thighs;
 And in the sixth, its wings the spinner plies.
 The next, we find the crickets in the field;
 Under our eaves, the eighth, they lie concealed;
 The ninth, they come and near our doorways keep;
 The tenth, beneath our beds they slyly creep.
 The rats we smoke out; chinks we fill up tight;--
 And close each opening on the north for light,
 And plaster wicker doors; then each one says,
 "O wife and children, this year's toiling days
 Are o'er, and soon another year will come;
 Enter and dwell in this our cozy home."

[6]For food, the sixth month, plums and vines they spoil;
 The seventh, the beans and sunflower seeds they boil; [p. 172]
 The eighth, they strike the jujube dates all down;
 The tenth, they reap the paddy fully grown,
 And with the grain make spirits 'gainst the spring,
 Which to the bushy eyebrows comfort bring.
 In the seventh month, their food the melons make;
 And in the eighth, the bottle gourds they take.
 The ninth, in soups hempseed they largely use,
 Nor Sonchus leaves do they for these refuse.
 Th' ailanthus foul, for other use not good,
 They fell, and then for fuel burn the wood:--
 'Tis thus the laborer is supplied with food.

[7]In the ninth month, the yards, now stript and bare,
 They for the produce of the fields prepare.
 The tenth month sees the carrying all complete,--
 Of early millets and the late, the wheat,
 The heap, the pulse,--whatever grain we eat.
 This labor done, the husbandmen all say,
 "Our harvest here is well secured. Away
 To town, and see what for our houses there
 We need to do, to put them in repair! [p. 173]
 The reeds we'll gather while we have the light,
 And firmly twist them into ropes at night.
 Up on the roofs we'll haste with these in hand:--
 Soon will the fields our time again demand."

[8]Our second month, they, with harmonious blows,
 Hew out the ice,--housed ere our third month close.
 The following month, and in the early dawn,
 They ope the doors;--forth now may ice be drawn;
 A lamb being offered, after rites of old,
 With scallions flanked, to him who rules the cold.
 In the ninth month, the cold begins, with frost;
 The tenth their cornyards swept and clean they boast.
 Good spirits, in two vessels kept, they take,
 To help their joy, and this proposal make:--
 "We'll kill both lambs and sheep," they joyous say,
 "And to the ruler's quickly take our way.
 We'll mount his hall; the massive cup we'll raise,
 Made of rhinoceros' horn, and as we praise,
 Wish him long life, the life of endless days."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 174]

  

II

The Ch'ih Hsiao; metaphorical. The duke of Chou, in the person of a bird, whose young ones have been destroyed by an owl, vindicates the decisive course he had taken with rebellion.

[1]Owl, O owl, hear my request,
 And do not, owl, destroy my nest.
   You have taken my young,
   Though I over them hung,
 With the nursing of love and of care.
 Pity me, pity me! Hear my prayer.

[2]Ere the clouds the sky had obscured,
 The mulberry roots I secured.
   Door and window around,
   Them so firmly I bound,
 That I said, casting downward my eyes,
 "Dare any of you my house despise?"

[3]I tugged with my claws and I tore,
 And my mouth and my claws were sore.
   So the rushes I sought,
   And all other things brought;
 For to perfect the house I was bent,
 And I grudged no toil with this intent. [p. 175]

[4]My wings are deplorably torn,
 And my tail is much injured and worn.
   Tossed about by the wind,
   While the rain beats unkind,
 Oh! my house is in peril of harm,
 And this note I scream out in alarm.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Tung Shan; narrative. The duke of Chou tells of the toils of his soldiers in their expedition to the east and of their return, and their joy at the last.

[1]To the hills of the east we went,
   And long had we there to remain.
 When the word of recall was sent,
   Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
 When told our return we should take,
   Our hearts in the west were and sore;
 But there did they clothes for us make:--
   They knew our hard service was o'er. [p. 176]
 On the mulberry grounds in our sight
   The large caterpillars were creeping;
 Lonely and still we passed the night,
   All under our carriages sleeping.

[2]To the hills of the east we went,
   And long had we there to remain.
 When the word of recall was sent,
   Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
 The heavenly gourds rise to the eye,
   With their fruit hanging under the eave.
 In our chambers the sowbug we spy;
   Their webs on our doors spiders weave.
 Our paddocks seem crowded with deer,
   With the glowworm's light all about.
 Such thoughts, while they filled us with fear,
   We tried, but in vain, to keep out.

[3]To the hills of the east we went,
   And long had we there to remain.
 When the word of recall was sent,
   Thick and fast came the drizzling rain. [p. 177]
 On ant hills screamed cranes with delight;
   In their rooms were our wives sighing sore.
 Our homes they had swept and made tight:--
   All at once we arrived at the door.
 The bitter gourds hanging are seen,
   From branches of chestnut trees high.
 Three years of toil away we had been,
   Since such a sight greeted the eye.

[4]To the hills of the east we went,
   And long had we there to remain.
 When the word of recall was sent,
   Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
 With its wings now here, and now there,
   Is the oriole sporting in flight.
 Those brides to their husbands repair,
   Their steeds red and bay, flecked with white.
 Each mother has fitted each sash;
   Their equipments are full and complete;
 But fresh unions, whatever their dash,
   Can ne'er with reunions compete.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

  

IV

The P'o Fu; narrative. Responsive to the last ode. His soldiers praise the duke of Chou for his magnanimity and sympathy with the people.

[1]  We splintered our axes, and brought
   Our hatchets all to the same plight.
 But the duke of Chou meant, when eastward he went,
   What was wrong in those, four 'states to right.
     Oh! the pity was great
     Which he felt for their state!

[2]  Our axes and chisels we broke
   To pieces, and splintered and rent.
 But the duke of Chou meant, when eastward he went,
   The four states all reformed to present.
     Oh! the pity was good
     That on them he bestowed!

[3]  Our axes we broke, and our clubs
   To fragments were splintered and split. [p. 179]
 But the duke of Chou meant, when eastward he went,
   The four states in close union to knit.
     Oh! the pity was rare
     That he showed for them there!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Fa Ko; metaphorical. While there is a proper and necessary way for everything, man need not go far to find what it is.

[1]In hewing an ax shaft, how must you act?
   Another ax take, or you'll never succeed.
 In taking a wife, be sure 'tis a fact,
   That with no go-between you never can speed.

[2]In hewing an ax shaft, hewing a shaft,
   For a copy you have the ax in your hand.
 In choosing a wife, you follow the craft,
   And forthwith on the mats the feast vessels stand.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 180]

  

VI

The Chiu Yu; allusive and narrative. The people of the east express their admiration of the duke of Chou, and sorrow at his returning to the west.

[1]The nine inclosures of the net
   The rud and bream keep tight.
 Our prince in dragon robe we see,
   And skirt with figures bright.

[2]The geese brief time fly round the isles;
   Home bends the duke his way.
 'Twas only for two passing nights
   He deigned with us to stay.

[3]Back to the land now fly the geese;
   The duke comes not again.
 'Twas only for two passing nights
   He could with us remain.

[4]Short time the single dragon robe
   Among us we have had.
 Our duke, O take not to the west,
   Nor bid our hearts be sad!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

  

VII

The Lang Po; allusive. The praise of the duke of Chou, more distinguished through his trials.

[1]Dewlap o'ergrown and heavy tail
   Th' impatient wolf impede or trip.
 But see the duke, humble while tried!
   Along his red shoes quiet slip.

[2]Tail heavy and dewlap o'ergrown,
   Th' impatient wolf trip or impede.
 But see the duke, humble while tried,
   His fame unflawed by hasty deed!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 182]

  

PART II

  

MINOR ODES OF THE KINGDOM

  

BOOK I. DECADE OF LU MING

  

I

The Lu Ming; allusive. A festal ode, sung at entertainments to the king's ministers, and guests from the feudal states.

[1]With sounds of happiness the deer
   Browse on the celery of the meads.
 A nobler feast is furnished here,
   With guests renowned for noble deeds.
 The lutes are struck; the organ blows,
   Till all its tongues in movement heave.
 Each basket loaded stands, and shows
   The precious gifts the guests receive.
 They love me, and my mind will teach,
 How duty's highest aim to reach. [p. 183]

[2]With sounds of happiness the deer
   The southernwood crop in the meads.
 What noble guests surround me here,
   Distinguished for their worthy deeds!
 From them my people learn to fly
   Whate'er is mean; to chiefs they give
 A model and a pattern high;--
   They show the life they ought to live.
 Then fill their cups with spirits rare,
 Till each the banquet's joy shall share.

[3]With sounds of happiness the deer
   The salsola crop in the fields.
 What noble guests surround me here!
   Each lute for them its music yields.
 Sound, sound the lutes, or great or small,
   The joy harmonious to prolong;
 And with my spirits rich crown all
   The cups to cheer the festive throng.
 Let each retire with gladdened heart,
 In his own sphere to play his part.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

  

II

The Ssu Mu; narrative and allusive. A festal ode, complimentary to an officer on his return from an expedition, celebrating the union in him of loyal duty and filial feeling.

[1]On dashed my four steeds, without halt, without stay,
 Though toilsome and winding from Chou was the way.
 I wished to return,--but the monarch's command
 Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;
 And my heart was with sadness oppressed.

[2]On dashed my four steeds; I ne'er slackened the reins.
 They snorted and panted,--all white, with black manes.
 I wished to return, but our sovereign's command
 Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;
 And I dared not to pause or to rest.

[3]Unresting the filial doves speed in their flight,
 Ascending, then sweeping swift down from the height,
 Now grouped on the oaks. The king's high command
 Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;
 And my father I left, sore distressed. [p. 185]

[4]Unresting the filial doves speed in their flight,
 Now fanning the air, and anon they alight
 On the medlars thick grouped. But our monarch's command
 Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;--
 Of my mother I thought with sad breast.

[5]My four steeds I harnessed, all white and black-maned,
 Which straight on their way, fleet and emulous, strained.
 I wished to return; and now venture in song
 The wish to express, and announce how I long
 For my mother my care to attest.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Huang Huang Che Hua; allusive and narrative. An ode appropriate to the dispatch of an envoy; complimentary to him, and suggesting instructions as to the discharge of his duty.

[1]As the flower that blooms bright on the mountain or lea,
 Is the legate, whom charged with high mission we see. [p. 186]
 With his suite, all alert and aye watchful he hies,
 That his hand may achieve what his heart shall devise.

[2]"Fresh and young are my steeds," so he sang as he sped,
 "And the six reins in hand look with ointment o'erspread.
 So hurrah! my good horses, dash on at your best,
 As now here, and now there, I am pushing my quest.

[3]"Many-spotted my coursers, whose hues finely blend,
 And the six reins in hand, soft as silk, freely bend.
 So hurrah! my good horses, strain tendons and thews,
 As now here, and now there, I am searching for news.

[4]"With black manes and white coats are the steeds of my car,
 And the gleam of the six glossy reins shines afar.
 So hurrah! my good horses, ply muscle and leg,
 As now here, and now there, for wise counsel I beg. [p. 187]

[5]"Dark, with white interspersed, are the coursers I drive;
 'Gainst my hands, the reins grasping, in vain would they strive.
 So hurrah! my good horses, speed onwards and fly,
 As now here, and now there, much inquiring I pry."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Chang Ti; allusive and narrative. Setting forth the close relation and affection that ought to obtain between brothers.

[1]      With mass of gorgeous flowers
       The cherry trees are crowned,
 But none within this world of ours
       Like brothers can be found.

[2]      When awful death comes near,
       'Tis brothers sympathize.
 When headlong flight fills plain and height,
       To brother brother flies. [p. 188]

[3]      See how the wagtail's head
       Quick answers to its tail!
 When hardships great befall our state,
       Friends, are of no avail.
       In times of urgent need,
       We brothers' help receive.
 Then friends, though good, of different blood,
       Long sighs will only heave.

[4]      Brothers indoors may fight;
       But insults from without
 Join them at once, and they unite
       The common foe to rout.
       In cases such as this,
       In vain to friends we turn.
 They may be true, but they'll eschew
       The danger they discern.

[5]      Deaths and disorder o'er,
       'Mid peace and rest now cold,
 Some men, alas! their brothers pass,
       Nor them as friends will hold. [p. 189]

[6]      With dishes in array,
       The cup may oft go round;
 But only where brothers are there,
       The feast is truly found.
       'Tis when they all appear,
       And each is in his place,
 That childlike joy, without alloy,
       Crowns harmony with grace.

[7]      Children and wife we love;
       Union with them is sweet
 As lute's soft strain that soothes our pain.
       How joyous do we meet!
       But brothers, more than they,
       Can satisfy the heart.
 'Tis their accord does peace afford,
       And lasting joy impart.

[8]      For ordering of your homes,
       For joy with child and wife,
 Consider well the truth I tell;--
       This is the charm of life!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 190]

  

V

The Fa Mu; allusive. A festal ode, sung at the entertainment of friends; intended to celebrate the duty and value of friendship, even to those of the highest rank.

[1]The woodmen's blows responsive ring,
   As on the trees they fall;
 And when the birds their sweet notes sing,
   They to each other call.
 From the dark valley comes a bird,
   And seeks the lofty tree.
 Ying goes its voice, and thus it cries,
   "Companion, come to me."
 The bird, although a creature small,
   Upon its mates depends;
 And shall we men, who rank o'er all,
   Not seek to have our friends?
 All spirits love the friendly man,
   And hearken to his prayer.
 What harmony and peace they can
   Bestow, his lot shall share. [p. 191]

[2]Hsu-hsu the woodmen all unite
   To shout, as trees they fell.
 They do their work with all their might;--
   What I have done I'll tell.
 I've strained and made my spirits clear,
   The fatted lambs I've killed.
 With friends who my own surname bear,
   My hall I've largely filled.
 Some may be absent, casually,
   And leave a broken line;
 But better this than absence by
   An oversight of mine.
 My court I've sprinkled and swept clean,
   Viands in order set.
 Eight dishes loaded stand with grain;
   There's store of fatted meat.
 My mother's kith and kin I wis
   I've widely called by name.
 That some be hindered better is
   Than I give cause for blame.

[3]On the hillside the trees they fell,
   All working with good will. [p. 192]
 I labor too, with equal zeal,
   And the host's part fulfill.
 Spirits I've set in order meet,
   The dishes stand in rows.
 The guests are here; no vacant seat
   A brother absent shows.
 The loss of kindly feeling oft
   From slightest things shall grow,
 Where all the fare is dry and spare,
   Resentments fierce may glow.
 My store of spirits is well strained.
   If short prove the supply,
 My messengers I straightway send,
   And what is needed buy.
 I beat the drums, and in the dance
   Lead joyously the train.
 Oh! good it is, when falls the chance,
   The sparkling cup to drain.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The T'ien Pao; narrative. An ode responsive to any of the five preceding. His officers and guests, feasted by the king, celebrate his praises, and desire for him the blessing of Heaven and of his ancestors.

[1]Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
 It round thee fair has cast [p. 193]
     Thy virtue pure.
 Thus richest joy is thine;--
 Increase of corn and wine,
 And every gift divine,
     Abundant, sure.

[2]Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
 From it thou goodness hast;
     Right are thy ways.
 Its choicest gifts 'twill pour,
 That last forevermore,
 Nor time exhaust the store
     Through endless days.

[3]Heaven shields and sets thee fast,
 Makes thine endeavor last,
     And prosper well.
 Like hills and mountains high,
 Whose masses touch the sky;
 Like stream aye surging by;
     Thine increase swell! [p. 194]

[4]With rite and auspice fair,
 Thine offerings thou dost bear,
     And sonlike give,
 The seasons round from spring,
 To olden duke and king,
 Whose words to thee we bring:--
     "Forever live."

[5]The spirits of thy dead
 Pour blessings on thy head,
     Unnumbered, sweet.
 Thy subjects, simple, good,
 Enjoy their drink and food.
 Our tribes of every blood
     Follow thy feet.

[6]Like moons that wax in light;
 Or suns that scale the height;
     Or ageless hill;
 Nor change, nor autumn know;
 As pine and cypress grow;
 The sons that from thee flow
     Be lasting still!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 195]

  

VII

The Ts'ai Wei; allusive and narrative. An ode on the dispatch of troops to guard the frontiers on the north against the wild tribes of the Hsien-yun.

[1]Come pluck the ferns, the ferns sharp-pointed take;
 The curling fronds now their appearance make.
 And now we march. O when shall we return?
 Till late next year we must in exile mourn.
 So long the husband, parted from his wife,
 Shall 'gainst the Hsien-yun wage the deadly strife.
 'Mid service hard all rest will be denied;--
 Northwards we go, to quell the Hsien-yun's pride.

[2]Come pluck the ferns, the ferns sharp-pointed pull;
 Their fronds uncurled, they tender look and cool.
 Onwards we march. O when shall we return?
 Disconsolate, our hearts in sadness mourn.
 Yes, sad our hearts! In sorrow forth we go,
 To thirst and hunger and each pinching woe. [p. 196]
 While serving thus the frontiers to defend,
 To those at home no message can we send.

[3]Come pluck the ferns, their sharp points disregard;
 Some time has passed, and now their leaves are hard.
 What is the date for our return assigned?
 Next year's tenth month.--We keep it well in mind.
 But the king's work no grudging heart requires;
 Denied our rest, we fan our valor's fires.
 Home thoughts may often cause us weary hours,
 But home we go not, till success is ours.

[4]What gorgeous sight was that which fixed our gaze?
 The mass of flowers the cherry tree displays.
 But here a sight we see, as fair and grand;--
 Our leader's car, given by his sovereign's hand.
 It stands equipt, imposing in our sight,
 With steeds all strong, and eager for the fight. [p. 197]
 And shall not we the inspiration own?
 One month our arms with victories three shall crown.

[5]Grand are those four steeds, harnessed to the car!
 Conducted this, we boldly dare the war.
 With confidence the general takes his seat;
 The men behind rejoice the foe to meet.
 On move the steeds in step. The quiver made
 Of sealskin tough is to the view displayed,
 And bow with ivory ends,--the Hsien-yun's dread.
 Daily each other's courage we provoke,
 And hope to end our service by a stroke.

[6]Ah! vain our efforts to assuage our grief!
 None know our sadness; nought can give relief.
 Last year, when from our homes the field we took,
 'Twas sweet on willows fresh and green to look.
 When we return, 'twill be the winter stern,
 And hard our path through snow clouds to discern.
 Alas! how great the toilsome journey's length,
 With thirst and hunger to exhaust our strength!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 198]

  

VIII

The Ch'u Ch'e; narrative. An ode of congratulation, on the return of the troops from the expedition against the Hsien-yun.

[1]  Forth from the city in our cars we drove,
     Until we halted at the pasture ground.
   The general came, and there with ardor strove
     A note of zeal throughout the host to sound.
     "Direct from court I come, by orders bound
   The march to hasten;"--it was thus he spake.
     Then with the carriage officers around,
   He strictly charged them quick dispatch to make:--
 "Urgent the king's affairs, forthwith the field we take."

[2]  While there we stopt, the second corps appeared,
     And 'twixt us and the city took its place.
   The guiding standard was on high upreared,
     Where twining snakes the tortoises embrace,
     While oxtails, crestlike, did the staff's top grace.
   We watched the sheet unfolding grandly wave;
     Each flag around showed falcons on its face.
   With anxious care looked on our leader brave;
 Watchful the carriage officers appeared and grave. [p. 199]

[3]  Nan Chung, our chief, had heard the royal call
     To go where inroad by Hsien-yuns was made,
   And 'cross the frontier build a barrier wall.
     Numerous his chariots, splendidly arrayed!
     The standards--this where dragons were displayed,
   And that where snakes round tortoises were coiled
     Terrific flew. "Northward our host," he said,
   "Heaven's son sends forth to tame the Hsien-yun wild."
 Soon by this awful chief would all their tribes be foiled.

[4]  When first we took the field, and northward went,
     The millets were in flower;--a prospect sweet.
   Now when our weary steps are homeward bent,
     The snow falls fast, the mire impedes our feet.
     Many the hardships we were called to meet,
   Ere the king's orders we had all fulfilled.
     No rest we had; often our friends to greet
   The longing came; but vain regrets we stilled;
 By tablets stern our hearts with fresh resolve were thrilled. [p. 200]

[5]  "Incessant chirp the insects in the grass;
     All round about the nimble hoppers spring.
   From them our thoughts quick to our husbands pass,
     Although those thoughts our hearts with anguish wring.
     Oh! could we see them, what relief 'twould bring!
   Our hearts, rejoiced, at once would feel at rest."
     Thus did our wives, their case deploring, sing;
   The while our leader farther on had pressed,
 And smitten with his power the wild Jung of the west.

[6]  The spring days now are lengthening out their light;
     The plants and trees are dressed in living green;
   The orioles resting sing, or wing their flight;
     Our wives amid the southernwood are seen,
     Which white they bring, to feed their silkworms keen.
   Our host, returned, sweeps onwards to the hall,
     Where chiefs are questioned, shown the captives mean.
   Nan Chung, majestic, draws the gaze of all,
 Proud o'er the barbarous foe his victories to recall.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

IX

The Ti Tu; narrative. An ode of congratulation, specially intended for the troops, on the return of the expedition against the Hsien-yun.

[1]The russet pear tree stands there all alone;
 How bright the growth of fruit upon it shown!
 The king's affairs no stinting hands require,
 And days prolonged still mock our fond desire.
 But time has brought the tenth month of the year;
 My woman's heart is torn with wound severe.
 Surely my warrior lord might now appear!

[2]The russet pear tree stands there all alone;
 How dense the leafy shade all o'er it thrown!
 The king's affairs require no slackening hand,
 And our sad hearts their feelings can't command.
 The plants and trees in beauty shine; 'tis spring.
 From off my heart its gloom I fain would fling.
 This season well my warrior home may bring! [p. 202]

[3]I climbed that northern hill, and medlars sought;
 The spring nigh o'er, to ripeness they were brought.
 "The king's affairs cannot be slackly done:"--
 'Tis thus our parents mourn their absent son.
 But now his sandal car must broken be;
 I seem his powerful steeds worn out to see.
 Relief has gone! He can't be far from me!

[4]Alas! they can't have marched; they don't arrive!
 More hard it grows with my distress to strive.
 The time is passed, and still he is not here!
 My sorrows multiply; great is my fear.
 But lo! by reeds and shell I have divined.
 That he is near, they both assure my mind;--
 Soon at my side my warrior I shall find!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Nan Kai. This is one of the six odes which are commonly spoken of as having been lost. The subject of the Nan Kai was: Filial sons admonishing one another on the duty of supporting their parents.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 203]

  

BOOK II. THE DECADE OF PAI HUA

  

I

The Pai Hua. The unsullied purity of filial sons. Text wanting.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Hua Shu. The harmony of the seasons, and the abundance of the harvests, seen especially in the large produce of the millet crops. Text wanting.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Yu Li; allusive and narrative. An ode used at district entertainments, celebrating the abundance of everything, and the prosperity of the times.

[1]By means of simplest fish trap that men make,
 Sand blowers small and yellow jaws they take;--
   Such the result good rule insures.
 And here our host his spirits forth has set,
 Good and abundant; proof we now are met,
   When ordered rule large wealth secures. [p. 204]

[2]In simplest fish traps that might useless seem,
 They take abundant store of tench and bream;--
   Such issue from our good rule springs.
 And here our host his spirits forth has set,
 Abundant, good;--sure proof we now are met,
   When ordered rule great riches brings.

[3]Into the simplest fish traps largely go
 Mudfish and carp;--captures that clearly show
   How with good rule the land is crowned.
 And here our host his spirits forth has set,
 Good and most ample;--proof we here are met,
   When ordered rule makes wealth abound.

[4]The mats in great abundance viands show;
 And these of rarest quality we know.

[5]The viands excellent are here revealed;
 Both land and sea their contributions yield.

[6]Viands in ample store the feast displays;
 And all in season, all beyond our praise.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Yu Keng. All things produced according to their nature. Text wanting.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 205]

  

V

The Nan Yu Chia Yu; allusive. A festal ode appropriate to the entertainment of worthy guests, and celebrating the generous sympathy of the entertainer.

[1]The fishers of the south for barbel make
 Sharp search, and many with their baskets take.
 The host his noble guests has gathered here;
 They drink with him, and joyous share his cheer.

[2]The barbel of the south are largely caught
 In wicker nets, which then to land are brought.
 The host has round him called each noble guest;
 They drink with him, delighted with the feast.

[3]The southern trees with drooping branches grow,
 Round which the sweet gourds clasp and twine below.
 His noble guests around the host we see;
 They drink with him, and feast in cheerful glee.

[4]About the filial doves incessant fly;
 Flock follows flock, in wheeling circles high.
 The noble guests long at their cups remain;
 They freely drink, and then they drink again.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 206]

  

VI

The Ch'ung Ch'iu. How all things attained their greatest height and size. Text wanting.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Nan Shan Yu T'ai; allusive. A festal ode, where the ruler, as the host, celebrates the virtues of his ministers, who are the guests, and supplicates blessings on them.

[1]  The southern hills the t'ai plant show,
     The northern yield the lai.
   Your presence here, my noble guests,
     Fills me with rapture high.
 'Tis on your strength that all my states depend;
 Myriads of years be yours, years without end!

[2]  On southern hills are mulberry trees,
     On northern willows grow.
   Your presence here, my noble guests,
     Makes my joy overflow.
 Your virtue's rays through all my regions shine;
 Myriads of years be yours in boundless line! [p. 207]

[3]  On southern hills the medlars thrive,
     And plum trees in the north.
   Your presence here, my noble guests,
     The richest joy calls forth.
 Parental love ye for my people show,
 And may your virtuous fame decay ne'er know!

[4]  The southern hills the k'ao display,
     The northern have the niu.
   Here at our feast, my noble guests,
     My heart rests glad in you.
 The eyebrows of long life your foreheads crown;
 Still wider be your virtuous fame's renown!

[5]  The honey trees on southern hills,
     The yu on northern rise.
   Your presence here, my noble guests,
     Rare happiness supplies.
 Gray hair and wrinkled face yours yet shall be:
 May future times your sons as prosperous see!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 208]

  

VIII

The Yu I. How all things were produced and flourished as was natural to them. Text wanting.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Liao Hsiao; allusive. A festal ode, on occasion of the king's entertaining the feudal princes who have come to his court.

[1]  Tall grows the fragrant southernwood,
     On which the dew shines bright.
   Now that my noble men I see,
     My anxious heart feels light.
 We feast, while smiles and chat our joy proclaim;
 Such guests deserve prosperity and fame.

[2]  Tall grows the fragrant southernwood,
     On which thick lies the dew.
   The presence of these noble men
     Gives grace and glory too.
 From error's taint is their pure virtue free;
 Long may they live, and ne'er forgotten be! [p. 209]

[3]  Tall grows the fragrant southernwood,
     With dew all over wet.
   Joyful and unconstrained these guests
     Share the rich feast here set.
 In concord with their brothers may they dwell,
 And happy age their virtue's praises tell!

[4]  Tall grows the fragrant southernwood,
     On which rich lies the dew.
   The rein ends of these noble men
     At once engaged my view.
 At dawn they hung, while the bells tinkled sweet
 From bar and bit. All good upon them meet!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Chan Lu; allusive. A festal ode, appropriate to the convivial entertainment of the feudal princes at the royal court.

[1]The dew lies heavy all around,
 Nor, till the sun shines, leaves the ground. [p. 210]
 Far into night we feasting sit;
 We drink, and none his place may quit.

[2]The dew lies heavy, and its gems
 Stud the luxuriant, grassy stems.
 The happy night with wassail rings;
 So feasted here the former kings.

[3]The jujube and the willow tree
 All fretted with the dew we see.
 Each guest's a prince of noble line,
 In whom the virtues all combine.

[4]The t'ung and i their fruits display,
 Pendent from every graceful spray.
 My guests are joyous and serene,
 No haggard eye, no ruffled mien.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 211]

  

BOOK III. THE DECADE OF T'UNG KUNG

  

I

The T'ung Kung; narrative. A festal ode, on occasion of a feast given by the king to some prince for the merit he had achieved, and the conferring on him of a red bow.

[1]The red bows unbent were received, and are kept
   In store,--to reward service done for our land.
 Lo! here is a prince whose great merit we own;
   To him one I give from my heart with glad hand.
 The bells and the drums all in order are placed;--
 I'll feast the whole morning with this noble guest.

[2]The red bows unbent were received, and are fixed
   On frames,--to await service done for our states.
 Lo! here is a prince who well merits the prize;
   With joy my whole heart in his presence dilates.
 The bells and the drums in good order all stand;--
 And this morning his place shall be on my right hand. [p. 212]

[3]The red bows unbent were received, and are placed
   In cases,--to show how we merit revere.
 Lo! here is a prince such reward who deserves;
   For him in my heart's core the love is sincere.
 With our bells and our drums the court shall resound,
 While for him all the morning the pledge cup goes round.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Ching Ching Che O; allusive and metaphorical. An ode, celebrating the attention paid by the early kings of Chou to the education of talent.

[1]Bright grows the aster-southernwood,
   Luxuriant on that spacious mound.
 Our lord, renowned for courtesy,
   Wakes in our hearts a joy profound.

[2]The aster, clothing yonder isle,
   Its color throws o'er all the stream.
 When we our noble lord behold,
   Our hearts reflect his gladdening beam. [p. 213]

[3]The aster on that lofty height
   In beauteous state luxuriant grows.
 An hundred sets of cowries bright
   Our noble lord on us bestows.

[4]Our youth were like the willow boat,
   Sinking and rising on the tide.
 Our noble lord now for them cares;--
   In him our resting hearts confide.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Lu Yueh; narrative. Celebrating a successful expedition against the Hsien-yun, and especially the character and conduct of Keih-foo who commanded in it.

[1]When the sixth month had come, the turmoil of war
 Burst suddenly forth, and each quick-harnessed car
 Stood ready to move, with its steeds keen and strong,
 While heavier cars bore the baggage along.
 Fierce blazing, the Hsien-yun had mustered their men;
 No recreant there, all was urgency then. [p. 214]
 The king gave the word; we were mustered and gone,
 To rescue from foemen the kingdom and throne.

[2]Well matched in their strength were the horses, and black,
 And trained to the reins, as they tighten or slack.
 Ere the sixth month was o'er, the field we could take;
 No more preparation we needed to make.
 With all our accouterments fully complete,
 Each day thirty li went our hurrying feet.
 The king gave the word; we were mustered and gone,
 With courage all ardent to help Heaven's son.

[3]Long and stout were the steeds, attached to each car,
 With broad heads that scented the battle afar.
 We smote the Hsien-yun, and great merit obtained,
 Nor flagged in our efforts till triumph was gained.
 The eye of our leader was careful and stern,
 Discharging his service, bright glory to earn; [p. 215]
 Determined the war to such issue to bring,
 As would firmly establish the throne of the king.

[4]For themselves badly judging, the Hsien-yun go,
 Bold to occupy Chiao, and seize upon Ho.
 Hao and Fang they o'erran, still issuing forth,
 Till, crossing the King, they pressed onto the north.
 Our flags showed the falcons in blazonry bright,
 And gayly their streamers all fluttered in white.
 Ten chariots of war, all imposing and strong,
 Led proudly the van of our conquering throng.

[5]The workmen had labored to perfect each car,
 Well balanced, before and behind, for the war.
 Its four steeds were mighty, unmatched in their strain,
 And yielding at once to each touch of the rein.
 We smote the Hsien-yun; ay, we conquered, and then
 We pursued them in flight to the far T'a-yuan.
 As in peace, so in war, our Chi-fu is great,
 Affording a pattern to all in each state. [p. 216]

[6]And now at the banquet, forgotten all care,
 He feasts with his friends, feeling happiness rare.
 The tedious marches are all over now,--
 The marches we traveled, returning from Hao.
 To his friends the bright spirits his welcome convey;
 Minced carp and roast turtle the mats all display.
 And who are the guests? There above every other
 Sits Chang Chung, renowned as a son and a brother.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Ts'ai Ch'i; allusive and narrative. Celebrating Fang Shu, and his successful conduct of a grand expedition against the tribes of the south.

[1]In those new fields, till the last year unfilled,
 And acres which this year the grain first filled,
 White millet there they reaped with eager hand,
 When Fang Shu came, the army to command.
 Three thousand chariots for his orders wait,
 Surrounded by a host, well trained, elate. [p. 217]
 He led them on. His car four piebalds drew,
 That moved like one great steed to human view.
 A royal gift, it shone in glittering red,
 With bamboo-checkered screen, and quiver made
 Of sealskin strong. The gilt hooks we could tell
 On each steed's breast; the rein ends graceful fell.

[2]Where toil last year had opened harvests new,
 And where about the villages it grew,
 White millet there they reaped with eager hand,
 When Fang Shu came, the army to command.
 His cars three thousand; on his banners shone
 Snake, tortoise, dragon, as he led them on.
 Gay was his yoke; his naves were lacquered red;
 Two tinkling bells hung from each horse's head.
 He wore the robes the king's gift had bestowed;
 Beneath, the red knee covers brightly glowed.
 Rare gems upon his girdle pendant hung,
 Flashed as they moved, and sounded as they swung. [p. 218]

[3]Swift as the soaring falcon cleaves the sky,
 And wheels about in airy circles high,
 Descending then, and lighting where it rose;
 So Fang Shu led his troops against their foes.
 Round the war chariots, full three thousand strong,
 Close marched the men, a well-trained warrior throng.
 The bells and drums his orders clear expressed,
 And then the marshaled forces he addressed,
 And wise arrangements made. The battle raged,
 While the drums rolled, inspiring all engaged.
 Victory once gained, a lighter sound they gave,
 The while he ordered back the victors brave.

[4]The savage hordes of King, made blind by fate,
 Had madly dared to oppose our larger state.
 Although Fang Shu was ripe with growing years,
 Yet in his plans a vigorous force appears.
 Leading his troops, the hostile chiefs he bound [p. 219]
 For question, with a captive crowd around.
 How numerous were his chariots in the fray,
 Numerous, and all arrayed in grand array,
 Like rattling thunder in assaulting speed!
 Oh! grand in wisdom was he as in deed!
 The Hsien-yun he had smitten to the ground;
 The awe-struck tribes of King his prowess owned.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Ch'e Kung; narrative. Celebrating a great hunting, presided over by King Hsuan, on occasion of his giving audience to the feudal princes at the eastern capital of Lu.

[1]Our chariots were well built and firm,
   Well matched our steeds, and fleet and strong.
 Four, sleek and large, each chariot drew,
   And eastward thus we drove along.

[2]Our hunting cars were light and good,
   Each with its team of noble steeds.
 Still further east we took the way
   To Fu mere's grassy plains that leads.

[3]Loud-voiced, the masters of the chase
   Arranged the huntsmen, high and low. [p. 220]
 While banners streamed, and oxtails flew,
   We sought the prey on distant Gaou.

[4]Each with full team, the princes came,
   A lengthened train in bright array.
 In gold-wrought slippers, kneecaps red,
   They looked as on an audience day.

[5]Each right thumb wore the metal guard;
   On the left arm its shield was bound.
 In unison the arrows flew;
   The game lay piled upon the ground.

[6]The leaders of the tawny teams
   Sped on their course, direct and true.
 The drivers perfect skill displayed;
   Like blow well aimed each arrow flew.

[7]Neighing and pleased, the steeds returned;
   The bannered lines back slowly came.
 No jostling rude disgraced the crowd;
   The king declined large share of game.

[8]So did this famous hunt proceed!
   So free it was from clamorous sound!
 Well does our king become his place,
   And high the deeds his reign have crowned!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

  

VI

The Chi Jih; narrative. Celebrating a hunting expedition by King Hsuan on a smaller scale, attended by the officers of the court, and within the royal domain.

[1]The day Mow-shin was lucky found;
   Then to the sire of steeds we prayed.
 Our cars and teams and gear were good;
   We scour the heights where wild game strayed.

[2]And Keng-wu also lucky proved;
   We picked our steeds, and chose our ground,--
 Where stags and does by Ts'eih and Ts'eu
   Made sport for him whom Heaven had crowned.

[3]We viewed the plain where teeming game
   Now shivering stand, now frantic run;
 Here two, there three. We charged along,
   Pleasure to yield to Heaven's great son.

[4]We bend our bows; our shafts we grasp;
   There lies the huge behemoth low,
 And boars are pierced:--spoil for the guests,
   At court, when wine cups overflow.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 222]

  

VII

The Hung Yen; allusive. The people, regathered into communities under King Hsuan, praise the officers by whom this had been accomplished.

[1]With rustling wings the wild geese fly,
   Round fields long strange to hand of toil.
 Called by the officers in charge,
   We labor on the desert soil.
 Sad is our state, but sadder still
 The hearts no wedded love can fill.

[2]The wild geese fly about, and light
   Amid the marsh, where grain once shone.
 We rear the walls as we are told;--
   Five thousand feet are quickly done
 Great is the toil, and sore the pain,
 But peaceful homes will rise again.

[3]The wild geese fly with plaintive note,
   That sadly suits our weary sighs.
 But those whose orders we obey,--
   They see our pain; and they are wise.
 If they had not been men of sense,
 They had rebuked our insolence.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 223]

  

VIII

The T'ing Liao; narrative. Describing the anxiety of some king--supposed to be King Hsuan--not to be late at his morning levee.

[1]How goes the night? For heavy morning sleep
 Ill suits the king who men would loyal keep.
 The courtyard, ruddy with the torch's light,
 Proclaims unspent the deepest hour of night.
 Already near the gate my lords appear;
 Their tinkling bells salute my wakeful ear.

[2]How goes the night? I may not slumber on.
 Although not yet the night is wholly gone,
 The paling torchlight in the court below
 Gives token that the hours swift-footed go.
 Already at the gate my lords appear;
 Their tinkling bells with measured sound draw near.

[3]How goes the night? I may not slumber now.
 The darkness smiles with morning on its brow.
 The courtyard torch no more gives forth its ray,
 But heralds with its smoke the coming day.
 My princes pass the gate, and gather there;
 I see their banners floating in the air.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 224]

  

IX

The Mien Shui; allusive. Bewailing the disorder of the times and the general indifference to it, and tracing it to the slanderers encouraged by men in authority.

[1]The waters flow with volume vast,
   Straight to the ocean's mighty court;
 Swift fly the soaring falcons past,
   And to their resting place resort.
 But through the land disorder wends,
   And with it none will dare to cope.
 Ye kinsmen near, ye honored friends,
   Ye people, why abandon hope?
 Alas that you the struggle shun,
 And leave your parents all undone!

[2]Their bed the mighty waters leave,
   And ruin spread the country o'er.
 The sky on wing the falcons cleave;
   High and yet higher still they soar.
 So is it with the lawless crew,
   Whose evil courses know no bound.
 I think of them, and start to do.
   Alas! I go but round and round.
 Still in my heart fast dwells its grief;
 I vainly strive to find relief. [p. 225]

[3]With volume vast the waters flow,
   But still within their channel run.
 And swiftly as the falcons go,
   The vault that copes the hill they shun.
 And can we then no method find
   To check the talk that fills the land?
 No means devise to curb or bind
   The idle tongue and wanton hand?
 Watch, friends, yourselves; watch reverently,
 And slanderous tongues will silent be!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Ho Ming; metaphorical. Certain moral lessons from natural facts.

[1]All true words fly, as from yon reedy marsh
 The crane rings o'er the wild its screaming harsh.
 Vainly you try reason in chains to keep;--
 Freely it moves as fish sweeps through the deep.
 Hate follows love, as 'neath those sandal trees
 The withered leaves the eager searcher sees.
 The hurtful ne'er without some good was born;--
 The stones that mar the hill will grind the corn. [p. 226]

[2]All true words spread, as from the marsh's eye
 The crane's sonorous note ascends the sky.
 Goodness throughout the widest sphere abides,
 As fish round isle and through the ocean glides.
 And lesser good near greater you shall see,
 As grows the paper shrub 'neath sandal tree.
 And good emerges from what man condemns;--
 Those stones that mar the hill will polish gems.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK IV. THE DECADE OF CH'I FU

  

I

The Ch'i Fu; narrative. The soldiers of the royal guard complain of the service imposed on them by the minister of war.

[1]Hear, minister of war, the charge we bring!
 We are the teeth and talons of the king;
   Close to his person is our place.
 Why have you sent us to this homeless life,
 Where far from court we roam, 'mid miseries rife?
   Why are we doomed to this disgrace? [p. 227]

[2]Hear, minister of war, the accusing word!
 We are the taloned soldiers of our lord,
   And near his person should have rest.
 But you from court have sent us far away,
 Where ceaselessly we toil from day to day,
   By constant misery oppressed.

[3]Hear, minister of war, whose erring deed
 Has paid our valor with a sorry meed,
   When we should near the court reside.
 Why have you sent us far to suffer grief,
 And leave our mothers longing for relief,
   With all their cooking labors tried?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Pai Chu; narrative. The writer expresses his regret at the abandonment of public life by an officer whom he admired.

[1]Free let the brilliant white colt eat
   The tenderest produce in my yard.
 Secure it by the neck and feet;
   And this morn's pleasure safely guard.
 Its owner, cherished in my heart,
   Shall then with me at ease abide.
 Alas that he should e'er depart.
   And hermitlike his merit hide! [p. 228]

[2]Free let the brilliant white colt eat
   The bean sprouts growing in my yard.
 Secure it by the neck and feet,
   This evening's joy thus safely guard.
 Its owner, cherished in my heart,
   Shall then be here, a guest admired.
 O could I wile him from the part
   He wants to play, from men retired!

[3]O leave thy colt of brilliant white!
   If thou to me would'st blithely come,
 As duke or marquis, honors bright
   Thou should'st obtain, and in thy home
 Find endless joy. Try to restrain,
   With strictest curb, thy roaming mind:
 And from the hermit life refrain,
   To which thou art so much inclined.

[4]'Tis vain. The brilliant white colt view,
   Deep in that empty valley stand,
 Before it placed a bundle new
   Of grass plucked by its master's hand.
 That master as a gem I hold.
   O that, relenting, he may send
 What I'll prize more than gems or gold,--
   News that he still remains my friend!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 229]

  

III

The Huang Niao; metaphorical. Some officer, who had withdrawn to another state, finds his expectations of the people there disappointed, and proposes to return to the royal domain.

[1]Thou yellow-plumaged bird, O spare
   The paper shrubs and fields of grain!
 For me these people show no care;--
   I long for kin and home again.
 That we judged ill, when we came here,
 Does from their cold neglect appear.

[2]The mulberry trees and fields of maize,
   Thou yellow-plumaged bird, eschew!
 These people are a dullard race;
   I long my brethren's face to view.
 That we judged ill, when we came here,
 Does from their cold neglect appear.

[3]Thou yellow-plumaged bird, O fly
   Those oak trees, nor the millet eat!
 From this bad land I back must hie;--
   I long my father's kin to greet.
 That we judged ill, when we came here,
 Does from their cold neglect appear.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 230]

  

IV

The Wo Hsing Ch'i Yeh; narrative. An officer, who had left the royal domain, and sought for protection in a state where he had affinities by marriage, relates his disappointment, and the unworthy cause of it.

[1]All through the fields I traveled sad,
   Th' ailanthus foul my only shade.
 Through our relationship I came,
   Shelter to find with you and aid.
 But me you show no wish to entertain;--
 Back to my state and clan I go again!

[2]All through the fields I traveled sad,
   And for my food the sheep's-foot cooked.
 Through our relationship, to you
   For lodging for a time I looked.
 But me you show no wish to entertain;--
 Back to my kindred now I go again!

[3]All through the fields I went and tried
   Hunger with pokeweed to appease.
 I came to you; your love is cold;
   And your new mate you seek to please.
 Grant that your heart her riches have not won,--
 Her charms are new; my relative's are gone!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

  

V

The Ssu Kan; narrative. On the completion of a royal palace; description of it, and good wishes for the builder and his posterity.

[1]On yonder banks a palace, lo! upshoots,
   The tender blue of southern hill behind;
 Firm-founded, like the bamboo's clamping roots;
   Its roof made pinelike, to a point defined.
 Fraternal love here bear its precious fruits,
   And unfraternal schemes be ne'er designed!

[2]Ancestral sway is his. The walls they rear,
   Five thousand cubits long; and south and west
 The doors are placed. Here will the king appear,
   Here laugh, here talk, here sit him down and rest.

[3]To mold the walls, the frames they firmly tie;
   The toiling builders beat the earth and lime.
 The walls shall vermin, storm, and bird defy;--
   Fit dwelling is it for his lordly prime. [p. 232]

[4]Grand is the hall the noble lord ascends;--
   In height, like human form most reverent, grand;
 And straight, as flies the shaft when bow unbends;
   Its tints, like hues when pheasant's wings expand.

[5]High pillars rise the level court around;
   The pleasant light the open chamber steeps;
 And deep recesses, wide alcoves, are found,
   Where our good king in perfect quiet sleeps.

[6]Laid is the bamboo mat on rush mat square;--
   Here shall he sleep, and, waking, say, "Divine,
 What dreams are good? For bear and grisly bear
   And snakes and cobras, haunt this couch of mine."

[7]Then shall the chief diviner glad reply,
   "The bears foreshow that Heaven will send you sons.
 The snakes and cobras daughters prophesy.
   These auguries are all auspicious ones." [p. 233]

[8]Sons shall be his,--on couches lulled to rest.
   The little ones, enrobed, with scepters play;
 Their infant cries are loud as stern behest;
   Their knees the vermeil covers shall display.
 As king hereafter one shall be addressed;
   The rest, our princes, all the states shall sway.

[9]And daughters also to him shall be born.
   They shall be placed upon the ground to sleep;
 Their playthings tiles, their dress the simplest worn;
   Their part alike from good and ill to keep,
 And ne'er their parents' hearts to cause to mourn;
   To cook the food, and spirit malt to steep.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The Wu Yang; narrative. Supposed to celebrate the largeness and condition of King Hsuan's flocks and herds; with an auspice of the prosperity of the kingdom.

[1]  Who dares to say your sheep are few?
     The flocks are all three hundred strong.
   Who dares despise your cattle too?
     There ninety, black-lipped, press along. [p. 234]
 Though horned the sheep, yet peaceful each appears;
 The cattle come, with moist and flapping ears.

[2]  These climb the heights, those drink the pool;
     Some lie at rest, while others roam.
   With raincoats, and thin splint hats cool,
     And bearing food, your herdsmen come.
 In thirties, ranged by hues, the creatures stand;
 Fit victims they will yield at your command.

[3]  Your herdsmen twigs and fagots bring,
     With prey of birds and beasts for food.
   Your sheep, untouched by evil thing,
     Approach, their health and vigor good.
 The herdsman's waving hand they all behold,
 And docile come, and pass into the fold.

[4]  Your herdsmen dream;--fish take the place
     Of men; on banners falcons fly, [p. 235]
   Displacing snakes and tortoises.
     The augur tells his prophecy:--
 "The first betoken plenteous years; the change
 Of banners shows of homes a widening range."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Chieh Nan Shan; allusive and narrative. A lamentation over the miserable state of the kingdom, denouncing the injustice and carelessness of Grand Master Yin as the cause of it, and the conduct of the king.

[1]That southern hill, sublime, uprears its craggy height;
 Such thou, Grand Master Yin, before the nation's sight!
 Burning with inward grief, none name thee even in jest;
 Ruin impends, but thou delay'st the needed quest. [p. 236]

[2]Sublime that southern hill, with vegetation grand!
 More awful thou, great Yin, whom as unjust we brand.
 With pestilence and death, Heaven aids disorder's sway;
 A silent nation frowns;--thou changest not thy way!

[3]On Yin our Chou depends. By justice he should bind
 Our many states in one, with no disloyal mind,
 And guide the people right, thus helpful to the king.
 O cruel Heaven, that he such woes on all should bring!

[4]In him, himself inert, the people put no trust.
 He, treacherous, from place and council keeps the just. [p. 237]
 Mean men, unfairly screened, the common weal destroy,
 And his vile relatives the highest posts enjoy.

[5]Great Heaven, unjust, the land exhausts with all these pains.
 Great Heaven, unkind, these woes upon it ceaseless rains.
 Oh! were the good in power, men's hearts would be at peace!
 And 'neath impartial rule, our wranglings soon would cease.

[6]O great unpitying Heaven, our troubles have no close!
 With every month they grow; men's minds know no repose.
 My heart with grief is drunk. What weak hand holds the reins? [p. 238]
 'Tis Yin's supineness that augments the people's pains.

[7]I yoke my steeds long-necked, and through the land I hie.
 From the distress on every side vain the attempt to fly!

[8]Here evil rampant bares the spear;--they fight with rage,
 Then pacified and friends, in revel they engage.

[9]This is from Heaven unjust. Our king has no repose.
 Infatuate Yin rejects all counselors as foes.

[10]This song by me, Chia-fu, the king's sad case relates.
 Would he but change his heart, and nurse the myriad states!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 239]

  

VIII

The Cheng Yueh; narrative, allusive, and metaphorical. A lamentation over the miseries of the kingdom, and the ruin coming on it, all through the king's employment of worthless creatures, and his indulgence of his favorite Pao Ssu.

[1]On the brow of the summer the hoarfrost abounds;
   Sorrow's wound rankles deep in my heart,
 And calumnies base, that the people perplex,
   Daily waxing, inflict sharper smart.
 All alone I am placed, none by me to stand;
   Griefs intense more and more fill my breast.
 Cares increase and disturb my sorrowful mind;
   Both in body and soul I'm distressed.

[2]O father and mother who bore me, your son,
   Was it only to suffer such woe?
 Why was I not born ere these evils arrived?
   Or why came they ere I am laid low?
 I hear their good words, which are but from the lip,
   And their bad words have no deeper seat.
 So shallow those men! And the more that I grieve,
   With their fiercer contempt do I meet. [p. 240]

[3]With the pang of great misery wringing my heart,
   Dwell I thus on this comfortless time;
 For the multitudes all will with me be brought
   To base servitude, guiltless of crime.
 And alas for us all in positions more high!
   From what lord shall I now get support?
 No more can I tell than,--see yonder a crow!
   Can I tell to whose house 'twill resort.

[4]Where the forest once grew, we look, and behold!!
   Fagots only and twiglets are left.
 To Heaven 'midst their perils, the people all look,
   And lo! Heaven seems of reason bereft.
 But is Heaven so dark? When its purpose is fixed,
   To its will opposition is vain.
 And good is the Ruler supreme, the great God!
   He hates none of the children of men.

[5]'Tis only fools say that the mountains are low;--,
   'Gainst such words each high ridge would protest.
 And as baseless the talk that is uttered by men, [p. 241]
   But the king lets it fly unrepressed.
 To ministers old and diviners of dreams
   For advice he repairs, but they say,
 "We are wise; but of crows which is female, which male,
   To pronounce who can tell you the way?"

[6]That the heavens are lofty who is there but knows?
   Yet beneath them I bow my head low,
 And that thick is the earth who is there but feels?
   Yet with dainty steps on it I go.
 For thus speaking and acting good reason I have,
   In the conduct of many around,
 Who originate all those calumnies base,
   Like the cobra or eft fatal found.

[7]Where the fields are rugged and stony, the grain
   Yet luxuriantly rises and grows.
 Heaven fights against me as if I were its match,
   Moves and shakes me, and then overthrows. [p. 242]
 As if I were hidden, they sought me at first,
   At the court for a pattern to shine.
 'Tis with hatred intense they scowl now on me,
   And my services curtly decline.

[8]With its sorrow my heart is deeply oppressed;
   'Tis as if with tight string it were bound.
 Nowadays those who rule no kindness display;
   Fierce oppression prevails all around.
 Blazing flames that spread wide, and terror inspire,
   May perhaps still be quenched at their height.
 But our city august, where Chou holds its state,
   Through this vile Szu of Pao sinks to night.

[9]That such issue will come is ever my thought;
   And moreover, O king, let me say,
 Like a wagoner you, and fast falls the rain!
   Heavy load suits but ill miry clay.
 Wheel aids you may have, but if these you neglect,
   And the hands that would help you are spurned,
 You soon will be crying, "O sir, give me aid,"
   When the car of the state is o'erturned. [p. 243]

[10]If your wheel aids you keep, and get them well plied,
   That their help they shall give to each spoke,
 And keep on the driver a vigilant eye,
   Then your carriage will travel unbroke.
 Your load will be safe, and your journey will come,
   Though most rugged and hard, to its end;
 But these things seem trifles, as looked upon now;
   To the peril you will not attend.

[11]Shallow ponds on the fish small pleasure bestow;
   To the bottom they dive, and there lie.
 But the fisherman sharp them clearly perceives,
   And a prey to his cunning they die.
 And so, men of worth, in this kingdom oppressed,
   Little pleasure can ever possess;
 For hatred pursues them, where'er they may hide.
   How such things fill my heart with distress!

[12]Clear sparkle the spirits, set forth at their feasts,
   And the mats with fine viands are crowned.
 Neighbors there and their kindred in numbers appear,
   And the halls with their praises resound.
 So is it with those, the unworthy and base;
   Such reward by their flattery they gain; [p. 244]
 While here I am left, and in solitude pine,
   Struggling hard with my grief and my pain.

[13]Though mean, they are gifted with houses and lands;
   Abjects vile, they their salaries draw;
 But the people endure a hard, famished lot,
   And are dealt with by Heaven's sternest law.
 Rich men may succeed in a time so severe;
   With their wealth and their stores they can live.
 But alas for the poor, alone, without help!
   Should the king not deliverance give?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Shih Yueh Chih Chiao; narrative. Lamentation of an officer over prodigies, celestial and terrestrial, betokening the ruin of Chou. He expounds the true causes of these and the abounding misery; names the chief culprits, and declares his own determination to remain at his post of duty.

[1]The sun and moon met in the upper sphere,
 The day Hsin-mao, the tenth month of the year.
 The moon was new, as she should reappear,
 And then the sun, eclipsed, showed evils near.
 The moon eclipsed before, and now the sun!
 Alas! we men below shall be undone. [p. 245]

[2]These bodies, erring, what is bad make known;--
 Good men neglected; order all o'erthrown.
 The moon eclipsed was what full oft takes place;
 The sun's eclipse portends a sadder case.

[3]And flashing levin shows the want of rest.
 With troubled streams, and tumbling mountain's crest.
 Large heights subside to vales; deep vales grow hills.
 Alas! how does the king not stop these ills?

[4]Among the ministers great Huang presides;
 In all their duties Fan the people guides;
 Chia-pai administers; Chung-yun is cook;
 The king's decrees Tsou enters in his book;
 Chueh regulates the stud; the guards Yu's sphere;
 The wife, in beauty blazing, has no fear. [p. 246]

[5]Great Huang, determined his own course pursues,
 Demands our service, nor inquires our views;
 Unroofs our homes; our fields makes moor or marsh;
 And "'Tis the law," he says, "I am not harsh."

[6]Farseeing Huang has built himself a town.
 Three ministers are there of wealth o'ergrown.
 No single chief he left to guard our king,
 While all its streets with hoof and chariot ring.

[7]I dare not my own services report;
 But slanderous tongues my blameless life distort.
 Our ills come not from Heaven, but fawning words
 And hidden hate, which schemers wield like swords.

[8]Far off my village, great my lack of peace,
 And elsewhere I might go to seek for ease.
 Others retire, but I shall not be driven
 From this my post, though dark the way of Heaven.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 247]

  

X

The Yu Wu Cheng; narrative. A groom of the chambers mourns over the miserable state of the kingdom, the incorrigible course of the king, and the retirement from office and responsibility of many, while he alone holds to his post.

[1]O vast and mighty Heaven, why shrinks thy love?
 Thy kindness, erst so great, no more we prove.
 Sent from above by thine afflicting hand,
 Famine and death now stalk throughout the land.
 O pitying Heaven, in terrors now arrayed,
 No care, no forethought in thy course displayed,
 Of criminals I do not think;--they bear
 The suffering which their deeds of guilt prepare.
 But there are many, innocent of crime,
 O'erwhelmed by ruin in this evil time!

[2]The honored name of Chou fades in the past,
 And, still augmenting, these sore troubles last.
 Their posts the Heads of offices all leave,
 While I toil on, none knowing how I grieve! [p. 248]
 The three great chiefs, and those whom they direct,
 At dawn and dusk, their businesses neglect.
 Nor morn beholds at court, nor evening late,
 The absent lord of each neglected state.
 If thou would'st turn to good, and banish ill,--
 But, hapless king, thou sinkest lower still.

[3]O glorious Heaven, thy gift the listening ear,
 Why justest words will not our monarch hear?
 Like traveler, from the right path gone astray,
 He knows not whither leads his devious way.
 Ye officers, this should your zeal inspire,
 And fan of duty the expiring fire.
 Of one another you should stand in awe.--
 Alas! you heed not Heaven's o'erruling law!

[4]Deaf to war's lessons, bad he still remains;
 To famine blind, from good he still refrains.
 Groom of the chambers I, and nothing more,
 Our sad estate I cease not to deplore.
 Ye officers, cowardlike, your duty shun,
 And to the king the truth will not make known.
 Whene'er he questions, you give brief reply;
 When touched by slander, from the court you fly. [p. 249]

[5]Bad is the time! Right words awaken hate.
 Who with his tongue what's in his heart will state
 Is sure to suffer, while pernicious lies
 Are gladly heard, and fulsome flatteries.
 The artful speech flows freely like a stream;
 At ease the speakers bask 'neath fortune's beam.

[6]And difficult the time! Risks manifold
 Surround the man who office dares to hold.
 Speak what the king impossible shall deem,
 And straight his countenance shows angry gleam.
 Speak what he likes and fain would carry out,
 And straight your friends look on with scorn and doubt.

[7]I say, Ye officers, come back to court."
 "We have no houses there," is your retort.
 My heart is pierced; ensanguined are my tears;
 My words but rouse the wrath of him who hears.
 But let me ask, "When homes elsewhere you reared,
 Who then gave help against the ills you feared?"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 250]

  

BOOK V. THE DECADE OF HSIAO MIN

  

[1]

The Hsiao Min; narrative. A lamentation over the recklessness and incapacity of the king's plans and of his counselors.

[1]Oh! pitying Heaven grows black with frown,
   That darkens far this lower sphere,
 For crooked schemes mislead the crown;
   Nor halts the king in his career!
 All counsels good and wise he spurns;
 To counsels bad he eager turns.
   I mark his ways with pain and fear.

[2]His creatures, impotent and vain,
   Now chime, now chafe, in rival mood.
 The case deserves our saddest strain!
   If one proposes aught that's good,
 Against it all are firmly bound;
 If bad, then all will rally round.
   Where will it end?--I sadly brood. [p. 251]

[3]Our wearied oracles are dumb,
   And silence keep when we consult.
 Our counselors still thronging come,
   With counsels barren of result.
 Though full the court, none dares to do;
 We plan the way we ne'er pursue,
   And halting, helpless still we halt.

[4]Ah me! the men who lead the state,
   Forsake the wisdom of the past.
 Unruled by maxims wise and great,
   They veer with every fitful blast.
 They cannot on themselves rely.
 Builders, they ask each passer-by,
   And leave their work undone at last.

[5]Unsettled though the land we see,
   The many foolish, some are wise;
 And scanty though the people be,
   Yet some can see, and some devise. [p. 252]
 Some gravely think, and some have tact;
 Yet borne upon the cataract,
   We sink in ruin, ne'er to rise.

[6]Who dares unarmed the tiger face?
   Who boatless dares to tempt the Ho?
 E'en their small wits see such a case,
   But nothing greater do they know.
 With fear and caution should we tread,
 Like men above some torrent's bed,
   Or those upon thin ice who go.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Hsiao Yuan; narrative and allusive. Some officer, in a time of disorder and misgovernment, urges on his brothers the duty of maintaining their own virtue, and of observing the greatest caution.

[1]The dove coos gently in the bush,
   Then wings to heaven its flight.
 My heart that broods o'er sorrow's wound,
   Thinks of our fathers bright.
 When early dawn unseals my eyes,
 Before my mind our parents rise. [p. 253]

[2]Men grave and wise a cup may take,
   And reason hold her sway.
 But men benighted taste, and grow
   More set on drink each day.
 Let all deportment good maintain;
 Heaven's gift once lost we ne'er regain.

[3]All o'er the plain they gather beans,
   Which they will sow again.
 The grubs hatched on the mulberry tree
   The sphex bears off to train.
 Teach carefully your sons at home,
 And good as you they will become.

[4]Look at the wagtails! Quick they leap,
   And twitter as they fly.
 Let us as active be, for days
   And months go swiftly by.
 Rise early, and go late to sleep;
 The name you bear in honor keep.

[5]The green peaks, driven by pinching want,
   Frequent the yards for grain. [p. 254]
 Alas for poor and lonely folks,
   Whom prison walls restrain!
 I sprinkle rice around my door,
 And to be good, Heaven's aid implore.

[6]We must be meek, and cautious move,
   As we were perched on trees.
 We must be anxious, and take care,
   As near a precipice.
 We must put down our feet as nice,
 As if we trod on thinnest ice.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Hsiao Pien; allusive and narrative. The eldest son and heir apparent of King Yu bewails his degradation, and the ease with which the king was led away by slanderers.

[1]To the trees that are their home,
 Flying slow, the crows all come.
 Other men can happy be;
 Ne'er am I from misery free. [p. 255]
 Have I Heaven offended sore?
 Surely guilt lies at my door.
 Homeless thus, oppressed with grief,
 Nowhere can I find relief.

[2]Once the road was clear to Chou,
 O'er it the rank grass grows now.
 On my heart is sorrow's blight;
 Ache my limbs as after fight.
 Through the night, still dressed, I sigh;
 Ere its time, old age comes nigh.
 Homeless thus, I find no rest,
 Head and heart alike distressed.

[3]Men with reverence always view
 Trees that round their homesteads grew.
 On their fathers all depend,
 In their mothers have a friend.
 From my father's loins I sprung,
 On my mother's breast I hung;
 Yet did Heaven my being give,
 'Neath a baleful star to live. [p. 256]

[4]Where cicadas' voices ring,
 Willow trees luxuriant spring.
 Deep the waters of that pool,
 Fringed with reeds and rushes cool!
 But like boat adrift I'm borne,
 Aimless, tossed about, forlorn.
 Sad my heart! I try in vain
 Briefest rest from thought to gain.

[5]Mark the stag's reluctant feet
 Slowly from the herd retreat.
 Crows the pheasant at the dawn,
 And his mate is to him drawn.
 Stript of branch and lea, that tree
 Is the image true of me.
 Sad my heart! I'm left alone,
 Unbefriended and unknown.

[6]See the hare for mercy crave!
 One steps in its life to save.
 When a corpse unburied lies,
 Some one straight a grave supplies. [p. 257]
 Callous monarch, all our woes
 Ne'er wake thy compunction's throes.
 Sad my heart beneath thy frown,
 And my tears fall ceaseless down!

[7]Slanders vile the king believes;
 Them as pledge cup he receives.
 Truthful judgment he denies,
 And to stifle kindness tries.
 Trees are felled where helps the strain,
 Fagots cleft along the grain.
 Leaves our king the guilty free,
 While he guilt imputes to me.

[8]Men will climb the greatest height;
 Deepest springs their search invite.
 O'er his words the king should watch;
 Ears are set each word to catch.
 Leave my dam, ye slanderers base;
 Move not basket from its place.
 Vainly thus, despised, I moan;
 Dark my future, though unknown!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 258]

  

IV

The Ch'iao Yen; narrative, and allusive, with the metaphorical element perhaps here and there. Some one, suffering from the king through slander, appeals to Heaven, dwells on the nature and evil of slander, and expresses his detestation of and contempt for the slanderers.

[1]O vast and distant Heaven, whom we
 Father and mother call, on thee
 I cry. Say why these ills on me
         Excessive fall.
 Oppressive, vast, my misery,
         Though guiltless all!

[2]The first small lie contains the rest.
 When slanders fill our monarch's breast,
 Ills grow, and never are redressed.
         Would he but trust
 The good, wrongs soon must be redressed.
         I know they must. [p. 259]

[3]His frequent covenants show him weak.
 Wrongs grow from cozening words they speak.
 He trusts the rogues that lie and sneak,
         And make things worse.
 Their duties shirked, their words so meek
         Prove but a curse.

[4]With the great work of some great mind;--
 A temple by true king designed,
 Or plans by sagest men outlined,
         I'm in a fog.
 Round common schemes my way I wind,
         Like hare and dog.

[5]As timber soft in carver's hand
 Assumes the shape he may command,
 So common speech to understand,
         I well may claim.
 Those talkers, flowing, artful, grand,
         Are sons of shame. [p. 260]

[6]And who are they? On yonder stream
 They dwell; and void of strength they seem.
 From men so bloated who would dream
         Of martial force?
 Both they and theirs may madly scheme,
         And fare the worse!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Ho Jen Ssu; narrative. Some noble suffering from slander, and suspecting that the slanderer was an old friend, intimates the grounds of his suspicion, and laments his case, while he would welcome the restoration of their former relations.

[1]      I ask what man came here.
 With treacherous schemes his mind o'erflows.
 Why to my dam came he so close,
       Nor to the gate drew near?
 Whom does he follow as his lord?
 It must be Pao, I'll pledge my word.

[2]      Companions close are they.
 Which was it caused me my disgrace?
 Why shunned he at the dam my face,
       Nor kindly word would say? [p. 261]
 Once were we bound with friendship's ties,
 While now to stand aloof he tries.

[3]      I ask what man is he.
 Inside my gate, before my hall,
 He stood. I heard his footsteps's fall,
       Though him I could not see.
 Unblushingly he breaks man's law,
 Nor yet of Heaven stands he in awe.

[4]      What man behaved so ill?
 Wild as a hurricane his ways!
 Or north, or south, he comes as sways
       The impulse of his will.
 Why to my dam approached he so,
 My mind is such distress to throw?

[5]      "Too slow!" is your appeal.
 "Too slow,"--and yet you could not stop
 "In haste," you say.--I saw you drop
       The reins, and grease your wheel. [p. 262]
 If you would come to me but once!
 Why keep me waiting, eyes askance?

[6]      Then upon your return
 You came not. If you had done so,
 My strong desire would no more glow;
       My heart would cease to burn.
 O come but once! Vain your excuse!
 Why to relieve me thus refuse?

[7]      Beads on one string we bung.
 If you the earthen whistle blew,
 I played the flute of pierced bamboo.
       If still you doubt my tongue,
 Here are the creatures three, whose blood
 Shall seal the oath I take as good!

[8]      Were you an imp of air,
 Or water, you'd be out of reach.
 But face to face we stand, and each
       Is to the other bare.
 In this good song I've freely told
 Your changeful ways, now hot, now cold.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 263]

  

VI

The Hsiang Pai; metaphorical, narrative, and allusive. A eunuch, suffering from slander, complains of his fate, and warns and denounces his enemies.

[1]A few fine lines, at random drawn,
 Like the shell pattern wrought in lawn
   To hasty glance will seem.
 My trivial faults base slander's slime
 Distorted into foulest crime,
   And men me worthless deem.

[2]A few small points, pricked down on wood,
 May be made out a picture good
   Of the bright southern Sieve.
 Who planned, and helped those slanderers vile,
 My name with base lies to defile?
   Unpitied, here I grieve.

[3]With babbling tongues you go about,
 And only scheme how to make out
   The lies you scatter round.
 Hear me.--Be careful what you say;
 People erelong your words will weigh,
   And liars you'll be found.

[4]Clever you are, with changeful schemes!
 How else could all your evil dreams [p. 264]
   And slanders work their way?
 Men now believe you; by and by,
 The truth found out, each vicious lie
   Will ill for ill repay.

[5]The proud rejoice; the sufferer weeps.
 O azure Heaven, from out thy deeps
   Why look in silence down?
 Behold those proud men and rebuke;
 With pity on the sufferers look,
   And on the evil frown.

[6]Those slanderers I would gladly take,
 With all who help their schemes to make,
   And to the tigers throw.
 If wolves and tigers such should spare,
 I'd hurl them 'midst the freezing air,
   Where the keen north winds blow.
 And should the north compassion feel
 I'd fling them to great Heaven, to deal
   On them its direst woe.

[7]As on the acred heights you dwell,
 My place is in the willow dell,
   One is the other near.
 Before you, officers, I spread
 These lines by me, poor eunuch, made.
   Think not Meng-tzu severe.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 265]

  

VII

The Ku Feng; allusive. Some one complains of the alienation from him of an old friend, produced by the change for the better in the circumstances of the latter.

[1]Gently and soft the east wind blows,
   And then there falls the pelting rain.
 When anxious fears pressed round you close,
   Then linked together were we twain.
 Now happy, and your mind at rest,
 You turn and cast me from your breast.

[2]Gently and soft the east wind blows,
   And then there comes the whirlwind wild.
 When anxious fears pressed round you close,
   Your bosom held me as a child.
 Now happy, and in peaceful state,
 You throw me off and quite forget.

[3]Gently and soft the east wind blows,
   Then round the rocky height it storms.
 Each plant its leaves all dying shows;
   The trees display their withered forms.
 My virtues great forgotten all,
 You keep in mind my faults, though small.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266]

  

VIII

The Liao O; metaphorical, narrative, and allusive. A son deplores his hard fate in being prevented from rendering the last services to his parents, and enlarges on the parental claim.

[1]Long and large the O plants grow.
 Hao plants surely I should know!
 How can I confound them so?
 Grief has robbed my eyes of sight,
 Almost plunging me in night.
 Others' hands laid in the grave,
 Those whose pain my being gave.

[2]Long and large the O plants grow.
 Wei plants surely I should know!
 How can I confound them so?
 Grief has robbed my eyes of sight,
 Almost plunging me in night.
 Others' hands laid in the earth,
 Those whose suffering gave me birth.

[3]Pitcher should be filled from vase;
 Where this fails, 'tis reckoned base.
 Than to live as orphan left,
 Better be of life bereft! [p. 267]
 Father dead, on whom depend?
 Mother dead, where find a friend?
 I, abroad, this sad case know,
 And, at home, can nowhere go.

[4]Father, from whose loins I sprung,
 Mother, on whose breast I hung,
 Tender were ye, and ye fed,
 Now upheld, now gently led.
 Eyes untiring watched my way;
 Often in your arms I lay.
 How could I repay your love,
 Vast as arch of heaven above?

[5]Cold and bleak that southern hill!
 Tempest fierce with terror thrill.
 All around is dark, but more
 Dark the lot which I deplore!
 Others all can happy be;--
 Why from grief am I not free?

[6]Hill so steep what foot can brave?
 Blustering winds around it rave.
 Fierce the winds! As fierce the fate,
 Which pursues me desolate!
 Happy all save me alone,
 Thinking aye of dues undone!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 268]

  

IX

The Ta Tung; allusive. An officer, of one of the states of the east, deplores the exactions made from them by the government; complains of the favor shown to the west; contrasts the misery of the present with the happiness of the past; and appeals to the stars of heaven idly beholding their condition.

[1]With millet filled, the dishes stood displayed;
 The spoons lay long and curved, of thornwood made.
 Smooth as a whetstone was the road to Chou,
 And straight as shaft well fitted for the bow.
 This road the common people gladly viewed;
 The officers on it their way pursued.
 Thus back to former times my thoughts will go,
 And down my cheeks the tears in streamlets flow.

[2]Now in the east, in states both large and small,
 Shuttles unplied, the looms are empty all.
 Thin cloth of dolichos supplies the shoes,
 Which shivering travelers on the hoarfrost use.
 Young nobles, cultured, but too thin and spare,
 Hurry along the road, all full of care.
 They go, they come; weary they are and worn.
 My heart aches for them, and I feel forlorn. [p. 269]

[3]This firewood, cut and hewn with earnest toil,
 I fear the waters from that spring will spoil.
 Fit then as emblems they would be of those
 Whose stern exactions grant us no repose.
 The firewood cut must homeward be conveyed;--
 Toil after toil is on the people laid.
 O that we could the needful rest but take!
 Tired out we sleep, and sigh when we awake.

[4]The east its noblest sons to service hard
 Sees promptly called; but they get no reward.
 There in the west sons of each noble line
 Live idle, and in splendid dresses shine.
 There also boatmen's sons now proudly wear
 The glossy furs of which men spoil the bear.
 Sons of the poorest families, elate,
 In public offices display their state.

[5]Our choicest spirits humbly we present.
 "How can such stuff," they say, "our taste content?"
 Long girdle pendants, well supplied with gems, [p. 270]
 We give, and each the gift as short contemns.
 Up to the Milky Way I turn my gaze;--
 Looks it not down to mark their evil ways?
 There too the Weaving Sisters' triple beam,
 While they move on, might shed an angry gleam.

[6]Nightly those Sisters through seven stages go,
 But no bright work do they to ease our woe.
 The stars we call Draft Oxen also shine,
 But they no cart for us to draw combine.
 The Morning Star appears in the dim east,
 The Evening Star oft twinkles in the west,
 And long and curved the Rabbit Net is there:--
 Each fills its place, but heeds not our despair.

[7]Four stars to be the Southern Sieve have claim,
 But nothing do they to make good the name.
 Northwards the Ladle sparkles in the sky,
 But ladles nothing that may drink supply.
 O Southern Sieve, thy mouth is idly shown,
 For good come from it we have never known.
 And thou, O Ladle, shining in the north,
 Thy handle eastward vainly stretchest forth!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

  

X

The Ssu Yueh; allusive and narrative. An officer bitterly deplores the oppression and misery of the time.

[1]In the fourth month summer shines;
 In the sixth the heat declines.
 Nature thus grants men relief;
 Tyranny gives only grief.
 Were not my forefathers men?
 Can my suffering 'scape their ken?

[2]In the cold of autumn days,
 Each plant shrivels and decays.
 Nature then is hard and stern;
 Living things sad lessons learn.
 Friends dispersed, all order gone,
 Place of refuge have I none.

[3]Winter days are wild and fierce;
 Rapid gusts each crevice pierce.
 Such is my unhappy lot,
 Unbefriended and forgot!
 Others all can happy be;
 I from misery never am free.

[4]On the mountains are fine trees;
 Chestnuts, plum trees, there one sees.
 All the year their forms they show;
 Stately more and more they grow. [p. 272]
 Noble turned to ravening thief!
 What the cause? This stirs my grief.

[5]Waters from that spring appear
 Sometimes foul, and sometimes clear,
 Changing oft, as falls the rain,
 Or the sky grows bright again.
 New misfortunes every day
 Still befall me, misery's prey.

[6]Aid from mighty streams obtained,
 Southern states are shaped and drained.
 Thus the Chiang and Han are thanked,
 And as benefactors ranked.
 Weary toil my vigor drains;
 All unnoticed it remains!

[7]Hawks and eagles mount the sky;
 Sturgeons in deep waters lie.
 Out of reach, they safety get,
 Arrow fear not, nor the net.
 Hiding place for me there's none;
 Here I stay, and make my moan.

[8]Ferns upon the hills abound;
 Ch'i and i in marshy ground.
 Each can boast its proper place,
 Where it grows for use or grace.
 I can only sing the woe,
 Which, ill-starred, I undergo.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 273]

  

BOOK VI. THE DECADE OF PEI SHAN

  

I

The Pei Shan; narrative. An officer complains of the arduous and continual duties unequally imposed upon him, and keeping him away from his parents, while others were left to enjoy their ease.

[1]I climb that hill upon the north,
   And gather medlars on its side.
 Active and vigorous, I go forth,
   And morn and night I walk or ride.
 I serve the king with eager will;
 But great the grief my parents feel!

[2]Where'er their arch the heavens expand,
   The king can claim the land below.
 Within the seabounds of the land,
   All at his summons come or go.
 His ministers unfairly act;
 They praise me, but with toils distract. [p. 274]

[3]Four ceaseless steeds my care engage;
   The king's affairs no rest allow.
 They say I bear no trace of age,
   While few, they think, such vigor show.
 While my backbone remains unbent,
 In work my life must still be spent.

[4]Some rest in careless ease, supine;
   Some for the state themselves wear out.
 On softest couches some recline;
   Others, unhalting, march about.

[5]Some never hear a clamorous sound;
   Others toil on 'midst rude alarms.
 Some idle on their backs are found;
   And some bear loads with head and arms.

[6]Some feast, and fearless seek new joys;
   Some live in constant dread of blame.
 Some the harsh critic's work employs;
   Others their numerous duties claim.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 275]

  

II

The Wu Chiang Ta Ch'e; narrative. Some officer, overloaded in the king's service, thinks it better to try and dismiss his troubles from his mind.

[1]Push not the cart you stand behind;--
   You'll only raise the dust. Nor dwell
 On your anxieties of mind;--
   You'll only make yourself unwell.

[2]Push not the cart you stand behind;--
   The dust will only blind your view.
 Dwell not on things that vex your mind;--
   You never thus can see them true.

[3]Push not the cart you stand behind;--
   The dust will but becloud your eyes.
 Heed not the troubles of your mind;--
   'Twill weight you as you seek to rise.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 276]

  

III

The Hsiao Ming; narrative. An officer, kept long abroad on distant service, deplores the hardships of his lot, and tenders good advice to his more fortunate friends at court.

[1]O Heaven above, before whose light
 Revealed is every deed and thought,
            To thee I cry.
 Hither on toilsome service brought,
 In this wild Chiao Yeh watch time's flight,
            And sadly sigh.
 The second month had just begun,
 When from the east we took our way.
            Through summer hot
 We passed, and many a wintry day.
 Summer again its course has run.
            O bitter lot!
 There are my compeers, gay at court,
 While here the tears my face begrime.
            I'd fain return.
 But there is that dread net for crime!
 The fear of it the wish cuts short.
            In vain I burn! [p. 277]

[2]Ere we the royal city left,
 The sun and moon renewed the year.
            We marched in hope.
 Now to its close this year is near.
 Return deferred, of hope bereft,
            All mourn and mope.
 My lonesome state haunts aye my breast,
 While duties grow, and cares increase,
            Too hard to bear.
 Toils that oppress me never cease;
 Not for a moment dare I rest,
            Nigh to despair.
 I think with fond regard of those,
 Who in their posts at court remain,
            My friends of old.
 Fain would I be with them again,
 But fierce reproof return would cause.
            This post I hold.

[3]When for the west I left my home,
 The sun and moon both mildly shone,
            Our hearts to cheer.
 We'd soon be back, our service done!
 Alas! affairs more urgent come,
            And fix us here. [p. 278]
 The year is hastening to expire.
 We gather now the southernwood,
            The beans we reap;--
 That for its fragrance, these for food.
 Such things that constant care require
            Me anxious keep.
 Thinking of friends still at their posts,
 I rise and pass the night outside,
            So vexed my mind.
 But soon what changes may betide?
 I here will stay, whate'er it costs,
            And be resigned.

[4]My honored friends, O do not deem
 Your rest which seems secure from ill
            Will ever last!
 Your duties quietly fulfill,
 And hold the upright in esteem,
            With friendship fast.
 So shall the spirits hear your cry,
 You virtuous make, and good supply,
            In measure vast. [p. 279]

[5]My honored friends, O do not deem
 Repose that seems secure from ill
            Will lasting prove.
 Your duties quietly fulfill.
 And hold the upright in esteem,
            With earnest love.
 So shall the spirits hear your prayer,
 And on you happiness confer,
            Your hopes above.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Ku Chung; narrative. Supposed to refer to and deplore some expedition of King Yu to the country about the Huai, where he abandoned himself to the delights of music.

[1]          How peal the royal bells,
 As the Huai sweeps along to the main!
           A tale their music tells,
 Waking thoughts in my mind full of pain.
           Before me back it sadly brings
           The memory of our virtuous kings;
 And they live in my fancy again! [p. 280]

[2]          Loud roll the royal drums,
 As the Huai rushes on to the deep.
           A vanished memory comes
 In their sound which compels me to weep,--
           The memory of our kings of old,
           Whose virtue flawless still we hold,
 Though the kings in their sepulchers sleep.

[3]          Bells peal and drums resound,
 As the Huai its three islands displays.
           They stir a grief profound
 In my heart that no revel allays.
           The virtue of our kings of yore
           A stamp of truth and beauty bore,
 Such as never we see nowadays.

[4]          Ch'in-ch'in the bells peal on,
 And the lutes in the concert we hear.
           Deep breathes the organ tone;
 Sounding stones join their notes, rich and clear.
           The while through the vessel there ring
           The Ya and the Nan which they sing,
 And the dancers with flutes now appear.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 281]

  

V

The Ch'u Tz'u; narrative. Sacrificial and festal services in the ancestral temple; and their connection with attention to husbandry.

[1]Here grew the tribulus around,
 Till of its thorns they cleared the ground;--
       Of old this work was wrought.
 Our fathers labored for our good,
 That millet we might plant for food,
 And millet used in sacrifice,
 Both yielding to us large supplies;--
       So for us took they thought.
 Now when our barns are filled with grain,
 And myriad stacks in field remain,
 Spirits and viands we prepare,
 To use on grand occasions rare,
       In sacrificial rite.
 The dead cannot in form be there,
 But there are those their part who bear.
 We lead them to the highest seat,
 And beg that they will drink and eat.
 So shall our sires our service own,
 And deign our happiness to crown,
       With blessings still more bright. [p. 282]

[2]With reverent air, in dress correct,
 With sheep and oxen pure, select,
 When autumn comes, and winter cold,
 Our temple services we hold,
       And offer sacrifice.
 The victims slain some haste to flay;
 Some boil the flesh; on stands some lay
 The pieces boiled, which some dispose
 In order due, exact and close,
       According to their size.
 The while, the priest, inside the gate,
 Lest elsewhere welcome be too late,
       Our sires asks to descend.
 Complete and brilliant are our rites;
 They grandly come, as he invites.
 Though hid from us in shadowy veil,
 Our offerings with delight they hail,
       And to our prayers attend.
 Their filial son, our honored lord,
 Great blessing gets. They will reward
 With myriad years his duty shown,
 And sure maintain upon the throne
       His sons till time shall end. [p. 283]

[3]Before the fires some reverent stand;
 Some take the mighty trays in hand;
 These with the roasted flesh they fill,
 Those with the livers broiled. Then still
 And reverent, the queen presides,
 And every smaller dish provides,
       The pious feast to grace.
 The guests and visitors draw near.
 Divined for, now they all appear,
       And take an honored place.
 'Tween those who personate our sires,
 Our lord, and them, as rule requires,
 Once and again the cup goes round.
 Each word and smile just that is found,
       Which word and smile should be.
 The spirits come in quiet state,
 And answer give with blessings great.
 Myriads of years--his due reward--
 Shall show how they our lord regard,
       And keep from evil free. [p. 284]

[4]Exhausted now we feel, but see
 Our every rite from error free.
 The able priest has learned the will
 Of the great spirits. To fulfill
 His part he hastes, and to our lord,
 Standing before him, with grave word,
       His message thus conveys:--
 "Your sacrifice has filled the air
 With fragrance. Both your spirits rare
 And viands rich your sires enjoy.
 Blessings not few, without alloy,
 They give;--each all that you could hope,
 Each sure as law's unerring scope,
 Exact in form, without delay,
 Due reverence you have striven to pay.
 From error free, discharged with care,
 Your ceremonies all declare
 Your filial heart. Your sires henceforth
 Will favors grant of greatest worth,
 For myriad years, and myriads more,
 Nor time exhaust the boundless store."
       'Tis this the wise priest says. [p. 285]

[5]The rites thus all performed exact,
 The drums and bells announce the fact.
 Our lord withdraws, and takes his way
 Where parting guests their homage pay.
       Then comes the wise priest's voice:--
 "The spirits all are satisfied."
 No longer in their seats abide
 Their representatives, but slow,
 'Mid warning bells and drums, withdraw;--
       So ends the sacrifice.
 The spirits tranquilly ascend.
 The queen and who the queen attend,
 And all the servants, haste to clear
 The hall, that nothing may appear
       Left from the sacred rites.
 Those who are of the royal kin,
 The old and young, abide within,
 The surname of the king they bear,
 And to the special feast repair,
       To which his grace invites. [p. 286]

[6]All the musicians follow fast,
 Their special aid at this repast
       The feasters shall not fail.
 The mats the viands rich display;
 No face looks sad, but all are gay.
 They drink, they eat, with fullest zest;
 Dish after dish, well pleased they taste;
       Great love and joy prevail.
 At last they rise, and to their lord
 First bow their heads with one accord;
       Then him they thus address:--
 "Rich viands and your spirits rare,
 All testified your pious care.
 The spirits of our sires partook;
 On you benignantly they look.
 Your term of life they will extend,
 And favors give that ne'er shall end.
 As through the year the seasons move,
 Your pious feelings equal prove
 Fully each sacrifice to pay.
 So may it be in future day,
 And sons and grandsons of your line,
 Observant of these rites divine,
       The ceremony bless!"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 287]

  

VI

The Hsin Nan Shan; narrative. Husbandry traced to its first author; details about it, going on to the subject of sacrifices to ancestors.

[1]Yes, all about that southern hill,
   Great Yu pursued his wondrous toil.
 He drained the plain, the marsh he dried;
   Our lord in fields laid out the soil.
 Their boundaries we now define,
 As south, or east, the fields incline.

[2]The wintry heavens, one arch of clouds,
   Send down the flakes that fill the sky.
 Then come the drizzling rains of spring,
   That moisture, with the snow, supply,
 To soak and fit the ground for use,
 And in its season grain produce.

[3]The plots, arranged in order fit,
   The millets in abundance bear. [p. 288]
 So shall our lord the harvest view;
   While food and spirits we prepare,
 For those in whom our sires descend,
 And guests who at the feast attend.

[4]The central plot the huts contains,
   While gourds each path and boundary line.
 Their fruits preserved, aside we put,
   Till 'mong the offerings they shall shine.
 So through his sires our lord shall gain
 Long life, and gifts from Heaven obtain.

[5]The fragrant spirits first are poured;
   Then near the gate the bull is led;--
 So we invite our sires to come.
   To show the victim pure and red,
 The knife with bells slides through the hair.
 Its blood and fat away we bear.

[6]'Then all our offerings we present,
   Diffusing round a fragrance great.
 How brilliant is the sacrifice!
   Our ancestors in kingly state
 Are there, unseen; but they shall send
 Blessing and life,--years without end!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 289]

  

VII

The Fu T'ien; narrative. Pictures of husbandry and sacrifices connected with it. Happy understanding between the people and their superiors.

[1]Bright shine my widespread fields before the eye,
 That yearly to the king a tithe supply.
 From olden times the crops have plenteous been;
 Each year has left to feed my husbandmen
 Sufficient store. Now to the ground I go,
 Where their rich soil the southern acres show.
 Some weed; some gather earth around the roots;
 Each millet plant luxuriantly upshoots.
 There I call round me in a spacious place
 The brightest youths, with cheering words to grace.

[2]Heaped in the vessels, bright the millet shone;
 Pure were the victim rams. Last harvest done,
 We thanked the spirits of the land and air,
 From whom the joyous husbandmen declare
 The copious produce of the year had come.
 Now without lutes and the resounding drum,
 To him who taught men tillage first we cry,
 And ask for rain to help our husbandry. [p. 290]
 So shall our millets grow. Each field now thrives,
 To bless our laborers, and bless their wives.

[3]Our lord of long descent now comes this way,
 Just as their wives and children food convey
 To those who on the southern acres toil.
 The inspector of the fields appears meanwhile
 Glad he looks on, and of the simple food
 The dishes tastes, to see if it be good.
 The hand of skill appears in every field;
 'Tis sure erelong luxuriant crop to yield.
 Our lord complacent looks, and in his view
 The toilers feel their zeal inspired anew.

[4]The reapers soon the crops will take in hand,
 Which curving down, and thick as thatch, shall stand.
 Lo! numerous stacks are built all o'er the grounds,
 Rising like islands, seen from far like mounds.
 Thousands of granaries must our lord prepare,
 And carts in myriads home their loads shall bear.
 With radiant joy each husbandman surveys
 The millets stored, the rice crop and the maize.
 Then all shall pray for blessing on our lord,
 For myriad years.--Such shall be his reward!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 291]

  

VIII

The Ta Tien; narrative. Further pictures of husbandry and sacrifices connected with it.

[1]Various the toils which fields so large demand!
 We choose the seed; we take our tools in hand.
 In winter for our work we thus prepare;
 Then in the spring, bearing the sharpened share,
 We to the acres go that south incline,
 And to the earth the different seeds consign.
 Soon, straight and large, upward each plant aspires;--
 All happens as our noble lord desires.

[2]The plants will ear; within their sheath confined,
 The grains will harden, and be good in kind,
 Nor darnel these, nor wolf's-tail grass infests;
 From core and leaf we pick the insect pests,
 And pick we those that eat the joints and roots:--
 So do we guard from harm the growing fruits.
 May the great spirit, whom each farmer names,
 Those insects take, and cast them to the flames! [p. 292]

[3]The clouds o'erspread the sky in masses dense,
 And gentle rain down to the earth dispense.
 First may the public fields the blessing get,
 And then with it our private fields we wet!
 Patches of unripe grain the reaper leaves;
 And here and there, ungathered are the sheaves.
 Handfuls besides we drop upon the ground,
 And ears untouched in numbers lie around;--
 These by the poor and widows shall be found.

[4]When wives and children to the toilers come,
 Bringing provisions from each separate home,
 Our lord of long descent shall oft appear;
 The Inspector also, glad the men to cheer.
 They too shall thank the spirits of the air,
 With sacrifices pure for all their care;
 Now red, now black, the victims that they slay,
 As south or north the sacrifice they pay;
 While millet bright the altars always show;--
 And we shall thus still greater blessings know.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 293]

  

IX

The Chan Pi Lo I; narrative. The feudal princes, met at some gathering in the eastern capital, praise the king as he appears among them.

[1]Fitness for war, 'mid peace, we here acquire,
 Around the Lo, whose waters, broad and deep,
 Flow swiftly on. Eastward our king has come,
 Of happiness and dignities the fount.
 His red knee covers, madder-dyed, shine bright;--
 So his six hosts to battle he would lead.

[2]Fitness for war, 'mid peace, we here acquire,
 Around the Lo, whose waters, broad and deep,
 Flow swiftly on. Eastward our king has come,
 With gems far gleaming round his scabbard's mouth.
 Long may he live;--for myriads of years,
 And still maintain the fortunes of his house!

[3]Fitness for war, 'mid peace, we here acquire,
 Around the Lo, whose waters, broad and deep
 Flow swiftly on. Eastward our king has come,
 Happy, and of all dignities possessed.
 Long may he live;--for myriads of years,
 Preserving safe his many clans and states!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 294]

  

X

The Shang Shang Che Hua; allusive and narrative. Responsive to the former;--the king celebrates the praises of the princes.

[1]Like the flowers which splendid shine,
   Amidst the leaves that cluster dense,
 Are these noble lords of mine,
   On whom I look with joy intense.
 All that my heart desires in them is met;
 Praise and good fortune they deserve to get.

[2]Like the flowers that splendid shine,
   Displaying yellow's deepest hue,
 Are these noble lords of mine,
   In whom such elegance I view.
 In all their words and manners is no flaw;--
 So to themselves all blessing shall they draw.

[3]Like the flowers that splendid shine,
   Some yellow, some of purest white,
 Are these noble lords of mine,
   Urging their steeds to rapid flight.
 White are the steeds they drive, but black their manes,
 And soft and glossy in their hands the reins! [p. 295]

[4]Left or right they wheel and move.
   Each order given they straight obey.
 Instant their skill and power they prove
   Equal, as needed, to display.
 Boundless resources in themselves there dwell;
 'Tis right their outward movements should excel!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK VII. DECADE OF SANG HU

  

I

The Sang Hu; allusive and narrative. The king, entertaining the chief among the feudal princes, expresses his admiration of them, and good wishes for them.

[1]Flitting round the greenbeaks see,
 With their wings of brilliancy!
 Birds they are that men admire;
 More those lords my soul inspire
 With admiring joy and love.
 Heaven will bless them from above!

[2]Here and there the greenbeaks light,
 Showing necks with feathers bright. [p. 296]
 Who but must the creatures prize?
 But it more delights my eyes,
 When these noble lords are seen,
 Who my states from danger screen.

[3]Screens they are, and bulwarks strong;
 All the chiefs around them throng,
 And on them as patterns gaze.
 Self-restraint each hero lays
 On himself,--from folly free;--
 Great their happiness must be!

[4]See the mighty cup of horn,
 Round their ranks in order borne!
 Full of spirits soft and good,
 It excites no conduct rude.
 Surely blessings haste to greet
 Lords of virtue so complete!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Yuan Yang; allusive. Responsive to the last ode;--the princes express their prayers and wishes for the king.

[1]The Yellow ducks, full grown, take wing and fly;
 For them the men both hand and spread nets ply;--
   So greatly they their beauty prize. [p. 297]
 May the king's life ten thousand years extend,
 While wealth and happiness that know no end
   Heaven, as deserved, to him supplies!

[2]The yellow ducks upon the dam oft rest,
 Each with its left wing 'gainst its neighbor's pressed;--
   Their mutual fondness thus they show.
 Heaven to the king ten thousand years assign!
 And blessings lasting in unbroken line
   Upon his merit great bestow!

[3]The stables large the teams of steeds contain;--
 In peace with forage, and in war with grain,
   Abundantly they are supplied.
 May the king's life extend ten thousand years,
 While all that lengthened time no sign appears
   Of wealth or happiness denied!

[4]The stables large contain the numerous teams;--
 Forage they get in peace; in war there gleams
   In every manger store of grain.
 Ten thousand years may our great sovereign live,
 And Heaven the wealth and blessing ever give,
   Which shall his comforting maintain!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 298]

  

III

The Kuei Pien; narrative, with allusive and metaphorical portions in all the stanzas. Celebrating a feast given by the king, at which he is present himself, to his relatives both by consanguinity and affinity.

[1]In their bonnets of deerskin, who are they that haste?
 Who the spirits so good, and such viands may taste?
 Not a stranger among them, but all of thy kin,--
 Certes none but thy brethren such honor could win.
 As the mosses and mistletoe cling to the tree,
 So their hearts, O our sovereign, cling closely to thee.
 While they see not they face, they are restless and sad,
 But a smile from thy lips makes them happy and glad.

[2]In their bonnets of deerskin, who are they that haste?
 Who such viands in season and spirits may taste?
 Not a stranger among them, thy brethren are here;
 Only they at such banquet with thee could appear. [p. 299]
 As the mosses and mistletoe grow on the pine,
 So their hearts, O our sovereign, around thee entwine.
 While they see not thy face, all is dark and forlorn,
 But a glance from thine eyes is to them as the morn.

[3]In their bonnets of deerskin, adorning each head,
 Now they quail the clear spirits, and lordly are fed.
 With thy brothers are kinsmen of every degree;
 Near or distant, they share the banquet with thee.
 When the sleet first descends, weatherwise, we well know,
 Winter soon will be here with its garments of snow.
 Death and mourning may come in our moments of glee;
 'Tis not long, O ye guests, that each other you'll see.
 O'er your cups now be glad, when the daylight has ceased,
 And do thou, O our sovereign, rejoice in the feast.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 300]

  

IV

The Ch'e Hsia; narrative and allusive. The rejoicing of a bridegroom over his young, beautiful, and virtuous bride.

[1]With axle creaking, all on fire I went,
   To fetch my young and lovely bride.
 No thirst or hunger pangs my bosom rent,--
   I only longed to have her by my side.
 I feast with her, whose virtue fame had told,
 Nor need we friends our rapture to behold.

[2]The long-tailed pheasants surest covert find,
   Amid the forest on the plain.
 Here from my virtuous bride, of noble mind,
   And person tall, I wisdom gain.
 I praise her while we feast, and to her say,
 "The love I bear you ne'er will know decay.

[3]"Poor we may be; spirits and viands fine
   My humble means will not afford. [p. 301]
 But what we have, we'll taste and not repine;
   From us will come no grumbling word.
 And though to you no virtue I can add,
 Yet we will sing and dance, in spirit glad.

[4]"I oft ascend that lofty ridge with toil,
   And hew large branches from the oaks;
 Then of their leafy glory them I spoil,
   And fagots form with vigorous strokes.
 Returning tired, your matchless grace I see,
 And my whole soul dissolves in ecstasy.

[5]"To the high hills I looked, and urged each steed;
   The great road next was smooth and plain.
 Up hill, o'er dale, I never slackened speed;
   Like lutestring sounded every rein.
 I knew, my journey ended, I should come
 To you, sweet bride, the comfort of my home."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 302]

  

V

The Ch'ing Ying; metaphorical and allusive. Against listening to slanderers.

[1]Like the blue flies buzzing round,
   And on the fences lighting,
 Are the sons of slander found,
   Who never cease their biting.
 O thou happy, courteous king,
 To the winds their slanders fling.

[2]Buzzing round the blue flies hear,
   About the jujubes flocking!
 So the slanderers appear,
   Whose calumnies are shocking.
 By no law or order bound,
 All the kingdom they confound.

[3]How they buzz, those odious flies,
   Upon the hazels clust'ring!
 And as odious are the lies
   Of those slanderers blust'ring.
 Hatred stirred between us two
 Shows the evil they can do.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 303]

  

VI

The Pin Chih Ch'u Yen; narrative. Against drunkenness. Drinking according to rule, and drinking to excess. A lively picture of the license of the times.

[1]When to the mats the guests draw near,
       Good order they observe.
 Some moving to the left appear,
       While to the right some swerve.
 In rows the dishes stand arrayed;--
 Of wood and bamboo featly made.
 Sauces and kernels in them shine;
 And tempered well the spirits fine:--
       The guests with reverence taste.
 Now are the drums and bells set up;
 And round the circle goes the cup,
       Without unseemly jest.
 The royal target then they rear,
 And bows and arrows soon appear,
       Made ready for the game.
 On different sides the archers stand;
 And one, his weapons in his hand,
       Calls out another's name.
 "Now shoot," he says, "and show your skill."
 The other answers, "Shoot I will,
 And hit the mark;--and when you miss,
 Give you the penal cup to kiss." [p. 304]

[2]The drums loud sound, the organ swells;
       Their flutes the dancers wave.
 The other instruments and bells
       Join in the concert grave.
 Thus with our music blends the dance,
 The solemn service to enhance,
       Which to our sires is paid.
 When rites, the greatest and the least,
 Have been performed to grace the feast,
       Then to our king 'tis said,
 "Blessings on you your sires bestow."
 With joy his sons and grandsons glow;
 They feel inspired to show their care,
 And reverently themselves to bear.
 The guests then come, in order led,
 By him who is their chief and head.
 With those who represent the dead
       They drink in reverent style.
 Attendants wait their cups to fill,
 But order rules 'midst their good will.
 Our cups are only drunk to cheer;
 Our temple services are clear
       From all excesses vile. [p. 305]

[3]When to the mats the guests approach,
       Mild harmony holds rule.
 These dare not upon those encroach,
       And no one plays the fool.
 So long as in duo bounds they keep,
       Discreetly they behave;
 But when those bounds they overleap,
       Then where are they,--so grave?
 They leave the mats, and prance about;
       They caper round and round.
 Their caution all is put to rout;
       Their wits fall to the ground.
 Anon as still more drunk they grow,
       On rudeness they are set.
 The cups their reason overthrow,
       And they themselves forget.

[4]Yes, when the guests have drunk too much,
       They shout aloud and brawl.
 The dishes get no gentle touch;
       Disorder fills the hall. [p. 306]
 They dance about, now fast, now slow,
       Can hardly keep their feet.
 What fools they are they do not know;
       No one resumes his seat.
 Each cap, awry, will hardly stay
       Upon the giddy head;
 But they keep on in madness' way,
       And no exposure dread.
 If, when their wits began to reel,
       They left the room at once,
 Both host and guests would happier feel,
       Nor know the sad mischance.
 But holding on, themselves they harm.
       The drinking feast is good
 Only when guests their wills can arm
       Against misconduct rude.

[5]Whene'er a drinking feast is set,
 Some sober keep, some drunk will get.
 One is appointed to preside,
 With an assistant by his side,
 Record to make, as they decide,
       Who praise deserve, who blame. [p. 307]
 But sots there are, in vice quite sunk,
 Who, seeing some will not get drunk,
       Say, "We for you feel shame."
 These, if they could get in a word,
 Might counsel to the rest afford.
 To fright them from their wild excess,
 Sternly they might them thus address:--
 "From such improper speech refrain;
 Not called to speak, your tongues restrain.
 You're drunk; if but a word you say,
 We'll send you out this very day,
 To find a thing which nature scorns,--
 A ram full grown, yet wanting horns.
 Drink but three cups, your memory's gone;
 How can you drinking still go on?"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Yu Tsao; allusive. Praise of the king by the princes at some feast:--his quiet happiness in Hao.

[1]Fishes there among the pondweed lie;
 From the bank their large heads we espy;--
        Fishes could not happier be. [p. 308]
 Here in Hao resides our lord, the king;
 To him joy his festive pleasures bring.
        Happy and at ease is he.

[2]Fishes there among the pondweed glide;
 From the bank their long tails are descried;--
        Fishes could not happier be.
 Here in Hao resides the king, our lord;
 Festive pleasures joy to him afford.
        Happy and at ease is he.

[3]Fishes there among the pondweed live,
 Shelter to them where the rushes give;--
        Fishes could not happier be.
 Here in Hao the king, our lord, resides;
 Safe and tranquil ever here he bides.
        Happy and at ease is he.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Ts'ai Shu; allusive and narrative. Responsive to the former;--celebrating the appearance of the feudal princes at the court, the splendor of their array, the propriety of their demeanor, and the favor conferred on them by the king.

[1]They pull the beans all o'er the ground,
 To place in baskets square, and round. [p. 309]
 So reap they what the fields produce,
 For present and for future use.
 When now themselves the princes show
 No stores have I gifts to bestow,
       Befitting their great worth.
 Yet a state carriage and its team
 Will well a feudal prince beseem;--
       Let such be all brought forth.
 And from the chambers let them bring
       The robes that princes wear.
 From duke to baron, I, the king,
       On them will these confer.

[2]The water bubbles from the spring,
       And round it grows the cress.
 So when the princes see the king,
       Their coming they express
 In various ways. Now here I see
 Their flags, with dragon blazonry,
       All waving in the wind.
 The gentle tinkling of their bells
 Comes to my ear, and surely tells
 They in their chariots, grandly drawn
 By the four steeds of mighty brawn,
       Cannot be far behind. [p. 310]

[3]The king soon gets a nearer view.
       The covers red he sees
 Upon their knees, of brilliant hue,
       And buskins 'neath the knees.
 A grave demeanor all display;
       The Son of Heaven approves.
 What to such princes can he say,
       Whose presence rapture moves?
 In admiration and delight,
       No grace can he withhold.
 To some he grants new honors bright,
       To some confirms the old.

[4]The oaks their branches wide extend,
       With leaves thick covered o'er,
 Which thus the roots and trunk defend,
       And make them thrive the more.
 So do these princes service do,
 Throughout the land, while they pursue
       The charges to them given.
 The various regions well they guard, [p. 311]
 Nor think they any labor hard,
       To aid the Son of Heaven.
 All blessings on their heads collect.
       And now to court they've brought
 Their ministers who nought neglect,
       Strong both in act and thought.

[5]The boat is by the rope held fast,
       Lest it should float away;
 So round the princes there is cast
       The king's protective stay.
 He looks on them with joy intense;
 He scans their merits to dispense
       His favors and rewards.
 He makes their happiness his charge;
 Their territories to enlarge,
       As duty he regards.
 To them it is a pleasure rare,
       A happy, joyous time,
 When from their states they here repair,
       To see his court sublime.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 312]

  

IV

The Chio Kung; allusive, narrative, and metaphorical. Against the king's cold treatment of his relatives by consanguinity and affinity; the extensive and baneful influence of his example; the encouragement given by him to calumniators.

[1]Whene'er we strongly bend a bow,
   Both string and ends we near us bring;
 And when we let the tension go,
   From us with quick recoil they spring.
 So when we show affection deep,
   Our kith and kin to us we draw;
 But when from them aloof we keep,
   They shrink from us by nature's law.

[2]When you, O king, to kin are cold,
   Such coldness rules throughout the land.
 You for their teacher all men hold;
   To learn your ways needs no command.

[3]Brethren whose virtue stands the test,
   By bad example still unchanged,
 Their generous feelings manifest,
   Nor grow among themselves estranged.
 But if their virtue weakly fails
   The evil influence to withstand,
 Then selfishness o'er love prevails,
   And troubles rise on every hand. [p. 313]

[4]When men in disputations fine
   To hear their consciences refuse,
 Then 'gainst each other they repine,
   And each maintains his special views.
 If one a place of rank obtain,
   And scorn humility to show,
 The others view him with disdain,
   And, wrangling, all to ruin go.

[5]A colt the old horse deems himself,
   And vainly hastens to the race;
 So thinks the mean man, bent on pelf,
   Himself fit for the highest place:
 Stuffed to the full, he still shall feed,
   Nor own that he has had enough.
 He drinks, and with insatiate greed,
   Knows not the time for leaving off.

[6]The monkeys by their nature know
   The way to climb a tree, untaught.
 We need no mud on him to throw,
   Whom lying in the mud we've caught.
 The nature of all meaner men
   Leads them to follow and obey.
 Nor right, nor wrong the millions ken,
   But imitate the sovereign's way.

[7]The snow falls fast, and all the ground
   Hides with its masses, white and clear;
 But when the sunbeams play around,
   It soon will melt and disappear. [p. 314]
 This fact, O king, you don't perceive;
   Those men who calumnies diffuse,
 Not heeding, to themselves you leave,
   And your indulgence they abuse.

[8]Yes, though the snow lie drifted deep,
   Away before the heat 'twill flow.
 I for the king's neglect must weep;--
   Like Man or Mao those men will grow.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Yu Liu; metaphorical and allusive. Some noble tells how impossible it was to approach or do anything for the king, and warns the others against doing so.

[1]The willow trees luxuriant grow.
 Who is not glad himself to throw
   Beneath their shade to rest?
 And so to our great sovereign's court
 The feudal lords should oft resort,
   And feel supremely blessed.
 But he whom we all deemed a god
 Is so uncertain in his nod,
   That they his presence shun.
 Near him alone I dare not go.
 Were I at court myself to show,
 And of his troubles take the charge,
 His calls on me would be so large,
   That I should be undone. [p. 315]

[2]Luxuriant grow the willow trees;
 Beneath their shade one often sees
   Large crowds at ease reclined.
 So should the king his grace extend,
 And to his court the princes bend
   Their steps with willing mind.
 But he, whom as a god we viewed,
 Is so uncertain in his mood,
   That they dare not appear.
 For me I should but court distress,
 If I alone were to address
 Myself to take his cares in hand;
 He would so much of me demand,
   I'd live in constant fear.

[3]The birds now on the trees alight,
 Then spread their wings in sudden flight,
   And soar aloft to heaven;
 So does the king his purpose change,
 From one thing to another range,
   As by his fancies driven.
 His heart we cannot fathom well,
 Nor can we any moment tell
   To what he will proceed.
 The task why should I undertake,
 And vainly the endeavor make,
 His grievous troubles to redress?
 'Twould only cause me sore distress,
   And to my misery lead.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 316]

  

BOOK VIII. THE DECADE OF TU JeN SHIH

  

I

The Tu Jen Shih; narrative. Praise of the ladies and gentlemen of a former time for the simplicity of their dress, the correctness of their deportment, and the elegance of their manners.

[1]In the old capital they stood,
   With yellow fox furs plain,
 Their manners all correct and good,
   Speech free from vulgar stain.
 Could we go back to Chow's old days,
   All would look up to them with praise.

[2]In the old capital they wore
   T'ai hats and black caps small;
 And ladies, who famed surnames bore,
   Their own thick hair let fall.
 Such simple ways are seen no more,
 And the changed manners I deplore. [p. 317]

[3]Ear stoppers, made of sew stones fine,
   In the old days were worn.
 Each lady of a noble line
   A Yin or Chi seemed born.
 Such officers and ladies now
 I see not, and my sorrows grow.

[4]With graceful sweep their girdles fell,
   Then in the days of old.
 The ladies' side hair, with a swell,
   Like scorpion's tail, rose bold.
 Such, if I saw them in these days,
 I'd follow with admiring gaze.

[5]So hung their girdles, not for show;--
   To their own length 'twas due.
 'Twas not by art the hair curled so;--
   By nature so it grew.
 I seek such manners now in vain,
 And pine for them with longing pain.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 318]

  

II

The Ts'ai Lu; narrative. A wife tells her sorrow and incapability of attending to anything, in the prolonged absence of her husband, to whom she was fondly attached.

[1]So full am I of anxious thought,
 Though all the morn king grass I've sought,
      To fill my arms I fail.
 Like wisp all-tangled is my hair!
 To wash it let me home repair.
      My lord soon may I hail!

[2]Though 'mong the indigo I've wrought
 The morning long, through anxious thought,
      My skirt's filled but in part.
 Within five days he was to appear.
 The sixth has come, and he's not here.
      Oh! how this racks my heart!

[3]When here we dwelt in union sweet.
 If the hunt called his eager feet,
      His bow I cased for him.
 Or if to fish he went away,
 And would be absent all the day,
      His line I put in trim. [p. 319]

[4]What in his angling did he catch?
 Well worth the time it was to watch
      How bream and tench he took.
 Men thronged upon the banks and gazed;
 At bream and tench they looked amazed,
      The triumphs of his hook.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Chu Miao; allusive and narrative. Celebrating the service of the earl of Shao in building the city of Seay, and the cheerful alacrity of his soldiers under his management.

[1]As the young millet, by the genial rain
   Enriched, shoots up luxuriant and tall,
 So, when we southward marched with toil and pain,
   The earl of Shao cheered and inspired us all.

[2]We pushed our barrows, and our burdens bore;
   We drove our wagons, and our oxen led.
 "The work once done, our labor there is o'er,
   And home we travel," to ourselves we said. [p. 320]

[3]Close kept our footmen round the chariot track;
   Our eager host in close battalions sped.
 "When once our work is done, then we go back,
   Our labor over," to themselves they said.

[4]Hard was the work we had at Seay to do,
   But Shao's great earl the city soon upreared
 The host its service gave with ardor true;--
   Such power in all the earl's commands appeared!

[5]We did on plains and low lands what was meet;
   We cleared the springs and streams, the land to drain.
 The earl of Shao announced his work complete,
   And the king's heart reposed, at rest again.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Hsi Sang; allusive and narrative. The writer tells his admiration and love for some men of noble character.

[1]Where lies the ground both wet and low,
 The mulberry trees in beauty grow;--
 'Tis sweet to see their clust'ring leaves.
 Such pleasure in my bosom heaves, [p. 321]
 When I the princely men descry;--
 To tell the joy 'twere vain to try.

[2]Where lies the ground both wet and low,
 The mulberry trees in beauty grow;--
 'Tis sweet to see their glossy leaves.
 Such pleasure in my bosom heaves.
 When I the princely men behold;--
 Then does my heart its joy unfold.

[3]Where lies the ground both wet and low,
 The mulberry trees in beauty grow;--
 'Tis sweet to see their dark green leaves.
 Such pleasure in my bosom heaves,
 When lights upon those men my eye;--
 At their grand fame my heart throbs high.

[4]I cherish those men in my heart.--
 Might not my words my love impart?
 No;--if the words were once but spoken,
 The charm of love might then be broken.
 The men shall dwell within my heart,
 Nor thence with lapse of time depart.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 322]

  

V

The Pai Hua; metaphorical. The wife of King Yu complains of being degraded and forsaken.

[1]The fibers of the white-flowered rush
   Are with the white grass bound.
 So do the two together go,
   In closest union found.
 And thus should man and wife abide,
   The twain combined in one;
 But this bad man sends me away,
   And bids me dwell alone.

[2]Both rush and grass from the bright clouds
   The genial dew partake.
 Kind and impartial, nature's laws
   No odious difference make.
 But providence appears unkind;
   Events are often hard.
 This man, to principle untrue,
   Denies me his regard.

[3]Northward the pools their waters send,
   To flood each paddy field;
 So get the fields the sap they need,
   Their store of rice to yield. [p. 323]
 But that great man no deed of grace
   Deigns to bestow on me.
 My songs are sighs. At thought of him
   My heart aches wearily.

[4]The mulberry branches they collect,
   And use their food to cook.
 But I must use a furnace small,
   That pot nor pan will brook.
 So me that great man badly treats,
   Nor uses as his wife,
 Degrades me from my proper place,
   And fills with grief my life.

[5]The bells and drums inside the court
   Men stand without and hear;
 So should the feelings in my breast,
   To him distinct appear.
 All-sorrowful, I think of him,
   Longing to move his love;
 But he vouchsafes no kind response;
   His thoughts far from me rove.

[6]The marabou stands on the dam,
   And to repletion feeds; [p. 324]
 The crane deep in the forest cries,
   Nor finds the food it needs.
 So in my room the concubine
   By the great man is placed;
 While I with cruel banishment
   Am cast out and disgraced.

[7]The yellow ducks sit on the dam,
   With left wing gathered low;
 So on each other do they lean,
   And their attachment show.
 And love should thus the man and wife
   In closest concord bind;
 But that man turns away from me,
   And shows a fickle mind.

[8]When one stands on a slab of stone,
   No higher than the ground,
 Nothing is added to his height;--
   Low with the stone he's found.
 So does the favorite's mean estate
   Render that great man mean,
 While I by him, to distance sent,
   Am pierced with sorrow keen.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 325]

  

VI

The Mien Man; allusive. Some inferior complains of his toil in an expedition, and of the neglect with which he was treated by his superiors.

[1]  Twitters fast the oriole,
     Where yonder bends the mound.
   The happy little creature
     Its resting place has found.
 So have not I. The journey's length
 And weary toil o'ertask my strength.
 Give me to eat; give me to drink;
 And teach my mind the way to think.
 Then bid a baggage cart prepare
 Along the route myself to bear.

[2]  Twitters fast the oriole,
     Where shows its edge the mound:
   The happy little creature
     Its resting place has found.
 So have not I. I dare not shrink
 From the long way, but trembling think,
 Unable to hold on, I'll sink. [p. 326]
 Give me to drink; and give me food;
 And teach my mind the thing that's good.
 Then bid a baggage cart prepare
 Along the route myself to bear.

[3]  Twitters fast the oriole,
     Where spreads its side the mound.
   The happy little creature
     Its resting place has found.
 So have not I. I dare not shrink
 From the long way, but trembling think,
 Before we reach the end, I'll sink.
 Give me to drink; to food invite;
 And tell my mind the thing that's right.
 Then bid a baggage cart prepare
 Along the route myself to hear.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Hu Yeh; narrative. Where the provisions are most frugal, all the rules of polite intercourse may yet be preserved.

[1]A few gourd leaves that waved about
   Cut down and boiled;--the feast how spare! [p. 327]
 But the good host his spirits takes,
   Pours out a cup, and proves them rare.

[2]A single rabbit on the mat,
   Or baked, or roast:--how small the feast!
 But the good host his spirits takes,
   And fills the cup of every guest.

[3]A single rabbit on the mat,
   Roasted or broiled:--how poor the meal!
 But the guests from the spirit vase
   Fill their host's cup, and drink his weal.

[4]A single rabbit on the mat,
   Roasted or baked:--no feast we think!
 But from the spirit vase they take,
   Both host and guests, and joyous drink.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Chien Chien Chih Shih; narrative. Commemorating the hardships of a long and difficult expedition to the east, aggravated by great rains.

[1]How high those frowning rocks arise!
   With awe they fill the mind. [p. 328]
 Our way through streams, o'er mountains lies;
   Toilsome the march we find.
 Eastward our expedition goes,
 Nor has our chief one hour's repose.

[2]Those frowning rocks the heights surmount,
   And fill the mind with dread.
 O'er hills, through streams, our steps we count;
   When shall our march be sped?
 Our warrior hastens on the track,
 Nor thinks he of our drawing back.

[3]Look at the swine, with legs all white,
   Washed by the pools from stain!
 The moon wades through the Hyads bright,
   Foretelling heavier rain.
 He at whose word we eastward fare
 No leisure has for other care.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The T'iao Chih Hua; metaphorical. The writer laments his misery amidst and in consequence of the general decay of the kingdom.

[1]Deep yellow are turned
   The bignonia flowers; [p. 329]
 And my wounded heart
   Its sorrow outpours.

[2]The flowers are all gone;
   But green leaves are seen.
 Than this fate have known,
   Better not to have been!

[3]In fish traps but stars!
   Ewes thin, with large head!
 While some may have food,
   Most languish, ill fed.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Ho Ts'ao Pu Huang; allusive and narrative. The misery and murmuring of soldiers constantly employed on expeditionary services, and treated without any consideration.

[1]Yellow now is all the grass;
 All the days in marching pass.
 On the move is every man;
 Hard work, far and near, they plan. [p. 330]

[2] Black is every plant become;
 Every man is torn from home.
 Kept on foot, our state is sad;--
 As if we no feelings had!

[3]Not rhinoceroses we!
 Tigers do we care to be?
 Fields like these so desolate
 Are to us a hateful fate.

[4]Long-tailed foxes pleased may hide
 'Mong the grass, where they abide.
 We, in box carts slowly borne,
 On the great roads plod and mourn.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 331]

  

PART III

  

GREATER ODES OF THE KINGDOM

  

BOOK I. DECADE OF KING WeN

  

I

The Wen Wang; narrative. Celebrating King Wen, dead and alive, as the founder of the dynasty of Chou, showing how his virtues drew to him the favoring regard of Heaven, and made him a bright pattern to his descendants and their ministers.

[1]The royal Wen now rests on high,
 Enshrined in brightness of the sky.
 Chou as a state had long been known,
 And Heaven's decree at last was shown.
 Its lords had borne a glorious name;
 God kinged them when the season came.
 King Wen ruled well when earth he trod;
 Now moves his spirit near to God.

[2]A strong-willed, earnest king was Wen,
 And still his fame rolls widening on. [p. 332]
 The gifts that God bestowed on Chou
 Belong to Wen's descendants now.
 Heaven blesses still with gifts divine
 The hundred scions of his line;
 And all the officers of Chou
 From age to age more lustrous grow.

[3]More lustrous still-from age to age,
 All reverent plans their zeal engage;
 And brilliant statesmen owe their birth
 To this much.-favored spot of earth.
 They spring like products of the land,--
 The men by whom the realm doth stand.
 Such aid their numerous bands supply,
 That Wan, rests tranquilly on high.

[4]Deep were Wen's thoughts, sustained his ways;
 His reverence lit its trembling rays.
 Resistless came great Heaven's decree;
 The sons of Shang must bend the knee;-- [p. 333]
 The sons of Shang, each one a king,
 In numbers beyond numbering.
 Yet as God spoke, so must it be:--
 The sons of Shang all bent the knee.

[5]Now each to Chou his homage pays,--
 So dark and changing are Heaven's ways.
 When we pour our libations here,
 The officers of Shang appear,
 Quick and alert to give their aid;--
 Such is the service by them paid,
 While still, they do not cast aside
 The cap and broidered ax,--their pride.
 Ye servants of our line of kings,
 Remember him from whom it springs.

[6]Remember him from whom it springs;--
 Let this give to your virtue wings.
 Seek harmony with Heaven's great mind;--
 So shall you surest blessing find.
 Ere Shang had lost the nation's heart,
 Its monarchs all with God had part
 In sacrifice. From them you see
 'Tis hard to keep high Heaven's decree. [p. 334]

[7]'Tis hard to keep high Heaven's decree!
 O sin not, or you cease to be.
 To add true luster to your name,
 See Shang expire in Heaven's dread flame.
 For Heaven's high dealings are profound,
 And far transcend all sense and sound.
 From Wen your pattern you must draw,
 And all the states will own your law.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Ta Ming; narrative. How the appointment of Heaven rested on King Wen, and descended to his son, King Wu, who overthrew the dynasty of Yin or Shang;--celebrating also the mother and the wife of Wen.

[1]Majestic Heaven from kings below,
 That they illustrious virtue show,
     With strictest law requires.
 They must not on its grace rely,
 Nor think that they can change defy.
 The house of Yin long ruled the land,
 Called to the throne by Heaven's command.
 But its last monarch, from it driven,
 Lost by supreme decree of Heaven
     The kingdom of his sires. [p. 335]

[2]What time in Chou ruled our King Chi,
 Among the princesses of Chi,
     In the domain of Yin,
 The second daughter of her name
 Had through the land a noble fame.
 Her from her parents Chi had sought,
 And to his capital he brought,
     And wedded her, Ta-jen.
 They both could perfect virtue claim,
     No duty left undone.
 A mother soon the wife became;
     The child was our King Wen.

[3]This our King Wen in all his way
 Did watchful reverence display,
 With clearest wisdom serving God,
 Who, pleased to see the course he trod,
     Him with great favor crowned.
 His virtue no deflection knew,
 But always to the right was true.
 The states beheld, and all approved;
 With loyal ardor stirred and moved,
     Wen as their head they owned. [p. 336]

[4]Throughout the land Heaven sent its glance;
 Whom should it to the throne advance?
     To Wen came the decree.
 While he was still in early years,
 By Heaven's arranging there appears
     She who his bride should be.
 North of the Hsia, on Wei, she shone,
     The child of a great house.
 Then Wen, to years of manhood grown.
     Tendered to her his vows.

[5]Like a fair denizen of Heaven
 Was she to whom those vows were given.
 The gifts he sent were deemed complete,
 And to the Wei, his bride to meet,
     Our Wen in person went.
 A bridge of boats across the stream
 He Made, as did her state beseem.
 She crossed; to Chou they held their way.
 Great was the glory of the day,
     And glorious the event!

[6]Heaven thus its grand appointment made,
 And Wen to all the land displayed, [p. 337]
     While still he ruled in Feng.
 Hsin's eldest daughter was the wife,
 Whom Heaven prepared to bless his life,
 And take his virtuous mother's place.
 And Heaven soon gave them further grace;
     'Twas from them King Wu sprung.
 Heaven kept and helped the child, until
     Its summons to him came.
 Then Wu marched forth to do its will,
     Smote Yin, and won his fame.

[7]Countless as forest leaves, Yin's hosts,
 Collected from its utmost coasts,
 Were marshaled in Mu's famous plain,
 To meet King Wu;--but all in vain.
     Chou to the crisis rose.
 Wu viewed their multitudes with fear,
 But Shang-fu's words soon gave him cheer:--
 "With you is God; your doubts dispel.
 With Him as helper, we shall quell
     The pride of all our foes."

[8]Vast was the plain. Each sandal car,
 That brightly shone amidst the war,
     Dashed rapidly along.
 Each team of steeds, black-maned and bay,
 Against all obstacles made way. [p. 338]
 Like mighty eagle on the wing,
 Shang-fu was ever near the king,
     Whose heart was thus made strong.
 At the first charge Yin's troops gave way,
     And took to shameful flight.
 That morn a long and brilliant day
     Displaced the previous night.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Mien; metaphorical and narrative. The small beginnings and subsequent growth of the house of Chou. Its removal from Pin under T'an-f u, and settlement in Chou, down to the time of King Wen.

[1]As grow the gourds, with ever length'ning stem.
 From elder sires sprang ours, as we from them.
 When first by Chu and Ch'i our people grew,
 And o'er them ruled the ancient Duke T'an-fu,
 There kilnlike huts and caves for them he made,
 Ere any house its walls and roof displayed.

[2]The ancient Duke T'an-fu came with the morn,
 In car along the western rivers borne,
 Nor stayed his steeds, until he reached Mount Ch'i.
 The Lady Chiang came in his company. [p. 339]
 With eager eyes they traveled o'er the ground,
 To find a site on which a town to found.

[3]The plain of Chou, with violets o'erspread
 And sonchus plants found sweet on such a bed,
 Lay wide and rich. He asked his men their mind,
 And by the scorched tortoise shell divined.
 Both answer gave:--"Now is the time and here!"
 His followers straight their homes began to rear.

[4]He cheered them on, and placed them on the land,
 On left and right their different sites he planned.
 Divisions, large and small, soon marked the plain,
 And channels, or to irrigate or drain.
 From east to west the acres he defined;
 Nought that was needed 'scaped his active mind.

[5]He named two officers who should preside
 O'er all these labors, and the people guide.
 These to direct the building work he calls;
 True to the plummet rise the many walls. [p. 340]
 They bind the frame boards, till they stand aright,
 And rear th' ancestral temple in its might.

[6]With earth in baskets crowding workmen came,
 Which then with shouts they cast into the frame.
 There with responsive blows the earth they pound,
 And trim and pare until the walls are sound.
 At once, five thousand cubits long, these rise,
 The drum unheard amidst the toilers' cries.

[7]The palace next they built. Its outer gate
 Arose with lofty and imposing state.
 The inner portal of the court they reared,
 With massive pomp. Anon, hard by, appeared
 The altar for the spirits of the land,
 Where the state's greatest movements should be planned.

[8]Thus though his foeman's rage he could not tame,
 T'an-fu preserved and left a noble fame. [p. 341]
 In time the oaks and thorns were cleared away,
 And roads for travelers opened to the day.
 The savage hordes of Hun all disappeared,
 Panting, and trembling at the name they feared.

[9]Then came King Wen, and stirred to nobler life
 The chiefs of Joo and Juy, who ceased their strife.
 Some sought our prince, whom yet they had not seen;
 Some, led by those who at his court had been;
 Some came who dreaded his avenging arm;
 And some, who knew he screened the weak from harm.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Yu Po; allusive and narrative. In praise of King Wen, celebrating his activity, influence, and capacity to rule.

[1]Abundant grow the oaks, and round them rise
 A mass of shrubs, both yielding large supplies
   Of firewood, or to burn or store.
 In grace and grandeur shone our prince and king;
 From left and right all haste, and to him cling,
   As bent from him to part no more. [p. 342]

[2]In grace and grandeur shone our prince and king.
 At sacrifice his ministers all bring
   Their cups, each handle half a mace.
 Solemn and grave, on left and right they stand,
 And pour libations with a reverent hand;--
   Well do such men the service grace!

[3]Upon the king the boats are borne along,
 As to their oars the rowers bend, and strong
   Impel them to their utmost speed.
 So marched our king in his avenging wrath,
 His six hosts swiftly following on his path;--
   How could his plans fail to succeed?

[4]The Milky Way reveals its span on high,
 With light and beauty bright'ning all the sky;--
   Men view it with admiring gaze.
 Long lived the king, and lasting influence shed
 Throughout the land, where his great son displayed
   The glorious issues of his ways.

[5]The vessels, formed of metal and of jade,
 By graver's tools are still more precious made;--
   With grace their worth is thus combined. [p. 343]
 Unceasing were the labors of our king;
 East, west, north, south, his laws and rules shall bring
   The reverent homage of each mind.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Han Lu; allusive and narrative. In praise of the virtue of King Wan, blessed by his ancestors, and raised to the highest dignity without seeking of his own.

[1]Round the foot of Mount Han
     Grow the hazel and thorn.
 Self-possession and ease
     Did our monarch adorn.
 Striving for his height of place,
 These around him threw their grace.

[2]From the large cup of jade
     Fragrant spirits down flow.
 Self-possession and ease
     Did our prince ever show.
 Could there but on him descend
 Rank and blessing without end? [p. 344]

[3]  Up to heaven flies the hawk;
     Fishes spring in the deep.
   Self-possession and ease
     Did our prince ever keep.
 Grand the influence he shed,
 As those virtues he displayed!

[4]  In the vessel behold
     How his spirits shine clear!
   The red bull is ready,
     Nor the knife views with fear.
 Thus he paid the sacred rite,
 Brighter blessing to invite!

[5]  Oaks and shrubs thickly grow,
     Which for firewood men hew.
   Self-possession and ease
     In our prince all could view.
 Spirits cheered him in his course,
 Nerving him with secret force.

[6]  How the creepers close twine
     Round the branches and stems!
   Self-possession and ease
     Robed our prince as with gems.
 Happiness increased unsought,
 Nor by crooked ways was bought.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 345]

  

VI

The Ssu Ch'i; narrative. The virtue of King Wen and its wonderful effects; with the excellent character of his mother and wife.

[1]Ta-jen was pure, of rev'rent life,
     From whom our King Wen sprang.
 Fit was she for his father's wife,
     And well she loved Chou Chiang.
 Ta-ssu inherited her fame;
 Through her an hundred sons there came.

[2]Wen formed himself upon his sires,
     Nor gave their spirits pain.
 Well pleased were they. Next he inspires
     His wife. His brethren fain
 To follow were. In every state
 The chiefs on his example wait. [p. 346]

[3]In palace see him,--bland, serene;
     In fane, with rev'rent fear.
 Unseen by man, he felt still seen
     By spirits always near.
 Unweariedly did he maintain
 His virtue pure, and free from stain.

[4]Some great calamities there came,
     Which he could not control.
 But none his generous aim might blame,
     Nought darken his bright soul.
 Untaught, the right he ever saw;
 Reproof he needed not, nor law.

[5]Grown men through him in virtue grew;
     Young men attainments made.
 Aye to himself our prince was true,
     Nor weariness displayed.
 His officers acquired great fame;
 To him they owed their deathless name.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 347]

  

VII

The Huang I; narrative. Showing the rise of the house of Chou to the sovereignty of the kingdom through the favor of God. The cases and achievements of King Ta, King Chi, and especially of King Wen.

[1]Oh! great is God. His glance on earth He bent,
 Scanning our regions with severe intent
 For one whose rule the people should content.

The earlier lines of kings had practiced ill,
 And ruling, ruled not after God's just will.
 He therefore 'mong the states was searching still.

Searching for one in whom He could confide.
 From the great states He westward turned aside,
 And there a place did for our house provide.

[2]Ta then was chief, who made wild nature trim
 And cleared the forest of the rotting limb.
 Impervious tracts grew pervious by him. [p. 348]

He felled and dressed the bosky clumps and rows;
 He drained the marshes where the willow grows;
 He thinned the mulberries, rising thick and close.

When this wise chieftain God to Chou had given,
 The Kwan hordes fled away, by terror driven;
 And sons came from the wife Ta got from Heaven.

[3]God looked upon the hills where Ta the oak
 And thorny shrubs had thinned, and lo! there broke
 Paths through the firs, that human feet bespoke.

The state thus founded, God prepared the king,
 And he through Ta-pai's flight from Chi shall spring.
 Ta's son was Chi, whose praises now I sing.

A younger brother's heart within him glowed;
 He to his elder rendered all he owed,
 And when he fled, a patriot's heart Chi showed.

So through his course his brother's flight appeared
 With glory crowned. Head of the name, Chi reared
 The throne to which Chou's way erelong was cleared. [p. 349]

[4]Gifted was Chi by God with wisdom high.
 His judgments true drew on him every eye;
 With silent growth his fame spread far and nigh.

Most ken, most wise, to yield or to command,
 And sway to exercise throughout the land,
 He was 'twixt king and chief a powerful band.

His son, King Wen, could all his honors claim,
 With virtue pure, beyond the reach of blame.
 On him and on his sons God's blessing came.

[5]God spake to Wen, "Be thou not like to those,
 Whose aim now flies to this, to that now goes,
 Whose facile wills obey each wind that blows."

So grandly clomb he to fair virtue's height.
 When rebel Mi dared to dispute his might,
 And dared to challenge this great land to fight;

They entered Yuan, and against Kung conspire.
 Then rose the king, majestic in his ire,
 And sent his troops to make the foe retire; [p. 350]

His power, as all expected, to display,
 And, strength'ning Chou, a deep foundation lay,
 On which might rise an universal sway.

[6]Calm in his capital, the king abode.
 His troops from utmost Yuan held on their road;
 O'er lofty hills right valiantly they strode.

The foe could plant no forces on our hills,
 Or high or low, nor drink our springs and rills,
 Nor touch the pools that trickling brooklet fills.

South of the Chi, and near the Wei, Wen saw
 Large plains, to which the masses he could draw.
 There now he dwelt, and to the states gave law.

[7]God spake to Wen, "I love your virtue wise
 Not blatant-tongued, nor flashed before men's eyes,
 Not seeking fickle change, or rude emprize. [p. 351]

All unpremeditate, and free from art,
 It leads you to enact the noblest part,
 A pattern king,--according to God's heart."

God spake to Wen, "Straight with your brethren go;
 And ladders take, and engines to bring low
 The walls of Ch'ung, and there defeat the foe."

[8]The warlike engines gently first they ply,
 Against the walls of Ch'ung, walls broad and high,
 Hoping the foe would not their power defy.

Captives for question, one by one, were brought;
 The left ears of the slain were slowly sought:--
 So would they wake the foe's relenting thought.

With the same object,--human life to spare,
 To God, and to war's sire, Wen sought by prayer
 And sacrifice. Who should resistance dare?

But Ch'ung held out. The engines moved along
 With all their force against its bulwarks strong,
 At which the troops were hurled, one eager throng.

Wen razed its walls, and quenched its rites in blood.
 The eye could scarcely tell where once it stood.
 Throughout the land, all feared his wrathful mood.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 352]

  

VIII

The Ling T'ai; narrative. The joy of the people in the growing opulence and dignity of King Wen.

[1]When Wen to build his wondrous tower began,
   Of all its plan a scheme he drew.
 To do the work, in crowds the people ran,
   And as by magic, lo! it grew.
 "Be not in haste:"--so kindly said the king,
 But all as to a father help would bring.

[2]The king was walking in his wondrous park,
   Where lay the does, all sleek and clean.
 'Twas sweet to him their restfulness to mark,
   And see the white birds' glistening sheen.
 Then to his wondrous pond he took his way,
 To view the fish their bounding life display.

[3]Right in the middle of a circling pool,
   His hall, the place of joy, he reared.
 For music there he made provision full.
   'Twixt pillars finely carved appeared
 Face boards, with tops of finest tracery,
 'Neath which large drums and bells were hanging free. [p. 353]

[4]On these the blind musicians did their part.
   Of lizard skin the drums were made.
 The eyeless men displayed consummate art;
   In perfect unison they played.
 The music loud resounded through the hall.
 What rapture did the festive throng enthrall!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Hsia Wu; narrative. In praise of King Wu, walking in the ways of his forefathers, and by his filial piety securing the throne to himself and his posterity.

[1]Kings die in Chou, and others rise,
   And in their footsteps tread.
 Three had there been, and all were wise;
   And still they ruled, though dead.
 Ta, Chi, and Wen were all in heaven,
 When Wu to follow them was given.

[2]Yes, Wu to follow them was given.
   To imitate his sires,
 And to obey the will of Heaven,
   He ardently desires.
 Through all his course this aim endured,
 And this the people's trust secured. [p. 354]

[3]Yes, Wu secured the people's faith,
   And gave to all the law
 Of filial duty, which till death
   Shining in him they saw.
 Such piety possessed his mind;
 Such pattern did he leave behind.

[4]Thus the one man was Wu--the one,
   The king, whom all did love.
 They saw in him the pattern son;
   Such sons to be they strove.
 The filial aim in him bright shone;
 In him were seen the dead and gone.

[5]In Wu his sires were thus brought back.
   The kings that from him spring,
 Continuing in his steps to walk,
   Upon themselves shall bring,
 Through myriad years, to Chou still given,
 The blessing of impartial Heaven.

[6]Ah! yes, Heaven's blessing will descend,
   And men their names shall bless.
 Thousands from Chou's remotest end,
   Their praises shall express.
 Their sway through myriad years shall last,
 Nor helpers fail, strong friends and fast.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 355]

  

X

The Wen Wang Yu Sheng; narrative to the last stanza, which is allusive. The praise of King Wen and King Wu:--how the former displayed his military prowess only to secure the tranquillity of the people; how this appeared in the building of Feng as his capital city; and how the latter entered, in his capital of Hao, into the sovereignty of the kingdom with the sincere good will of all the people.

[1]Oh! the praise of King Wen
   Shall forever endure.
 For the people he sought,
   How their rest to make sure.
 And his work he beheld
   Made complete and secure;
 And our Wen was a sovereign true!

[2]'Twas the gift of high heaven
   That the throne did bestow.
 What success Wen achieved,
   When great Chung was laid low!
 Feng he called it, and moved
   There, his grand state to show;
 And our Wen was a sovereign true! [p. 356]

[3]He repaired its old walls,
   And the old moat he cleared.
 As his sires had oft done,
   So his new seat he reared.
 Not in haste did he build,
   And the son more appeared;
 And our prince was a sovereign true!

[4]Oh! how brightly those walls
   Did his merit display!
 From all quarters they came,
   And would not be said nay.
 For to Feng they repaired,
   Their true homage to pay;
 And our prince was a sovereign true!

[5]East from Feng flowed the stream
   That the same name did bear.
 'Twas the work of Great Yu
   Made the water flow there.
 And to Feng the states came,
   Wu their king to declare;
 And our king was a sovereign true! [p. 357]

[6]Then to Hao Wu removed,
   And the pool-circled hall
 There he built, and received
   The submission of all.
 East, west, north, and south,
   Him their monarch they call;
 And our king was a sovereign true!

[7]Having thought of the site,
   By the shell Wu divined.
 As the shell answer gave,
   So the site was assigned.
 Thus King Wu dwelt in Hao,
   Where his city we find;
 And our Wu was a sovereign true!

[8]Where the Feng water flows,
   Is the white millet grown.
 In the men Wu employed
   How his merit was shown!
 To his sons he would leave
   His wise plans and his throne;
 And our Wu was a sovereign true!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 358]

  

BOOK II. DECADE OF SHeNG MIN

  

I

The Sheng Min; narrative. The legend of Hou-chi:--his conception; his birth; the perils of his infancy; his boyish habits of agriculture; his subsequent teaching of agriculture, and his founding of sacrifices, the honors of sacrifice paid to him by the house of Chou.

[1]'Tis to the famed Chiang Yuan we trace
 The earliest of our favored race;
 And how this happened, let my verse
 The ancient story now rehearse.
 With offering pure and sacrifice,
 And look directed to the skies,
 She prayed that Heaven would take away
 The deep reproach that on her lay
 Of childless womb; and then she trod
 Upon a toe print made by God.
 Straight, as she rested, she was moved,
 And, pregnant now, retirement loved.
 A son, Hou-chi, erelong appeared,
 Whom with a mother's care she reared. [p. 359]

[2]Lo! when her carrying time was done,
 Came like a lamb this first-born son.
 No pains of labor suffered she,--
 No hurt, no strain, no injury.
 With omen of his future part
 Did God thus cheer the mother's heart.
 He had accepted in the skies
 Her offering and her sacrifice;--
 And thus it was she bore her son,
 And of birth pangs had suffered none.

[3]Once in a narrow lane exposed,
 The sheep and oxen round him closed,
 And sheltered with their loving care.
 Again the woodman found him, where
 In a wide forest he was placed,
 And bore him from the darksome waste.
 On the cold ice exposed once more,
 A bird, beneath the child and o'er,
 Stretched its great wings. When it took flight,
 Hou-chi began to wail in fright;
 And loud and long his cries resound,
 Filling the airy region round. [p. 360]

[4]When he could only creep, his face
 With glance of wisdom beamed, and grace.
 When he could feed himself, then fain
 Was he to sow large beans and grain.
 His beans with fine luxuriance grow;
 His rows of rice rare beauty show;
 His hemp and wheat adorn the field;
 His gourds abundant produce yield.

[5]In husbandry this was his course:--
 Wisely to aid kind nature's force.
 He cleared the grass, and plowed the land,
 Where yellow grain should waving stand.
 The living germ with care was nurst,
 Till from its sheath it nearly burst.
 'Twas then as seed laid in the ground:--
 It sprang, and soon in ear was found.
 Strong grew the plant, and fine, and sweet,
 Hung down anon, each grain complete.--
 T'ai's state to rule for him was meet. [p. 361]

[6]There he gave out the beauteous grains:--
 Millets,--the black, and what contains
 Two kernels, and tall red, and white.
 Largely they planted with delight
 The double-kerneled, and the black,
 Which, as they reap, they quickly stack.
 The red and white their labor share,
 But these, when reaped, they homeward bear,
 And for the solemn rites prepare.

[7]And still those rites we here maintain.
 Some in the mortar hull the grain;
 Some take it thence; then sift it some;
 The while fresh treaders constant come.
 Washed in the dish with rattling sound,
 It is distilled; the steam floats round.
 We fix the day, and then with prayer
 And fasting for the rites prepare.
 Upon the burning fat we lay
 The southernwood, and next essay,
 With ram, the Spirit of the way
 To please. Flesh boiled or roast
 For representatives we boast.
 We with these rites Hou-chi revere,
 And welcome in the opening year. [p. 362]

[8]The stands of wood and earthenware
 Grand store of various offerings bear.
 Soon as their fragrant odors rise,
 God, pleased, accepts the sacrifice.
 Fragrant it is, and timely paid;--
 'Twas Hou-chi its foundation laid.
 Chou's lords and kings, down to this time,
 Have duly kept the rite sublime.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Hsing Wei; allusive and narrative. A festal ode, celebrating some entertainment given by the king to his relatives, with the trial of archery after the feast; celebrating especially the honor done on such occasions to the aged.

[1]See how the rushes spring
   Thickly along the way!
 Ye browsing herds, no foot
   Upon those rushes lay!
 Grown to their height erelong,
   They soft and rich shall shine.
 Close as the rushes grow,
   Should brethren all combine. [p. 363]
 Let all at feast appear,
   None absent, none thought mean.
 Mats for the young be spread!
   On stools let elders lean!

[2]Lo! double mats are spread,
   And stools are featly set.
 Servants in waiting stand;
   See host and guests are met.
 He pledges them; they him;
   He drinks; again they fill.
 Sauces and pickles come,
   Roast meat and broiled; and still
 Palates and tripe are brought.
   Then lutes and drums appear.
 Singers fine concord make;--
   The joyous feasters hear.

[3]The feasting o'er, from bow,
   Lacquered and strong and bright,
 Four well-poised shafts each sends,
   That in the target light. [p. 364]
 The guests are ranged as they
   The mark have nearest hit.
 They shoot again; the shafts
   Are fairly lodged in it.
 Their bearing then is judged;
   Each takes his final place,
 As mild propriety
   Has round him thrown its grace.

[4]The long-descended king
   Presides, and ends the feast.
 With spirits sweet and strong
   From vase he cheers each guest.
 And for the old he prays,
   While all with rapture glow,
 That they the wrinkled back
   And whitening hair may show;
 Striving with mutual help
   In virtue's onward ways,
 And brightest happiness
   Thus crown their latest days.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 365]

  

III

The Chi Tsui; narrative. Responsive to the last;--the uncles and brothers of the king express their sense of his kindness, and their wishes for his happiness, mostly in the words in which the personators of the dead had conveyed the satisfaction of his ancestors with the sacrifice offered to them and promised to him their blessing.

[1]You gave us of the brimming cup,
   And crowned us with your grace.
 Great king, forever may you live
   With brightening happiness!

[2]You gave us of the brimming cup,
   And dainty viands spread.
 May you, great king, forever live!
   Your splendor never fade!

[3]Yea, perfect may your wisdom be,
   Achieving its high aim!
 "First ends in last; last springs from first;--
   Revealed, that message came. [p. 366]

[4]What said the message from your sires?
   "Vessels and gifts are clean;
 And all your friends, assisting you,
   Behave with reverent mien.

[5]"Most reverently you did your part,
   And reverent by your side
 Your son appeared. On you henceforth
   Shall ceaseless blessings bide.

[6]"What shall the ceaseless blessing be?
   That in your palace high
 For myriad years you dwell in peace,
   Rich in posterity.

[7]"What of the sons shall from you flow?
   Through you, thus blessed of Heaven,
 Those myriad years of royal sway
   Shall to your sons be given.

[8]"And whence shall come that lustrous race?
   From your heroic wife.
 From her shall come the line of sons
   To live again your life."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 367]

  

IV

The Fu I; allusive. An ode, appropriate to the feast given to the personators of the departed, on the day after the sacrifice in the ancestral temple.

[1]How the flocks of the wild ducks and widgeons play,
 As they now skim the King, and now seek their prey!
 How happy the birds! And not less joy inspires
 Those who yesterday played the part of your sires.
 Your viands are fragrant; your spirits are clear.
 They feast and they drink; and all happy appear.
 Complete is the honor you render them here!

[2]The wild ducks and widgeons now see on the sand,
 As along the King's banks they move or they stand!
 How happy the birds! And now here, as their due,
 Those who sat as your sires are feasted by you.
 Abundant your spirits, your viands are good.
 They feast and they drink in their happiest mood.
 Ne'er before on the summit of honor they stood. [p. 368]

[3]Round the islets the wild ducks and widgeons fly,
 And on the land settle with loud scream and cry.
 How happy the birds! And with joy those are filled,
 Who with fathers long gone were yesterday thrilled.
 Your viands are sliced, and your spirits are strained.
 They feast and they drink, with new happiness gained
 From this glory they now from you have obtained.

[4]The wild ducks and widgeons behold on the wing,
 Where their tribute the streamlets pay to the King!
 How happy the birds! And how honored are those,
 In whom your sires yesterday found their repose!
 The feast in the ancestral temple is spread,
 Where blessing and dignity most are conveyed.
 Of each feaster what happiness now crowns the head!

[5]Where the stream through the rocks its way seems to forge,
 Many wild ducks and widgeons rest in the gorge.
 How happy the birds! As complacent are they, [p. 369]
 Through whom your great fathers their will did convey.
 Your exquisite spirits, your meat broiled and roast,
 That they have partaken those feasters can boast.
 Henceforth shall their minds by no troubles be tossed!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Chia Lo; narrative. In praise of some king,--perhaps King Ch'eng,--whose virtue secured to him the favor of Heaven; presaging for him all happiness, and especially a line of distinguished posterity. Probably the response of the personators of the departed to the preceding piece.

[1]What brilliant virtue does our king,
   Whom all admire and love, display!
 People and officers all sing
   The praise of his impartial sway.
 Heaven to his sires the kingdom gave,
   And him with equal favor views.
 Heaven's strength and aid will ever save
   The throne whose grant it oft renews.

[2]By virtue sought, fresh honors shine;
   All other blessings follow sure. [p. 370]
 Admired and reverent, lo! his line
   Through myriad ages shall endure.
 From error free, to duty true,
   They rule the states, they fill the throne.
 Nor shall they fail with homage due
   The olden statutes aye to own.

[3]A bearing high and self-restrained
   May they in all their conduct show!
 And thus their virtuous fame unstained
   With lapse of time still brighter grow!
 From jealousies and envies free,
   May they advance the good to place!
 And blessings, boundless in degree,
   Their rule through all our regions grace!

4 When so those sons of Heaven shall sway,
   Nor greater cares their care withdraw
 From smallest things, friends shall obey,
   And find repose beneath their law.
   Love shall around them cast its chain,
 Kings who not idly fill their seat.
   The people restful peace shall gain,
 And each king with their praises greet.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 371]

  

VI

The Kung Liu; narrative. The story of Duke Liu:--how he made his first settlement in Pin, building there, laying out the ground, forming armies, arranging for a revenue, till even Pin became too small for all his people.

[1]Duke Liu we sing, with generous ardor fired,
 Whose breast his people's good alone inspired,
 In their old seat no longer could he rest;
 Its narrow limits forced him from the west.
 The produce of the many fields he reaps;
 What can be spared, in store he safely keeps.
 Here in the barn, there in the field, it lies;
 His forethought then wrapper and sack supplies,
 This hoard of grain and dried meat to contain,
 When they should move, a glorious fame to gain.
 Then ready further with his weapons all,
 Bows, arrows, shields, spears, axes great and small,
 His people to the march he forth did call.

[2]Duke Liu we sing, with generous ardor fired,
 Whose breast his people's good alone inspired.
 O'er all the plain he ranged with eager eye,
 But could not space for thronging crowds descry. [p. 372]
 In pity for the numbers thus confined,
 He told to all the measure in his mind.
 Loth to abandon their much-loved repose,
 At first, but not for long, their murmurs rose.
 Each lofty hilltop now the duke ascends;
 Back to the plains he comes, and eastward bends
 His course. Lo! at his girdle pendant seen,
 The jade, and gems of yao, emit their sheen!
 Sheathed in its glittering scabbard hangs the sword,
 That safety from the foeman shall afford.

[3]Duke Liu we sing, with generous ardor fired,
 Whose breast his people's good alone inspired.
 To Pin now come, where gush the hundred springs,
 His followers all about him there he brings.
 Round him there lay the bright and ample plain;
 He climbs a ridge, a wider view to gain.
 Behold! a spacious table-land he spies,
 Where his new settlement may well arise.
 For multitudes large space could be assigned,
 And immigrants still room for booths would find. [p. 373]
 Here then he dwelt, and would his plans unfold;
 Here counsel took, and heard what others told.

[4]Duke Liu we sing, with generous ardor fired,
 Whose breast his people's good alone inspired.
 When on the height his rest he thus had found,
 His officers all stand in state around.
 The mats are spread, with stools upon them set;
 Both old and young, they here are joyous met.
 From herd and pen the victims both are killed;
 Dried gourds for cups are with the spirits filled.
 So does the duke his friends and chieftains feast;
 Him as their lord and ruler hails each guest.

[5]Duke Liu we sing, with generous ardor fired,
 Whose breast his people's good alone inspired.
 When now his bounds extended far and wide,
 He marked the shadows, thereby to decide
 The east and west, the north and south, all round.
 He clomb the ridges, and, observing, found
 What tracts were in the light, what in the shade. [p. 374]
 The springs and streams he carefully surveyed.
 Three armies of defense were made. Each plain
 And marsh was measured; and to till the grain
 An equal system framed: the farmers wrought,
 And shared the produce, after they had brought
 The fair proportion for himself he sought.
 West of the hills the land he also tilled,
 And grandly Pin with men and wealth was filled,

[6]Duke Liu we sing, with generous ardor fired,
 Whose breast his people's good alone inspired.
 At first rude homes their purpose served in Pin;
 Erelong the Wei in boats he crossed, to win
 Whetstones and iron. Dwellings now they rear,
 And makeshift huts before them disappear.
 The houses good, their boundaries well defined,
 The people multiply, and fortune kind
 Attends their course. The vale of Huang they fill
 On either side. The Kuo vale then they till.
 Still grow their numbers; through the Jui they go;
 Tracts widely spread now Liu's dominion know.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 375]

  

VII

The Chiung Cho; allusive. The most unlikely things may by human ingenuity be made useful; how much more should a sovereign fulfill the duties of his position!

[1]Bring water from the distant pool,
   And let it settle in a jar.
 Millet or rice 'twill steam--such use
   May come from things that paltry are.
 You are our happy, courteous king;
   On you a noble duty lies.
 Father and mother, joined in one,
   With all the people sympathize!

[2]Bring water from the distant pool,
   And let it settle in a jar.
 A spirit vase 'twill wash;--such use
   May come from things that paltry are.
 You are our happy, courteous king,
   Born subject to a noble law.
 Like center to which all should turn,
   So you the people ever draw. [p. 376]

[3]Bring water from the distant pool,
   And let it settle in a jar.
 All things 'twill serve to cleanse;--such use
   May come from things that paltry are.
 You are our happy, courteous king,
   Set to fulfill a noble end.
 The center in which all have rest,
   The people's hearts to you should tend.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Chuan O; narrative, with allusive portions. Addressed by the duke of Chao to King Ch'eng, desiring for him long prosperity and congratulating him, in order to admonish him, on the happiness of his people, and the number of his admirable officers.

[1]The south wind swept across the hill;
 Its whistling sound each nook did fill..
   Our happy, courteous king
 Was there, and, as he roamed about,
 In tuneful notes his joy gave out.
   Then I began to sing. [p. 377]

[2]"You roam, with jocund spirits blest,
 And now, serene, at ease you rest,
   O happy, courteous king!
 May you your destined years fulfill,
 And, like your noble fathers still,
   Life to good issue bring!

[3]"How vast and glorious is your realm,
 Where peace sits steadfast at the helm,
   O happy, courteous lord!
 May you your destined years complete,
 While ever as their host you treat
   All spirits at your board!

[4]"Heaven to your sires assigned the crown,
 To you 'mid greatest peace come down,
   O happy, courteous king!
 Through all your term of years, may joy
 And happiness without alloy,
   Their charm around you fling! [p. 378]

[5]"Men filial proved, and virtuous, stand
 Near to your throne on either hand,
   Wise guidance to afford.
 Like wings they bear you up on high,
 Where you their pattern all descry,
   O happy, courteous lord!

[6]"Like mace of jade, pure, clear, and strong,
 What majesty and grace belong
   To those, your helpers true!
 The hope of all, their praise all sing.
 Through them, O courteous, happy king,
   The nation's guide are you.

[7]"See how the phoenixes appear,
 And their wings rustle on the ear,
   As now they settle down!
 Such are those noble men who wait,
 O happy king, upon your state,
   The servants of your crown! [p. 379]

[8]"The male and female phoenix, lo!
 With rustling wings about they go,
   Then up to heaven they soar.
 Such are those noble men who stand,
 Prompt to obey your least command;--
   None love your people more.

[9]"Hark how the phoenixes emit
 Their notes, as on that ridge they sit!
   There the dryandras grow,
 And on its eastern slope they rise
 With richer growth; and thence the cries
   Sweet and still sweeter flow!

[10]"Numerous your chariots! Fleet your steeds,
 And trained! Your name for noble deeds
   Shall be renowned for long.
 O king, these verses I have made,
 And humbly at your feet they're laid,
   Inspired by your own song."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 380]

  

IX

The Min Lao; narrative. In a time of disorder and suffering, some officer of distinction calls upon his colleagues to join with him to effect a reformation in the capital, and put away the parties, especially flattering parasites, who were the cause of the prevailing misery.

[1]Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
 But we perchance may give them some relief.
 This is the nation's heart.--Show kindness here,
 And through our regions peace will reappear.
 On wily flatterers look with angry frown,
 Thus warning those who conscience do not own.
 With fierce oppressors deal by strictest law,
 Till of Heaven's will they learn to stand in awe.
 Gentle to men from far, assist those near;--
 So shall the king be strong, with nought to fear.

[2]Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
 But we perchance may give them some relief.
 This is the nation's heart.--Here kindness show,
 And hither all will come with constant flow.
 On wily flatterers look with angry scorn;--
 Lo! noisy braggarts of their pride are shorn. [p. 381]
 The fierce oppressors with strong hand repress;--
 This course the people's sufferings shall redress.
 What service you have done, keep on to do;--
 So shall the king enjoy his rest through you.

[3]Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
 But we perchance may give them some relief.
 Show kindness here.--This is the nations' heart;--
 Repose will spread from this to every part.
 The indignant face to wily flatterers show,
 Thus awing those whose deeds no limits know.
 The fierce oppressors check with firmest will,
 So hindering them from acting out their ill.
 Then let us keep ourselves with reverent care,
 And to the virtuous for their help repair.

[4]Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
 But we perchance may give them some relief.
 This is the nation's heart.--Show kindness here,
 And thus dispel the people's anxious fear.
 To wily flatterers no indulgence give,
 Thus warning all who but for evil live.
 The fierce oppressors with strong hand keep down,
 That so the right no more be overthrown. [p. 382]
 As children, for such trust unfit are you,
 But vast the service which you have to do!

[5]Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
 But we perchance may give them some relief,
 Show kindness here.-- This is the nation's heart;--
 So shall you soothe and heal the people's smart.
 View wily flatterers with indignant eye,
 And from the court the parasites will fly.
 'Gainst fierce oppressors wage determined fight,
 And thus from vile reversal save the right.
 The king us all as priceless jade would prize;--
 Thus therefore I reprove you and advise.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Pan; narrative. An officer of experience mourns over the prevailing misery; complains of the want of sympathy with him shown by other officers, admonishes them, and sets forth the duty required of them, especially in the angry mood in which it might be supposed that Heaven was.

[1]Reversed is now the providence of God;--
 The lower people groan beneath their load.
 The words you speak,--how far from right are they!
 The plans you form no reach of thought display. [p. 383]
 "Sages are not, no guidance have we here!"
 So say you, but your words are not sincere.
 Through this your plans are narrow and confined;--
 therefore warn you, and speak out my mind.

[2]Calamities Heaven now is sending down;--
 Be not complacent, but the crisis own.
 Such movements now does angry Heaven produce;--
 Be not indifferent and your trust abuse.
 If in your counsels harmony were found,
 The people's hearts in union would be bound.
 If to speak kind and gentle words you chose,
 How soon would these their restless minds compose!

[3]You have your duties; mine are not the same.
 King's servants all,--such is our common name.
 I come your comrade, with you to advise,
 But you resent it, and my words despise.
 Urgent the matters I would fain submit!
 O think them not for laughter matters fit!
 Remember what in days of old they spake:--
 "With grass and fuel gatherers counsel take." [p. 384]

[4]Heaven now exerts a fierce and cruel sway;--
 Is this a time your mockeries to display?
 I'm old, but speak with tongue that never lied,
 While you, my juniors, are puffed up with pride.
 Never a word of age have I expressed,
 But saddest themes you make a theme for jest.
 The troubles soon like blazing fires shall rage,
 Beyond our power to lessen or assuage.

[5]Heaven now regards us with its blackest scowl;--
 Boast not yourselves, nor try men to cajole.
 Good men who see your reason thus o'ercome,
 Like those who personate the dead, are dumb.
 The land with sighs and groans the people fill,
 Yet we dare not attempt to probe their ill.
 The wild disorder all their means devours,
 But they know not one kindly act of ours.

[6]You hear the whistle; straight the flute you hear;--
 Heaven's slightest touch the people quick revere.
 As one half mace you on the other lay;
 As something light you touch and bring away; [p. 385]
 An easier task you could not undertake:--
 Think it not hard the people good to make.
 Perversities they have, and not a few;--
 Perversity of yours let them not view.

[7]Men of great virtue like a fence are found;
 The multitudes, as walls, the king surround.
 Great states the kingdom from barbarians shield;
 Great families, as bulwarks, safety yield.
 The cherishing of virtue gives repose;
 The king, by brethren guarded, laughs at foes.
 Let not the strong wall crumble in the dust;
 Let not our king have none in whom to trust.

[8]The wrath of Heaven revere with trembling awe;--
 From it let no vain sport your thoughts withdraw.
 Revere Heaven's changing moods with fear profound,
 And, thoughtful, fly from pleasure's whirling round.
 Great Heaven on you its clearest glance directs,
 And all your doings carefully inspects.
 Far sees great Heaven with its all-piercing eye;--
 And watches you amid your revelry.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 386]

  

BOOK III. DECADE OF TANG

  

I

The Tang; narrative. Warnings addressed to King Li on the issues of the course which he was pursuing, showing that the miseries of the time, and the imminent danger of ruin, were to be attributed, not to Heaven, but to himself and his ministers

[1]How great is God, who ruleth men below!
   In awful terrors now arrayed,
 His dealings seem a recklessness to show,
   From which we shuddering shrink, dismayed.
 But men at first from Heaven their being drew,
   With nature liable to change.
 All hearts in infancy are good and true,
   But time and things those hearts derange.

[2]Thus to the tyrant Ju our King Wen said:--
   "Alas! alas! O king of Yin,
 To you the proud oppressors give their aid,
   And 'gainst you fierce exactors sin!
 Why call such men your offices to hold?
   O'er your affairs why such men set? [p. 387]
 'Heaven made them thus, so insolent and bold!'
   But 'tis from you their strength they get."

[3]Thus to the tyrant Ju our King Wen said:--
     "Alas! alas! Yin's king so great,
 You honor not the good, but in their stead
   Oppressors whom the people hate.
 To you with baseless stories they reply,
   And thieves and robbers by them stand.
 Their oaths and maledictions fiercely fly,
   Ceaseless and deep, throughout the land."

[4]Thus to the tyrant Ju our King Wen said:--
   "Alas! alas! O king of Yin,
 Fierce is your will, here in the court displayed,
   And only hatred thus you win.
 Your proper virtue you have never sought,
   And thus none good surround your throne.
 Of what true virtue is you take no thought,
   Hence are your nobles worthless known."

[5]Thus to the tyrant Ju our King Wen said:--
   "Alas! alas! Yin's king so great, [p. 388]
 Not Heaven, but spirits, flush your face with red,
   That evil thus you imitate.
 You do in all your conduct what is wrong.
   Darkness to you the same as light,
 Your noisy feasts and revels you prolong;
   And day through you is black as night."

[6]Thus to the tyrant Ju our King Wen said:--
   "Alas! alas! O king of Yin,
 Round you it is as if cicadas made,
   And bubbling soup, their ceaseless din.
 Things, great and small, fast to perdition go,
   While you pursue your reckless game.
 Our middle states with indignation glow;
   The demon lands as loudly blame."

[7]Thus to the tyrant Ju our King Wen said:--
   "Alas! alas! O Yin's great king,
 'Tis Yin, not God, has caused this time of dread,
   Yin that old ways away would fling.
 Old men and wise may not give you their trust,
   But statutes and old laws remain. [p. 389]
 Now is Yin's fortune crumbling to the dust,
   Because obedience you disdain."

[8]Thus to the tyrant Ju King Wen did speak:--
   "Alas! alas! O king of Yin,
 For Yin its beacon was not far to seek;--
   In Hsia's last king its light was seen.
 True is the lesson in the saying taught:
   'While leaf and branch still vigorous grow,
 A tree may fall. And what that fall has wrought?
   Its roots uptorn the cause will show.'"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The I; narrative, excepting Stanza 9, which is allusive. Containing various counsels which Duke Wu of Wei made to admonish himself, when he was over his ninetieth year;--especially on the duty of a ruler to be careful of his outward demeanor, and to receive with docility instructions delivered to him.

[1]Outward demeanor, cool and grave,
 Reveals who inward virtue have.
 People in common parlance say,
 "Wise men stupidity display." [p. 390]
 Not so. For dullness where you find,
 'Tis from defect within the mind;
 And if a wise man dull appear,
 He wrongs his native character.

[2]What's mightiest is--the man to be.
 This powerful everywhere we see.
 Where from true virtue actions spring,
 All their obedient homage bring.
 Whose views are great, and fixed his aims;
 Who in due time his will proclaims;
 Whose plans reach far; whose reverent care
 His outward bearing shall declare:--
 Him a true chief the people call,
 And hailed his pattern is by all.

[3]Look at the present state of things!
 Your conduct only chaos brings.
 Low in the dust your virtue lies,
 A drunken sot whom men despise
 You seize the joy before you brought,
 And give not to the past a thought. [p. 391]
 Oh! bear in mind the kings of old,
 And strive their statutes fast to hold.

[4]See whom great Heaven condemns! As flow
 The waters from their spring, they go
 To ruin all.--This lesson know.
 Rise early, and go late to sleep;
 Sprinkled and swept your courtyard keep;--
 Thus to your people pattern be.
 Well to your steeds and chariots see;
 And bows and shafts, and weapons all,
 Have ready at a moment's call.
 So shall you stand prepared for war,
 And keep the southern hordes afar.

[5]What officers and people need,
 Give to them, both by word and deed.
 Your princely duties do with care;
 Of dangers unforeseen beware.
 Be circumspect in all you say,
 And reverent bearing still display,
 From censure free of man or child,
 Attractive ever, ever mild. [p. 392]
 A flaw in mace of white jade may
 By patient toil be ground away
 But for a flaw we make in speech
 What can be done? 'Tis past our reach.

[6]Words are your own. To speak be slow.
 Say not, "'Tis but a word." No, no!
 There's none for you your tongue can guard.
 O'er it yourself keep watch and ward.
 Answers to every word will leap;
 Good deeds their recompense shall reap
 If friends from you with kindness meet,
 And subjects as your sons you treat,
 Your line from age to age shall live,
 And subjects strict obedience give.

[7]When mingling with superior men,
 In friendly intercourse, oh! then
 How mild your face! What harmony!
 All wrong and error bow you flee!
 When in your chamber, 'neath its light,
 Your conscience keep as pure and bright. [p. 393]
 Say not, "No one can see me here;
 The place is secret." Be in fear.
 The spirits come, but when and where
 No one beforehand can declare.
 The more should we not spirits slight,
 But ever feel as in their sight.

[8]O prince, a virtuous course pursue,
 In manner good, and fair, and true.
 Keep on your acts a watchful eye;
 Thus may you scrutiny defy!
 Exceed not, break not, virtue's law;--
 So shall you men's attention draw,
 Their pattern prized, and free from flaw.
 A peach one throws me; in return
 I give a plum. Please here discern
 Cause and effect together bound,
 In certain sequence ever found.
 Seek horns on lamb! It has not horns.
 Your sense, my son, such seeking scorns.

[9]When wood is tough, and full of spring
 It makes the bow with silken string. [p. 394]
 Mildness and reverence base supply
 For virtue's structure, broad and high.
 I tell the wise man what is good;--
 He does it straight in docile mood.
 I tell the fool, and forthwith he
 Denies its truth indignantly.
 Such differences in men we find;
 So wide apart is mind from mind!

[10]Ere you knew right from wrong, my son,
 I held your hand, and led you on,
 Showing what things were good, what bad;--
 Such lessons from my lips you had.
 And lest you should not clearly hear,
 I held you gently by the ear.
 A son since then your arms has filled;
 And have you still a mind unskilled?
 'Tis self-sufficiency doth hold
 The early taught still dark when old.

[11]Before great Heaven's clear piercing eye
 My life seems vain; its pleasures die. [p. 395]
 Foolish and dark you still remain,
 Wringing my heart with constant pain.
 I taught you well; I never tired;--
 My teaching but contempt inspired.
 Your teacher? No, I was your bore;
 You only shrank from me the more.
 Ah! still the truth you do not know,
 Though years have made your hair like snow.

[12]My son, thus plainly have I told
 What sages taught in days of old.
 Give to my counsels reverent heed;--
 So shall you shun each guilty deed.
 Lo! Heaven in anger seems to threat
 With utter overthrow our state.
 Not from a distance need we draw
 The proofs of Heaven's avenging law.
 Great Heaven is far too wise to err.
 If lower sink your character,
 And virtue still the less you show,
 Your people you will plunge in woe.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 396]

  

III

The Sang Jou; metaphorical, narrative, and allusive. The earl of Jui mourns over the disorder and misery of the times, with a view to reprehend the misgovernment of King Li,--especially his oppressions and listening to bad counselors.

[1]See the luxuriant mulberry tree,
   That threw far round its leafy shade,
 Now by rude hands--sad sight to see!
   Stript of its leaves, a ruin made.
 So on our multitudes descends
   Oppression's fierce and ruthless hand.
 My heart beneath its sorrow bends.
   Great Heaven, take pity on the land!

[2]Eager and strong, the war steeds prance;
   Falcon and other banners fly.
 Bristles the land with spear and lance;
   Wasted and peeled our regions lie.
 Disorder grows, and peace is fled; .
   Where is the black-haired race of yore?
 Beneath the sky with ruin red
   Chou's kingdom sinks to rise no more. [p. 397]

[3]Who can arrest the march of fate?
   Heaven nurtures not, but glows with ire.
 No town presents a sheltering gate;
   Where can our hurrying feet retire?
 When good men, sons of peace, bear sway,
   They smooth and knit the social state.
 They are not here;--who paved the way
   For those through whom come strife and hate?

[4]Sore anguish dwells within my heart;
   I brood upon the country's woes.
 Why was I born to have my part
   Now when great Heaven its anger shows?
 Throughout our coasts, from east to west,
   No quiet resting place is found.
 I wander, desolate, distressed,
   And troubles rave our borders round.

[5]You plan, O king, and caution use?
   Lo! growing ills, dismembered land! [p. 398]
 Your great concern should be to choose
   The best, around your throne to stand.
 Be this your way! What burns and glows,
   Ere used, you in the water cool.
 How can your methods bring repose?
   Ruin awaits you, and your rule.

[6]One struggles on against the wind,
   With breathless effort,--all in vain.
 So they who fain would serve thee find
   A baffling force, and little gain.
 They till the fields who might have shone
   High in official rank and power;
 For now, ambition's impulse gone,
   They sow and reap, and seek no more.

[7]Heaven thus inflicts death and unrest;
   And lo! we see a kingless throne!
 And still there comes the insect pest,
   And farmers' hopes are overthrown. [p. 399]
 Woe! woe to our great central land!
   For all in peril heaves my sigh.
 Bereft of strength, I sadly stand,
   And silent view the vault on high.

[8]See here a ruler, firm and good,
   Whom chiefs and people all revere!
 He keeps his heart; his plans are shrewd;
   He seeks for helpers far and near.
 See there one of a different kind,
   Who thinks none but himself is wise!
 Within his narrow range confined,
   His actions only cause surprise.

[9]Lo! 'mongst the trees, the herds of deer
   In concord roam throughout the wood.
 With us all friends are insincere;
   None cultivate the faithful mood.
 "Advance! Retreat!" thus people say;
 "There's equal danger either way." [p. 400]

[10]Here is a sage! His views and speech
   Go far beyond the present time.
 There is a fool! With narrow reach,
   His smallest thoughts he counts sublime.
 All this before I could have told.
   Oh! why did fear my tongue withhold?

[11]The good man see! His way is barred;
   He pines unused, or dwells unsought.
 See now the man whose heart is hard!
   He's courted, and to honor brought.
 Such government disorder breeds;
   The people haste to evil deeds.

[12]From the large valleys come the winds;
   There they collect, and thence they blow.
 And thus the virtuous man one finds
   Doing what's good;--he must act so.
 But he, whose nature scorns the right,
   His nature vile, 'gainst good will fight.

[13]By force of nature blows the wind;
   So men of greed will strive for pelf.
 Would he but hear, I'd speak my mind;--
   As drunk, I mutter to myself. [p. 401]
 He will not use the good; and I
   Deplore his course with moan and sigh.

[14]Ah! friends, these lines, I know full well,
   Will only wake your angry thought;
 But random shot may sometimes tell,
   And bird on wing be hit and caught.
 Your good, and that alone, I seek,
   Howe'er your anger you may wreak.

[15]Those hypocrites, adepts in lies,
   Produce the chaos of the land.
 The more one's weak, the more he plies
   Whatever strength he can command.
 The people hopelessly perverse!
   'Tis their vile work has wrought this curse.

[16]The people show unrest, because
   Those artful villains on them prey.
 They listen to you with applause;
   Behind your back what's bad they say.
 Ah! friends, these charges you deny.
   My song is true! It does not lie.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 402]

  

IV

The Yun Han; narrative. King Hsuan, on occasion of a great drought, expostulates with God and all the spirits, who might be expected to assist him and his people, asks them wherefore they were contending with him, and details the measures he had taken, and was still taking, for the removal of the calamity.

[1]Grand shone the Milky Way on high,
 With brilliant span athwart the sky,
     Nor promise gave of rain.
 King Hsuan long gazed; then from him broke,
 In anguished tones the words he spoke.
     Well might he thus complain!
 "O Heaven, what crimes have we to own,
 That death and ruin still come down?
 Relentless famine fills our graves.
 Pity the king who humbly craves!
     Our miseries never cease.
 To every spirit I have vowed;
 The choicest victim's blood has flowed.
 As offerings I have freely paid
 My store of gems and purest jade.
     Hear me, and give release! [p. 403]

[2]"The drought consumes us. As on wing
 Its fervors fly, and torment bring.
 With purest mind and ceaseless care
 My sacrifices I prepare.
 At thine own border altars, Heaven,
 And in my father's fane, I've given
     What might relief have found.
 What powers above, below, have sway,
 To all my precious gifts I pay,
     Then bury in the ground.
 Yes, every spirit has received
 Due honor, and, still unrelieved,
     Our sufferings greater grow.
 Hou-chi can't give the needed aid,
 And help from God is still delayed!
 The country lies a ruined waste.
 O would that I alone might taste
     This bitter cup of woe!

[3]"The drought consumes us. Nor do I
 To fix the blame on others try.
 I quake with dread; the risk I feel,
 As when I hear the thunder peal, [p. 404]
     Or fear its sudden crash.
 Our black-haired race, a remnant now,
 Will every one be swept from Chou,
     As by the lightning's flash.
 Nor I myself will live alone.
 God from His great and heavenly throne
     Will not spare even me.
 O friends and officers, come, blend
 Your prayers with mine; come, lowly bend.
 Chou's dynasty will pass away;
 Its altars at no distant day
     In ruins all shall be!

[4]"The drought consumes us. It keeps on
 Its fatal course. All hope is gone.
 The air more fierce and fiery glows.
 Where can I fly? Where seek repose?
     Death marks me for its prey.
 Above, no saving hand! Around,
 No hope, no comfort, can be found.
 The dukes and ministers of old
 Give us no help. Can ye withhold
 Your sympathy, who lately reigned? [p. 405]
 And parents, how are you restrained,
     In this so dreadful day?

[5]"The drought consumes us. There on high
 The hills are parched. The streams are dry.
 Drought's demon stalks abroad in ire,
 And scatters wide his flames and fire.
     Alas my woeful heart!
 The fires within its strength consume;
 The heats without create a-gloom
     That from it will not part.
 The dukes and ministers bygone
 Respond not to my prayer and moan.
 God in great Heaven, permission give
 That I may in retirement live,
     And try to heal my smart!

[6]"The drought consumes us. Still I strive,
 And will not leave while I survive.
     Duty to shun I fear.
 Why upon me has come this drought? [p. 406]
 Vainly I try to search it out,
     Vainly, with quest severe.
 For a good harvest soon I prayed,
 Nor late the rites I duly paid,
 To spirits of the air and land.
 There wanted nought they could demand,
     Their favor to secure.
 God in great heaven, be just, be kind!
 Thou dost not bear me in Thy mind.
 My cry, ye wisest spirits, hear!
 Ye whom I constantly revere,
     Why do I this endure?

[7]"The drought consumes us. People fly,
 And leave their homes. Each social tie
     And bond of rule is snapt.
 The heads of boards are all perplexed;
 My premier's mind is sorely vexed;
     In trouble all are wrapt.
 The masters of my horse and guards;
 My cook, and men of different wards:--
 Not one has from the struggle shrunk. [p. 407]
 Though feeling weak, they have not sunk,
     But done their best to aid.
 To the great sky I look with pain;--
 Why do these grievous sorrows rain
     On my devoted head?

[8]"Yes, at the mighty sky I gaze,
 And lo! the stars pursue their maze,
     And sparkle clear and bright.
 Ah! Heaven nor helps, nor seems to ken.
 Great officers and noble men,
 With all your powers ye well have striven,
 And reverently have sought from Heaven
     Its aid in our great fight.
 My death is near; but oh! keep on,
 And do as thus far you have done.
     Regard you only me?
 No, for yourselves and all your friends,
 On whom for rule the land depends,
     You seek security.
 I turn my gaze to the great sky;--
 When shall this drought be done, and I
     Quiet and restful be?"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 408]

  

V

The Sung Kao; narrative. Celebrating the appointment by King Hsuan of a relative to be the marquis of Shen, and defender of the southern border of the kingdom, with the arrangements made for his entering on his charge.

[1]How grand and high, with hugest bulk, arise
 Those southern hills whose summits touch the skies!
 Down from them came a spirit to the earth,
 And to the sires of Fu and Shen gave birth.
 In those two states our Chou a bulwark has,
 O'er which the southern foemen dare not pass;
 And all its states they screen, and through them spread
 Lessons of virtue, by themselves displayed.

[2]Famed for his merit was Shen's present chief.
 The king with Hsieh planned to enlarge his fief.
 There, as his sires elsewhere had been, should he
 To all the southern states a pattern be.
 The earl of Chao got charge there to provide
 The capital, where Shen's chief should preside,
 And o'er the south a powerful influence gain.
 There too his sons that influence should maintain. [p. 409]

[3]Thus to the chief the king gave his command:--
 "A pattern be to all the southern land.
 Your center Hsieh, go from it onwards, till
 Your merit all that southern sphere shall fill."
 Chao's earl was charged the new lands to define,
 And by Chou's rules fit revenue assign.
 The master of Shen's household orders got,
 To move betimes the harem to the spot.

[4]The earl of Chao thus the foundation cleared,
 On which the chief's great merit should be reared.
 The city's walls he built, and then went on
 To build the temple. This work grandly done,
 The chief receives four steeds, a noble team,
 Whose breasthooks 'mid their trappings brightly gleam.

[5]Those steeds were with a car of state well matched,
 And then the king from court the chief dispatched. [p. 410]
 "Your residence," he said, "has been my care.
 The south I chose. Quick thither now repair.
 And take this noble mace, which I confer,
 The symbol of your rank. Go, uncle, go;
 Protect the southern lands from every foe."

[6]Soon now the chief his way took from the north.
 The king in Mei the parting feast set forth.
 Thence, through the capital and southward bound,
 The chief of Shen in Hsieh at last was found.
 When Chao's earl the country had defined,
 And by Chou's rules the revenue assigned,
 Stores of provisions had been laid aside,
 For the chief's rapid journey to provide.

[7]Chariots and thronging footmen were arrayed;
 With martial pomp the chief his entrance made.
 The states of Chou rejoice. They haste to bring
 Their warm and joyous greetings to the king.
 "In your great uncle," thus they say, "you've found
 A bulwark strong. Grandly is Shen renowned!
 In peace and war a pattern good will he,
 Throughout our regions, to your chieftains be." [p. 411]

[8]With virtue clad, the chief of Shen shines bright;--
 Though mild, not weak; though strong, yet ever right.
 Our myriad states his powerful sway shall own,
 And with their praises his grand merit crown.
 Chi-fu presents this song, well meant, well made;--
 Accept, O chief, the tribute I have paid!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The Cheng Min; narrative. Celebrating the virtues of Chung Shan-fu, who appears to have been one of the principal ministers of King Hsuan, and his dispatch to the east, to fortify the capital of the state of Ch'i.

[1]Heaven made the race of men, designed
   With nature good and large;
 Functions of body, powers of mind,
   Their duties to discharge.
 All men this normal nature own,
 Its normal virtue all men crown
   With love sincere and true.
 Heaven by our sovereign's course was moved, [p. 412]
 And to aid him, its son approved,
   Gave birth to Chung Shan-fu.

[2]Mild and admired, this chief displays
   Virtues that win the heart.
 His air and looks a wondrous grace
   To all his ways impart.
 His rule of life the ancient law,
 To bear himself unmarred by flaw
   With earnest mind he aims.
 In sympathy with our great Head,
 Abroad the royal will to spread
   His constant service claims.

[3]The king gave charge to Chung Shan-fu:--
   "Hear now what I direct.
 As served your fathers, so serve you,
   And me, your king, protect.
 Let all my lords your pattern see;
 Publish among them each decree;
   Speak freely in my stead.
 Of what goes on inform my mind. [p. 413]
 Through you let all my measures find
   Obedience promptly paid."

[4]Great was the charge. Our hero hears,
   And hastens to obey.
 Among the princes he appears;
   Of each he marks the way.
 Who good, who bad, throughout the land,
 He clearly sees. With wisdom grand
   He guards his life and fame.
 Nor day nor night he icily rests;
 The king's, the one man's, high behests
   His soul with zeal inflame.

[5]Among the people flies the word:
   "What's soft men swallow fast;
 And what is for the teeth too hard
   Out of their mouths they cast."
 But never yet did mortal trace
 In Chung Shan such ignoble case;
   Nor soft nor hard he knows.
 The strong and fierce he does not dread;
 And on the poor or widowed head
   Insult he never throws. [p. 414]

[6]Again the people often say:--
   "Virtue is very light?
 Light as a hair; yet few can bear
   The burden of its weight."
 'Tis so; but Chung Shan, as I think,
 Needs not from virtue's weight to shrink,
   That other men defies.
 Aid from my love his strength rejects.
 If the king's measures have defects,
   What's needed he supplies.

[7]He asks the spirit of the path
   His blessing to send down.
 His steeds are strong; each soldier hath
   A bravery like his own.
 Eastward they march; his charge is there.
 That city's bulwarks to repair,
   How ardently he hies!
 List to the tinkling of his bells!
 Of his steeds' constant tramp it tells;--
   The walls will soon arise. [p. 415]

[8]Yes, on to Ch'i the hero went,
   With his four steeds so strong.
 Their eight bells told his purpose bold;--
   He'll not be absent long!
 I, Yin Chi-fu, this song now sing.
 Like gentle breeze, O may it bring
   To his unresting mind,
 'Mid all his toils and cares, some cheer!
 Yes, may our great Chung Shan find here
   The comfort I designed!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Han Yi; narrative. Celebrating the marquis of Han:--his investitute and the king's charge to him; the gifts he received, and the parting feast; his marriage; the excellence of his territory; and his sway over the regions of the north.

[1]Grand is the guardian hill of Han!
 There the Great Yu his work began,
   The land from wreck to save.
 Thence to the capital there leads
 A noble road. See there the steeds
 That draw Han's lord, as he proceeds
   Investitute to crave. [p. 416]
 Called now his father's seat to fill,
 He goes to hear the royal will.
   To him the king thus said:
 "As served your fathers, so serve you.
 Be careful my commands to do.
 Early and late show active zeal;
 With reverence seek the kingdom's weal.
   And thus your fealty paid
 Shall strengthen the great fief I give;--
 Marquis of Han you long shall live.
 What princes come not to my court
 Deal with, until they here resort,
   And thus your sovereign aid."

[2]Oh! noble was the marquis' team.
 Both long and large, the steeds beseem
   His youthful state and port.
 His mace of rank he with him brought,
 When audience of the king he sought,
   And bowed within his court.
 The king his royal favor showed.
 And on him princely gifts bestowed. [p. 417]
 Those were--the dragon flag, whence streamed
 Its pennon that with plumelets gleamed;
 The brilliant yoke; the bamboo screen;
 The robe with dragon on it seen;
 Red slippers; and the hooks to shine
 On his steeds' breasts; the frontlets fine,
 Whose carvings should their foreheads grace;
 The board across his car to place;
 The tiger's skin, to throw around
 That leaning board with leather bound.
 Then last there came the rein ends bright,
 Tipt with gilt rings,--a splendid sight.

[3]The court now leaving, home he hies;
 But first he offers sacrifice,
 And prays the spirit of the way
 Guidance to give. That night to stay
 At Too he planned. The parting feast
 Hsien-fu there gives to speed the guest.
 The court sends forth its many lords,
 To taste the cheer the king affords.
 An hundred vases stand around,
 All with the choicest spirits crowned.
 The mats roast turtle and fresh fish
 Present, and many a lordly dish. [p. 418]
 And bamboo sprouts, and tender shoots,
 And sauces fine, and fragrant fruits,
 With their rich perfume fill the air.
 Oh! but it was a banquet rare!
 It closed, and lo! before the gate,
 With mighty steeds, a car of state!

[4]Now back in Han, its lord must wed,
   And home a wife shall bring.
 To Chueh-fu's child his suit he paid,
   The niece of Fen, our king.
 The union fixed, in grand array,
 To Chueh-fu's house he takes his way;
   An hundred cars attend.
 The tinkling music falls and swells,
 Emitted by their numerous bells,
 As on their course they wend.
 The glory of that day was great.
 Lo! round the bride in fairest state,
 The virgins, her companions, stand,
 Close following her on either hand.
 As lovely clouds that slowly sail,
 And the moon's greater glory veil, [p. 419]
   So beautiful were they.
 The marquis looked, with rapture thrilled.
 Never was gate with splendor filled,
   As Chueh-fu's gate that day.

[5]Great fame Chueh-fu bas got in war,
 And every state has seen his car;
 But through the land, where'er he went,
 To settle his dear child intent,
   No state like Han he saw.
 Oh! pleasant is the state of Han!
 Chueh saw the mighty streams that ran
 Through all its length, and then the lakes,
 With forests girt and tangled brakes,
   That admiration draw.
 Big bream and tench the waters fill,
 And in the glades on every hill
   Are multitudes of deer.
 In wilder parts the grisly bear,
 Tigers and wild eats, make their lair.
   Hunters their prey find here.
 Chueh saw, and pleasure filled his breast,
 And here his child found joy and rest. [p. 420]

[6]The multitudes of Yen had reared
   Han's walls, and made them strong.
 Its rulers then no foeman feared;
 There had they dwelt for long.
 The first of them a charge had got,
 From Han, as from a central spot,
   To rule the tribes around.
 The marquis now got wider charge,
 His jurisdiction to enlarge
   O'er all the northern ground.
 The Chuy and Mih to curb and awe,
 And bring to own Chou's sovereign law,
   Would his first care require.
 Then stronger walls and deeper moat
 Would silence each rebellious note,
   And all with fear inspire.
 The fields too he must now define,
 And the fixed revenue assign,
   As in the king's domain.
 His bearers shall to court repair,
 With skins stript from the tawny bear,
 The white fox and the panther red,
 In yearly course a tribute paid,
   The king's trust to maintain.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 421]

  

VIII

The Chiang Han; narrative. Celebrating an expedition against the more southern tribes of the Huai, and the work done for the king in their country by Hu. earl of Chao, with the manner in which the king rewarded him and he responded to the royal favor.

[1]On grandly flowed the Chiang and Han;
   As grandly moved our mighty force.
 We rested not, nor idly strayed;
   Straight to the Huai we held our course.
 Forth all our cars of war had come;
   Unfurled, our falcon banners flew.
 We rested not, nor were remiss,--
   Marshaled the Huai tribes to subdue.

[2]Again come to the mighty stream,
   The troops in martial splendor shone.
 Of the whole land to order brought
   Announcement to the king had gone.
 Peace through the hostile region reigned;--
   The king's state breathed, and was at rest.
 The battle strife no longer raged,
   And quiet filled the royal breast. [p. 422]

[3]The king had charged our Hu of Chao,
   Where the two streams their waters join:--
 "Go, open all the country up;
   As law requires, its lands define.
 I would not have those tribes distressed,
   But this state must their model be.
 Their lands, in small and larger squares,
   Must stand, far as the southern sea."

[4]And now thus says at court the king:--
   "Great lord, your work is nobly done.
 Your ancestor was their support,
   When Wen and Wu received the throne.
 Compared with them, a child am I;
   You are the great duke's worthy heir.
 Grand has your merit now appeared;
   Your happiness shall be my care.

[5]"This jade libation cup, and jar
   Of flavored spirits, now receive. [p. 423]
 For further grant of hills and streams,
   I've asked our cultured founder's leave.
 More than your sire received in Chao,
   These in K'e-chou to you I give."
 Hu, grateful, bowed his head, and said,
   "Great son of Heaven, forever live!"

[6]He bowed, then rose, and loud proclaimed
   The gracious goodness of the king,
 And vowed he still would do his best,
   That through the land Chao's praise should ring.
 "Yes, live forever, son of Heaven,
   Display thy wisdom, spread thy fame!
 Thy civil virtues still go forth,
   Till all the realm shall bless thy name!"

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Chang Wu; narrative. Celebrating an expedition of king Hsuan against the more northern tribes of the Huai,--its imposing progress and complete success.

[1]Nan Chung's descendant, Huang the Great,
   Grand master, now draws near
 Before the king, and to him straight
   The king's charge, loud and clear, [p. 424]
 Comes thus:--"My armies six forth call;
   What war requires make ready all;--
 South we our course direct.
   Your duties reverently fulfill,
 And wary be lest our good will
   Those southern states reject."

[2]Next to the chief of Yin 'twas said:--
   "Charge Hsiu-fu, earl of Ch'eng,
 The ranks to range, and warning dread
   Make through the host to ring.
 Our march along the Huai's bank lies;
   Against Hsu must our enterprise
 Rapid and sure be made.
   Delay we brook not, nor to hold
 The land we take, lest the threefold
   Work in the fields be stayed."

[3]The son of Heaven calm, trustful was,
   Majestic in his strength.
 His troops advanced, no crowded mass,
   Nor lines of broken length. [p. 425]
 From stage to stage, as on they went,
   The land of Hsu with terror rent,
 Its people all unmanned.
   As when men hear the thunder's roll,
 Or sudden crash, and quake in soul,
   So now shook all the land.

[4]The king aroused his martial might,
   As he were moved with rage.
 His tiger chiefs he sent to fight;
   And eager to engage
 Well named were they! Along Huai's banks
   Soon grandly moved the royal ranks.
 A captive crowd was held.
   Securely kept the country round,
 No rebel hosts a passage found,
   Succor to Hsu to yield.

[5]Numerous the legions, moving fleet,
   As if on wings they flew;
 Grand as the Chiang and Han, when meet
   Their mingled streams the view. [p. 426]
 Solid as mountain mass they seemed,
   And brightly as the river gleamed,
 Whose waters ceaseless rush.
   Continuous, in order sure,
 Inscrutable, success secure,
   They marched revolt to crush.

[6]The king's plans truthful and sincere,
   Hsu's tribes at once sought peace.
 Its chiefs assembled all; their prayer
   Was for the royal grace.
 And quickly by the son of Heaven
   Was order to the country given;
 In solemn court he shone.
   Before him came the chiefs, and swore
 That they would break their faith no more.
   "The war," he said, "is done."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Chan Ang; narrative, and allusive in the last stanza. The writer deplores the misery and oppression that prevailed, and intimates that they were caused by the interference of women and eunuchs in the government.

[1]To Heaven I look with longing eye,
   But only meet its angry frown. [p. 427]
 In restless trouble long we lie,
   And great afflictions still come down.
 Throughout the realm is nothing firm;
   Both high and low are in distress.
 In palace and in court they swarm,
   Whose ravages the land oppress.
 Wrapt in the net of crime we groan;
   Nor peace nor cure comes to our moan.

[2]You now, O king, possess the lands,
   Which as their own men once could claim;
 And chiefs, who led their faithful bands,
   Are stript of wealth, and brought to shame.
 Men blameless, free from slightest taint,
   Within that fearful net are snared;
 While others walk without restraint,
   Whose guilt is openly declared.

[3]A wise man builds the city wall;
   But a wise woman throws it down.
 Wise is she? Good you may her call;--
   She is an owl we should disown! [p. 428]
 To woman's tongue let length be given,
   And step by step to harm it leads.
 Disorder does not come from Heaven;
   'Tis woman's tongue disorder breeds.
 Women and eunuchs! Never came
   Lesson or warning word from them!

[4]Hurtful and false, their spite they wreak;
   And when exposed their falsehood lies,
 The wrong they do not own, but sneak,
   And say, "No harm did we devise."
 Thrice cent. per cent! Why that is trade,
   And would the wise man but disgrace.
 Public affairs to wife and maid
   Must not silkworms and looms displace.

5 Why is it Heaven thus sends reproof?
   Why have the spirits ceased to bless?
 From the wild Ti you keep aloof,
   And me would in your wrath oppress.
 Omens of ill you slight, though rife;
   Nor for your outward bearing care.
 The good fly from the scene of strife;
   Ruin impends, and blank despair. [p. 429]

[6]Heaven's awful net o'erhangs the land,
   Full of more woes than tongue can tell.
 The good retire on every hand.
   What sorrows in my bosom swell!
 Near and more near the net of Heaven!
   Soon will its meshes all enfold.
 Good men are from their duties driven,
   And how can grief of mine be told?

[7]The waters bubbling up make known
   How deep and strong the spring below;
 And long the inward grief has grown,
   From which my words of sorrow flow.
 Why came not this ere I was born?
   Why happened it ere I was dead?
 Yet still the sorrowing and forlorn
   Great and mysterious Heaven can aid.
 O king, your sires no more disgrace!
   So may you save your future race.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 430]

  

XI

The Chao Min; narrative, all but Stanza 6, which is metaphorical. The writer bemoans the misery and ruin which were going on, and shows how they were owing to the king's employment of mean and worthless characters.

[1]O pitying Heaven, why see we thee
   In terrors thus arrayed?
 Famine has come. The people flee,
   And homeless roam, dismayed.
 In settled spots, and far and near,
   Our regions all lie waste and drear.

[2]See o'er the land Heaven's net of crime!
   And lo! in place appear
 Men idle, knowing not the time,
   Locusts looked at with fear,
 Oppressive, perverse, fond of strife!--
   Can such as these bring peace and life?

[3]Slanderers and insolent, the king
   Yet sees in them no ill.
 Us to dread peril's brink they bring;
   Our minds with care they fill. [p. 431]
 Not for a moment dare we rest,
   Degraded oft, and sore opprest.

[4]As when the dry parched grass we see
   Wither for want of rain;
 As water plants graft on a tree
   Cannot their life retain;
 So all things now to ruin haste.
   Who can their fatal course arrest?

[5]'Twas merit once that riches gained;
   The case how different now!
 Troubles through all our time have reigned,
   And greater still they grow.
 Like grain unhulled those men in place!
 Like fine rice these who find no grace!
 Ye villains, of yourselves retire!
 Why thus prolong my grief and ire?

[6]Now empty stands and dry the pool;--
   No streams into it flow.
 The spring is idle, once so full;--
   Unfed now from below!
 So for those evils all around
 Sufficient causes could be found; [p. 432]
 But they increase my anxious care,
 Lest I be caught in evil snare.

[7]When our first kings the throne received,
   Such ministers they had
 As Chao's great chief, whom all believed.
   In one day he would add
 A thousand li, from states which came
 Our king's protecting care to claim.
 Now in one day that space is lost!
 Can none the ancient virtue boast?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 433]

  

PART IV

  

ODES OF THE TEMPLE AND THE ALTAR

  

BOOK I. SACRIFICIAL ODES OF CHOU

  

SECTION I. DECADE OF CH'ING MIAO

  

I

The Ch'ing Miao; narrative. Celebrating the reverential manner in which a sacrifice to King Wen was performed, and further praising him.

Solemn and pure the ancestral temple stands.
   The princes aiding in the service move
 With reverent harmony. The numerous bands
   Of officers their rapt devotion prove.
 All these the virtues of King Wen pursue;
   And while they think of him on high in heaven,
 With grace and dignity they haste to do
   The duties to them in his temple given.
 Glory and honor follow Wen's great name,
   And ne'er will men be weary of his fame.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 434]

  

II

The Wei T'ien Chih Ming; narrative. Celebrating the virtue of King Wen as comparable to that of Heaven; and looking to him for blessing in the future.

Heaven by a deep and ceaseless law
   Orders its ways with man.
 Pure shone, without a single flaw,
   The virtue of King Wen.
 To us he shows his kindness still.
   As all our powers we strain
 To be in concord with his will,
   His favor we shall gain.
 So may the last his throne to fill
   His love and grace retain!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Wei Ch'ing; narrative. Appropriate at some sacrifice to King Wen, and celebrating his statutes.

The statutes of King Wen are pure and clear;
 Them we must guard, and in our lives revere. [p. 435]
 Since first we sacrificed to him till now
 When all the states obedience yield to Chou,
 The fortune of our house comes from his laws,
 Its happy omen first, and then its cause.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Lieh Wen; narrative. A song in praise of the princes who have assisted at a sacrifice.

Ye brilliant and accomplished lords,
   Who with your help my worship crown,
 The favors that your grace affords
   My sons in future reigns shall own.
 Ever in your own states eschew
   Alike all greed and wastefulness;
 So shall the king still honor you;
   And when your present services
 He calls to mind, your sons shall know
 New honors he will oft bestow.
 Let each be strong, and play the man;--
   So shall your influence be great. [p. 436]
 Ever in virtue lead the van;--
   All chiefs your course will imitate.
 The former kings in mind still bear;
 What glory can with theirs compare?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The T'ien Tso; narrative. Appropriate to a sacrifice to King Ta.

'Twas Heaven that made the lofty hill,
   And there King Ta his work began,
 Laboring the land all round to till.
   Then in tranquillity King Wen
 Pursued the work, till that mount Ch'i,
   Rugged and craggy though it frowned,
 Was reached by the smooth roads we see.
   Long be it by their offspring owned!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI

The Hao T'ien Yu Ch'eng Ming; narrative. Appropriate at a sacrifice to King Ch'eng.

The fixed decree of mighty Heaven
   Had long to Chou assigned the throne,
 Which first to Wen and Wu was given.
   Ch'eng next to them as ruler shone. [p. 437]
 Then the foundations of his power
   Were made by Ch'eng more deep and sure.
 Through night and day no idle hour
   He knew,--the reticent and pure.
 His virtue wrought, and glorified
   The heritage he had obtained;
 Nor were his heart's best powers unplied,
   Till o'er the land good order reigned.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Wo Chiang; narrative. An ode appropriate to a sacrifice to King Wen, associated with Heaven, in the brilliant hall.

My offerings here are given,
   A ram, a bull.
 Accept them, mighty Heaven,
   All-bountiful.
 Thy statutes, O great king,
   I keep, I love;
 So on the realm to bring
   Peace from above. [p. 438]
 From Wen comes blessing rich;
   Now on the right
 He owns those gifts to which
   Him I invite.
 Do I not night and day
   Revere great Heaven,
 That thus its favor may
   To Chou be given?

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Shih Mai; narrative. Appropriate to King Wu's sacrificing to Heaven, and to the spirits of all the hills and rivers, on a progress through the kingdom, after the overthrow of the Shang dynasty.

Now through his many states rides Wu,
   A royal progress making.
 May Heaven its gracious favor show,
   Him for its own son taking!
 Most surely has the house of Chou
   Been called to reign by Heaven.
 To our Wu's slightest nod by all
   Trembling response is given. [p. 439]
 All spirits to himself he draws,
   O'er sacred rites presiding;
 Even the spirits of the Ho,
   And those on hills abiding.
 Yes, he our sovereign lord is known
   As king supreme and glorious,
 Our house of Chou distinguished is;
   'Tis brilliant and victorious.
 Wu to each prince his rank assigns;
   And now sweet peace enjoying,
 He casts the spear and shield aside,
   The bow no more employing.
 I will in ways of virtue walk,
   And spread it through our regions.
 Thus shall the king preserve the throne,
   Without the aid of legions.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Chih Ching; narrative. An ode appropriate in sacrificing to the kings Wu, Ch'eng, and K'ang.

The arm of Wu was full of might;
   None could his fire withstand; [p. 440]
 And Ch'eng and K'ang stood forth to sight,
   As kinged by God's own hand.
 We err not when we call then sage.
   How grandly they maintained
 Their hold of all the heritage
   That Wen and Wu had gained!
 As here we worship, they descend,
   While bells and drums resound,
 And stones and lutes their music blend.
   With blessings we are crowned.
 The rites correctly we discharge;
   The feast we freely share.
 Those sires Chou's glory will enlarge,
   And ever for it care.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Ssu Wen; narrative. Celebrating Hou-chi;--an ode appropriate to the border sacrifice, when Hou-chi was worshiped as the correlate of God.

O thou, accomplished, great Hou-chi,
   To thee alone 'twas given
 To be, by what we trace to thee,
   The correlate of Heaven.
 On all who dwell within our land
   Grain food didst thou bestow. [p. 441]
 'Tis to thy wonder-working hand
   This gracious boon we owe.
 God had the wheat and barley meant
   To nourish all mankind.
 None would have fathomed His intent,
   But for thy guiding mind.
 Man's social duties thou didst show
   To every tribe and state.
 From thee the polished manners flow
   That stamp our land "The Great."

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK I

  

SECTION II. THE DECADE OF CH'eN KUNG

  

I

The Ch'en Kung; narrative. Instructions given to the officers of husbandry;--probably after the sacrifice to God in spring for a good year.

Ho! ministers of husbandry;
   Your duties reverent care demand.
 The king has given you perfect rules;--
   See that those rules ye understand.

Ho! ye who aid the ministers,
   The last month of our spring is here. [p. 442]
 'Tis yours the new-sown fields to tend,
   And manage those in their third year.
 How fair each wheat and barley field,
 That soon their waving crops shall yield!

In them the bright and glorious God
   Will grant to us a plenteous year;
 Give orders that, with spud and hoe
   Provided well, your men appear.
 Anon the stalks that rustling stand
 Shall fall before the reaper's hand.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The I Hsi; narrative. Instructions to the officers of husbandry:--probably like the preceding ode, after a sacrifice to God for a good year.

O yes! the spirit of King Ch'eng,
   When we inquired of him, drew nigh,
 And clearly told us when to bring
   The gifts that now before him lie.
 Lead forth your men, with energy
   O'er their own fields to sow the grain, [p. 443]
 Those, in each square of thirty li,
   Ten thousand families can maintain.

Now let the plows turn up the soil,
   The men attending, pair by pair.
 The harvest will repay their toil;--
   The bounteous produce all shall share.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Chen Lu; allusive. Celebrating the representatives of the two former dynasties, who had come to court to assist at sacrifice:--may have been sung when the king was dismissing them in the ancestral temple.

Round yonder marsh, there in the west,
   A flock of egrets fly.
 With graceful movement, like those birds,
   My visitors came nigh.
 Their fathers reigned where I reign now,
 But loyal are they to our Chou.

There in their own states are they loved,
   Nor tired of are they here.
 Their fame with lapse of time shall grow
   Both day and night more clear.
 Their fathers reigned where I reign now,
 But loyal are they to our Chou.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 444]

  

IV

The Feng Nien; narrative. An ode of thanksgiving for a plentiful year.

The plenteous year has given us large supply
 Of rice and millet, and our granaries high
 Hardly suffice the produce to contain,--
 Millions of measures of the garnered grain!
 From this distilled, shall spirits, strong and sweet,
 Our sires and mothers with their fragrance greet,
 When to their shrines each season we repair;
 And in all other rites their part shall bear.
 Blessings of every kind our land shall crown;--
 And all the spirits our devotion own!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Yu Ku; narrative. The blind musicians of Chou; the instruments of music; and their harmony. Prepared probably for the occasion of the duke of Chou's completing his instruments of music, and announcing the fact at a grand performance in the temple of King Wen.

See the blind musicians here!
 Sightless all, the men appear, [p. 445]
 In the temple court of Chou.
 All is ready for them now.

Stand the music frames around,
 On whose posts rich plumes abound,
 While their face boards, edged like teeth,
 Show the drums that hang beneath.
 Sounding stones and hand drums there
 In the concert part shall bear.
 See the chu to signalize
 When the music shall arise;
 And the yu, whose harsher note
 Hushes instrument and throat.

When the duke has thus prepared,
 Soon the various notes are heard.
 Organ's swell and flutes' soft voice
 Make the listening ears rejoice.

Sweet the harmony of sound,
 Holding all in rapture bound!
 When such music shall be made,
 Then our sires for whom 'tis played,
 And the visitors who come,
 Welcomed to this sacred home,
 Shall desire it to last long,
 Thrilled with the melodious song.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 446]

  

VI

The Ch'ien; narrative. Sung in the first month of winter, and in spring, when the king presented a fish in the ancestral temple.

In Ch'i and Chu, those streams of I,
   About the warrens fish abound.
 Large swarms of various kinds we see.
   The mudfish and the carp are found.

The thryssa and the yellow jaws,
   And sturgeons, large and lank, are there,
 Which we, observant of the laws,
   Offer in sacrifice, with prayer,
 That Chou may hold its brightening way,
 Nor o'er its fortunes come decay.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Yung; narrative. Appropriate at a sacrifice by King Wu to his father Wen.

The helping princes stand around,
   With reverent air, in concord fine.
 The king, Heaven's son, with looks profound,
   Thus prays before his father's shrine:-- [p. 447]

"This noble bull I bring to thee,
   And these assist me in the rite.
 Father, august and great, on me,
   Thy filial son, pour down thy light!

"All-sagely didst thou play the man,
   Alike in peace and war a king.
 Heaven rested in thee, O great Wen,
   Who to thy sons still good dost bring.

"The eyebrows of long life to me,
   Great source of comfort, thou hast given.
 Thou mak'st me great, for 'tis through thee
   Come all the other gifts of Heaven.

"O thou, my meritorious sire,
   And thou in whose fond breast I lay,
 With power and grace your son inspire
   His reverent sacrifice to pay.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Tsai Chien; narrative. Appropriate to an occasion when the feudal princes were assisting King Ch'eng at a sacrifice to King Wu.

Before their sovereign king the lords appeared,
   To seek the rules that he for them ordains. [p. 448]
 Their banners bright with dragon blazonry
   Waved grandly in the air. Upon their reins
 Rings glittering shone, while on their broidered flags
   And carriage fronts bells gave a tinkling sound.
 Thus full of majesty, they came to court,
   And splendid were their equipages found!

The king then led them on the left, and laid,
   With filial heart, before his father's shrine,
 His offerings, that long life he might obtain,
   And still preserve the honors of his line.
 Favors he gets, both great and manifold.
   'Tis from those brilliant and accomplished lords
 They spring; and there shall long through them descend
   Blessings unmixed and bright that Heaven affords.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Yu K'o; narrative. Celebrating the duke of Sung on one of his appearances at the capital to assist at the sacrifice in the ancestral temple of Chou;--showing how he was esteemed and cherished by the king.

Behold our noble visitor,
   The son of Shang's high line.
 His steeds, like those of his great sires,
   All white and spotless shine. [p. 449]

The polished members of his train
   Are with him come in state.
 With reverence and dignity,
   For his commands they wait.

Our noble visitor will stay
   But for one night or two.
 Glad should we be if he would think
   Two nights or four were due.

Bring forth the ropes to bind his steeds.
   Alas! he will not bide.
 To him be every comfort given!
   A parting feast provide!

The greatest dignity is his.
   'Tis right our noble guest
 Should with their choicest favors be
   By men and spirits graced!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

X

The Wu; narrative. Sung in the ancestral temple to the music regulating the dance in honor of the achievements of King Wu.

You were august and great, O royal Wu,
   And showed your matchless strength in every plan.
 Your father Wen, accomplished he and true,
   Had on the road to triumph led the van. [p. 450]

The heritage you from your sire obtained,
   And soon the oppressive rule of Yin was staid.
 O'er all its hosts the victory you gained,
   And, firmly 'stablished, all the land you swayed.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK I

  

SECTION III. THE DECADE OF MIN Yu HSIAO TZu

  

I

The Min Yu Hsiao Tzu; narrative. Appropriate to the young King Cheng, declaring his sentiments in the temple of his father.

Alas for me, still but a child!
   For all too soon I know
 The cares of the unsettled state.
   Too heavy will they grow.
 I shrink in sorrow from the task;
   But, O my mighty sire,
 To filial virtue, all thy life,
   Thou ever didst aspire. [p. 451]

My great grandsire, though now enshrined,
   To thee still living proved,
 As if in courtyard and in hall
   His royal person moved,
 And I, the little child, will be
   As reverent night and day.
 To you, great kings, such homage I
   Now on your throne will pay.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Fang Lo; narrative. Seems to be a sequel to the preceding piece. The young king tells of his difficulties and incompetences; asks for counsel to help to copy the example of his father; states how he meant to do so; and concludes with an appeal or prayer to his father.

At, the beginning of my sway,
   Counsel I seek to know
 How in my shrined father's way
   My feet may surely go.

Far-reaching were, his life proclaims,
   The plans of his great mind;
 But how to carry out his aims
   I fail as yet to find. [p. 452]

When most my powers I shall have tried
   To reach to his grand height,
 My steps will ever turn aside,
   Or to the left or right.

I'm but a child, how can I hope
   Aright my seat to fill,
 Or with the many troubles cope
   That bode disturbance still?

O excellent and mighty sire,
   To help thy son now deign!
 With thy high wisdom me inspire,
   And on thy throne maintain.

To thee, as ever near, I'll try
   My virtue true to prove.
 In court, in house, before my eye,
   Thy form shall always move.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

III

The Ching Chih; narrative. The young king shows his sense of what was required of him to preserve the favor of Heaven, a constant judge; intimates his good purposes; and asks the help of his ministers to be enabled to fulfill them.

With reverence I will go
   Where duty's path is plain.
 Heaven's will I clearly know;
   Its favor to retain [p. 453]
 Is hard. Let me not say
   Heaven is remote on high,
 Nor notices men's way.
   There in the starlit sky
 It round about us moves,
   Inspecting all we do,
 And daily disapproves
   What is not just and true.

Only a child am I.
   Treading in duty's way,
 With effort vain I try
   Due reverence to display.
 Each day throughout the year,
   How slight the progress seems!
 But to the vision clear
   I'll pass from broken gleams.
 Aid then my feeble youth
   To bear the heavy crown.
 Teach me the right and truth
   Through all my life to own.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 454]

  

IV

The Hsiao Pi; narrative. King Cheng acknowledges that he had erred, and states his purpose to be careful in the future; he will guard against the slight beginnings of evil, and is penetrated with a sense of his own incompetences.

When of the past I think, myself I blame;
 I'll guard in future 'gainst what caused me shame
 I'll shun the wasp, nor do the foolish thing
 By which I seemed to invite its painful sting.
 It looked a wren, that I could hold unharmed;
 It grew to a fierce bird, with talons armed!
 Uneasy is my head which wears the crown,
 And bitter trials press me sorely down.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Tsai Shan; narrative. The cultivation of the ground, from the first breaking of it up till it yields abundant harvests;--available specially for sacrifices and on festive occasions.

The toilers come to clear the ground,
 Where grass and brushwood thick abound,
 Where plowshare never yet was found. [p. 455]

In thousands now they gather there;
 And side by side, and pair by pair,
 The roots from out the soil they tear:--

Some in the marshes lying low;
 Some where the dry paths winding go;
 Some where the running waters flow.

The master see, inspecting all;
 His sons, responsive to his call;
 Their households also, great and small.

With them are neighbors, strong and true,
 Who come all helpful work to do;
 And servants hired are present too.

Hark! how the merry feast goes round!
 The husbands' hearts with love abound;
 Their wives close by their sides are found.

Now they begin with patient care
 The southern acres to prepare.
 The soil is broken by the share.

They sow the various grains; each ear
 With mystic life will soon appear,
 When the young plants their heads uprear. [p. 456]

Behold in lines unbroken rise
 The tender blades, whose lengthening size
 Gains daily growth before our eyes!

Luxuriant is the sprouting grain,
 And through it goes a numerous train.
 Who weed it o'er and o'er again.

Erelong their work the reapers ply,
 The golden grain is piled on high;
 The stalks unnumbered multiply:--

Enough to make the spirits sweet,
 To offer at our fathers' feet;
 To furnish what for rites is meet;

Enough, when at the fragrant board
 Sit host and guest, for king and lord
 The glorious banquet to afford;

Enough, when now the feast is o'er,
 To satisfy the aged poor,
 And cheer them from the unfailing store.

Nor now alone, but from of old,
 And everywhere's the story told,
 Toil reaps from earth a thousandfold.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 457]

  

VI

The Liang Ssu; narrative. Much akin to the preceding:--presumably an ode of thanksgiving in the autumn to the spirits of the land and grain.

With sharp and well-shaped glittering share,
 The toilers turn, with patient care,
 The southern acres to prepare.

The different kinds of grain they sow.
 Each seed, though hid the earth below,
 Its form of life will quickly show.

Behold their wives and children there!
 These the cooked millet to them bear,
 Carried in baskets round and square.

In light splint hats their hoes they speed,
 Clearing the ground for fruitful seed,
 And rooting out the noisome weed.

The weeds, uprooted, die away,
 And feed the ground by their decay.
 The millets grow from day to day. [p. 458]

And now the golden stalks and tall
 Before the reapers, rustling, fall.
 Straightway they're built up like a wall.

High as a wall the sheaves are placed,
 Like comb teeth close, and interlaced.
 Anon the grain is stored in haste.

Hundreds of houses hold the store;
 The wives and children fret no more;
 The labors of the year are o'er.

This black-lipped tawny bull we slay,
 Whose horns the well-known curve display,
 The rites of husbandry to pay.

Thus to the future hand we down
 These rites long held in high renown,
 Glad the ancestral ways to own.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII

The Ssu I; narrative. An ode, appropriate to a sacrifice and the feast after it.

In robes of silk, all bright and clean,
 And temple cap, with reverent mien, [p. 459]
 The officer walks from the hall
 Straight to the porch, and looks at all
 The sheep and oxen doomed to bleed.
 Back he returns, and gives good heed
 To tripods and the mighty horn
 By the rhinoceros once borne.
 No need for it! The feasters drink
 The spirits good and mild, but shrink
 From wanton revelry and pride.
 By this an auspice is supplied
 Of the long life which those shall reap
 Who thus the rules of virtue keep.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII

The Cho; narrative. An ode in praise of King Wu.

Oh! powerful was the mighty host,
   By which the throne to Chou was given.
 Wu nursed it, while the time was dark,
   Submissive to the will of Heaven.
 But when the day propitious came,
 He armed himself, and marched to fame. [p. 460]
 And what the martial king achieved,
   We have been favored to obtain.
 That we may rightly use the lot,
   Which thou for us didst nobly gain,
 Thy course, O king, we on our part
   Will follow with sincerest heart.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX

The Huan; narrative. Celebrating the merit and success of King Wu.

Throughout our myriad regions there is peace;
   Year after year the plenteous harvest brings.
 Great Heaven in showing favors does not cease,
   And will with blessing crown Chou's line of kings.
 The martial sovereign, Wu, the confidence
   He won from all his officers retained.
 Their service would he through the realm dispense,
   And for his house security thus gained.
 Oh! glorious was he in the sight of Heaven,
 By which to him the throne of Shang was given.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 461]

  

X

The Lai; narrative. The praise of King Wen.

King Wen with earnest purpose toiled,
   And nothing left undone.
 'Tis right his sons should now be styled
   Lords of the realm he won.

Abroad his virtue we will spread;
   Him in our hearts we'll shrine;
 Our aim that peace established
   May last while lasts our line.

Through him it was there came to Chou
   Heaven's favor and decree.
 Him in our breasts we cherish now;
   Our pattern shall he be.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI

The Pan; narrative. The greatness of Chou, and its firm possession of the kingdom, as seen in the progresses of its reigning sovereign.

Oh! great is now the house of Chou.
   The lofty hills we climb,--
 Both those whose ridges far extend,
   And those with peaks sublime. [p. 462]

Along the Ho we watch the flow
   Of its embanked stream.
 Where'er o'erhead the sky is spread,
   Me truly king men deem.

The princes all, both great and small,
   My summons promptly own.
 So by this progress do I know
   Chou stablished on the throne.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK II. THE PRAISE ODES OF LU

  

I

The Kung; narrative. Celebrating some marquis of Lu for his constant and admirable thoughtfulness, especially as seen in the number and quality of his horses.

[1&nbsp;&nbsp;]On the wide plains, our frontiers near,
   The stallions, sleek and large, appear.
   There, sleek and large, they meet our sight;
   Some black, with their hind quarters white;
   Pale yellow, some; some black; some bay:--
   For carriage teams good horses they! [p. 463]
 To the duke's thoughts we can assign no bound;
 Turned to his steeds, lo! thus good are they found!

[2]  On the wide plains, our frontiers near,
   The stallions, sleek and large, appear.
   Those stallions, sleek and large, are seen;
   Some piebald,--white and flushed with green,
   And others white, with yellow sheen;
   Some chestnuts; and some dapple gray:--
   From carriage teams strong horses they!
 To the duke's thoughts no limit can we set;
 Turned to his steeds, such is the strength they get!

[3]  On the wide plains, our frontiers near,
   The stallions, sleek and large, appear.
   Oh! sleek and large, those sprightly males!
   Some that appear as flecked with scales;
   Some black, with manes of spotless white;
   Some white or red, manes dark as night:--
   In carriage yoked, obedient quite!
 The duke's thoughts never cease and never tire;
 Turned to his steeds, lo! thus they rule their fire! [p. 464]

[4]  On the wide plains, our frontiers near,
   The stallions, sleek and large, appear.
   Oh! sleek and large, those stallions bright!
   Cream-colored, some; some, red and white;
   Some, with white hairy legs; with eyes
   Like those of fishes, some:--men prize
   Such horses, grand in strength and size.
 His thoughts without depravity, our prince
 Thinks of his steeds, and such powers they evince!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Yu Pi; allusive. The happy intercourse of some marquis of Lu with his ministers and officers;--how they deliberated on business, feasted together, and the ministers and officers expressed their good wishes.

[1]How sleek and strong, how sleek and strong,
 Those chestnut teams that dash along!
 Early to court they bring, and late,
 Their masters, ministers of state,
 In council wise, quick in debate.
 As flock of egrets, circling round
 Aloft, then lighting on the ground,
 Those masters are. The drums resound; [p. 465]
 Having well drunk, they rise and dance,
 And thus their mutual joy enhance.

[2]How sleek and strong, how sleek and strong,
 Those stallion teams that dash along!
 Early and late their masters all
 Are present in the palace hall,
 And with the duke a-drinking fall.
 As flock of egrets, circling round
 Aloft, or wheeling 'bove the ground,
 Are they. Anon the drums resound;
 Having well drunk, they homeward move;
 Pure is the mutual joy they prove.

[3]How sleek and strong, how sleek and strong,
 Those iron grays that dash along!
 Early and late, their masters all
 Are present in the palace hall,
 And with the duke a-feasting fall.
 At last their prayer they thus express:--
 "May fruitful years our marquis bless!
 His goodness may he still maintain,
 And leave to sons in lengthening chain!"
 May such rejoicing long remain!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 466]

  

III

The P'an Shui; allusive and narrative. In praise of some marquis of Lu, celebrating his interest in the state college, which probably he had repaired or rebuilt, testifying his virtues, and auspicing for him a complete triumph over the tribes of the Huai, which would be celebrated in the college.

[1]Fair is the pool, half-circling round
   The college of our land.
 The plants of cress that there abound
   We pluck with eager hand.
 To it our prince of Lu draws nigh;
 We see his dragon banner fly,
   Free waving in the wind.
 And as he moves, his horses' bells
 Tinkle harmonious, and fast swells
   The crowd that comes behind.

[2]Fair is the pool, half-circling round
   The college of our land.
 The pondweed plants that there abound
   We pluck with eager hand. [p. 467]
 Arrived is now our prince of Lu,
 With team of steeds that grandly show,--
   Steeds, each of highest worth.
 His fame is great. With winning smile.
 And blandest look, no haste the while,
   His lessons he gives forth.

[3]Fair is the pool, half-circling round
   The college of our land.
 The mallow plants that there abound
   We pluck with eager hand.
 The college now our prince contains.
 Joyous, the festive cup he drains,--
   The cup of spirits good.
 His be the strength that knows not age!
 His be the noble course and sage,
   By which men are subdued!

[4]Our prince of Lu has virtue rare;
   His reverence we see.
 His every step he guards with care;
   The people's mold is he. [p. 468]
 In peace and war his powers are proved,
 His mighty sires are deeply moved;--
   O'er him with love they bend.
 Through filial duty ever paid,
 And without farther effort made,
   Blessings on him descend.

[5]Our prince of Lu has wisdom great;
   His virtue brighter grows.
 This college, glory of the state,
   To him its beauty owes.
 The tribes of Huai will own his sway;
 His tiger chiefs down here will lay
   The ears cut from their foes.
 His questioners, like Kao Yao wise,
 Will here rehearse their enterprise,
   And captive kerns expose.

[6]His numerous officers, all true,
   And of a virtuous mind,
 Will haste with martial zeal to do
   The part to them assigned;-- [p. 469]
 Those tribes from south and east. expel,
 Then back their triumphs come to tell,
   And here themselves report.
 The duke no judge's help will need,
 As calm and truthful here they plead
   Their claims before his court.

[7]They draw their bows, with bone made strong.
   How whiz the arrows fleet!
 Their cars of war dash swift along,
   Eager the foe to meet.
 Drivers and footmen weary not,
 Till o'er the tribes of Huai is got
   A victory entire.
 Your plans, O prince, be firm and true!
 So shall you all those tribes subdue,
   And quench rebellion's fire.

[8]On wing they come, those owls, and rest
   The college trees among.
 Our mulberry fruits they eat with zest,
   Grown birds of sweetest song [p. 470]
 So shall the Huai tribes change their minds,.
 And bring their tribute in all kinds
   Of produce rich and rare;--
 The ivory tusks, the tortoise big,
 The metals from their mines they dig;--
   Their fealty to declare.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Pi Kung; narrative. In praise of Duke Hsi, and auguring for him a magnificent career of success, which would make Lu all that it had ever been:--written probably on an occasion when Hsi had repaired on a grand scale the temples of the state, of which pious act his success would be the reward.

[1]Solemn the temples stand, and still,
 Strong, built throughout with nicest skill.
 From them our thoughts to Chiang Yuan go,
 The mother of our Chou and Lu.
 She grandly shone with virtue rare
 That nought could bend. So did she share
 God's favor, and Hou-chi she bore,
 Without a pang, or labor sore,
 Just when her carrying days were o'er.
 On Hou-chi then all blessings came. [p. 471]
 That millets' times were not the same,
 This ripening quickly, and that slow,
 He knew, and first the pulse to sow,
 And then the wheat, where each should grow.
 Soon called a state, though small, to rule,
 It under him became a school,
 Where husbandry men learned to know,
 To sow, to reap, to weed, to hoe.
 Millets,--the early, black, and red,
 And rice that loves the watery bed;--
 All these through all the land were known,
 And of Yin's toils the worth was shown.

[2]Long after Hou-chi, in his line,
 King Ta arose, quick to divine
 Heaven's will, who eastward came and dwelt
 South of Mount Ch'i. There first was felt
 The power of Chou, and Shang's fierce sway
 Began to dwindle and decay.
 From him we pass to Wen and Wu,
 Continuing Ta's great work to do,
 Till in the plain of Mu 'twas given
 To see th' accomplished will of Heaven. [p. 472]
 There met the hosts, both well arrayed,
 And when Wu feared, his general said,
 "Let not a doubt your mind possess!
 With you is God, your arms to bless."
 The troops of Shang defeat sustained;
 Wu's men, all fire, grand victory gained.
 His son, King Ch'eng, next wore the crown,
 And said to Tan of wide renown,
 Still as the duke of Chou well known,
 "Your eldest son, O uncle great,
 I will appoint to rule the state
 Of Lu, and there on your bestow
 A territory that shall grow,
 And help afford our house of Chou."

[3]Thus first did Lu a ruler get,
 Who marquis in the east was set.
 The lands and fields, each stream and hill,
 Were granted to him, at his will
 To hold, and many states attached,
 Whose fealty jealously he watched. [p. 473]
 From him derived, our present chief,
 Son of Duke Chuang, now holds the fief.
 With dragon banner raised aloft,
 Grasping the pliant reins and soft,
 Here comes he sacrifice to pay.
 In spring and autumn, no delay
 He makes; but soon as dawns the day,
 Correct his offerings appear;--
 The victims, red and pure, are here:--
 First for the great and sovereign Lord,
 Then for Hou-chi, our sire adored.
 The victims these enjoy and own,
 And send abundant blessings down.
 Nor they alone, O prince, do so,
 But from the duke of Chou gifts flow,
 And all your sires their grace bestow.

[4]In autumn comes th' autumnal rite,
 With bulls, whose horns in summer bright
 Were capped with care:--one of them white,
 For the great duke of Chou designed;
 One red, for all our princes shrined. [p. 474]
 And see! they set the goblet full,
 In figure fashioned like a bull;
 The dishes of bamboo and wood;
 Sliced meat, roast pig, and pottage good;
 And the large stand. Below the hall
 There wheel and move the dancers all.
 O filial prince, your sires will bless,
 And grant you glorious success.
 Long life and goodness they'll bestow
 On you, to hold the state of Lu,
 And all the eastern land secure,
 Like moon complete, like mountain sure.
 No earthquake's shock, no flood's wild rage,
 Shall e'er disturb your happy age.
 And with your aged nobles three
 Unbroken shall your friendship be,
 In long and firm security.

[5]A thousand are the cars of war.
 Aloft on each, seen from afar,
 Rise the two spears, with tassels red.
 In each two bows in case are laid, [p. 475]
 To frames with green strings firmly bound.
 Guarding those cars, and all around,
 March thirty thousand footmen bold,
 And on their helmets can be told
 The shells, strung on vermilion string:--
 Such is the force our state can bring.
 We'll quell the tribes both west and north,
 And against King and Shoo go forth.
 O prince, the spirits of your dead
 With blaze of glory crown your head!
 Give you long life, and riches great,
 And round you trusty helpers set,
 Of wrinkled back and hoary hair,
 With counsel wise for every care!
 You may those spirits prosper thus,
 And make your old age vigorous,
 For thousands, myriads of years,
 With bushy eyebrows, free from fears!

[6]To us belongs T'ai's frowning height,
 For all in Lu the grandest sight.
 Both Kuei and Meng we safely keep;
 To farthest east our sway shall sweep, [p. 476]
 Till all the states along the sea
 To Lu obedient shall be.
 The tribes of Huai will own our might,
 Proud to our prince their faith to plight.
 Such the memorial he shall leave!
 Such deeds our marquis shall achieve!

[7]Both Fu and Yi he shall maintain,
 And victory over Seu shall gain,
 Till all the states along the sea
 To him obedient shall be.
 The tribes of Huai, the Mih whose home
 Is in the north, the Man who roam
 The south, and tribes more southern still
 Shall bow, submissive to his will.
 Prompt they shall answer to his call,
 And homage pay, his subjects all.

[8]Oh! Heaven our prince will greatly bless,
 And he the eyebrows shall possess,
 That show long life, and Lu maintain;
 Both Ch'ang and Hsu he shall regain.
 Whatever land belonged of yore
 To Tan, our prince shall soon restore. [p. 477]
 Then shall his joy at feast be told
 To his good wife, and mother old.
 There, too, his chiefs, of virtue rare,
 Each in his place, the joy shall share.
 He thus shall all our region rule;
 His cup of blessing shall be full.
 Like child's his teeth shall still be seen,
 With hoary hair,--and old age green!

[9]The pines from Ch'u-lai's hill were brought,
 And cypresses on Hsin-fu sought.
 The trees were felled, and hewn exact,
 The workmen, with the nicest tact,
 Using of various lengths the line,
 Projected far the beams of pine.
 While rose the inner chambers great.
 Grand are those temples of the state,
 New built, the work of Hsi-ssu skilled,
 So wide, so deep, that all are filled
 With admiration of his art!
 How well has Hsi-ssu done his part!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 478]

  

BOOK III. THE SACRIFICIAL ODES OF SHANG

  

I

The Na; narrative. Appropriate to a sacrifice to Tang the Successful, the real founder of the Shang dynasty,--dwelling especially on the music, and on the reverence with which the service was performed.

O grand! the drums, both large and for the hand,
 Complete in number, here in order stand.
 Their tones, though loud, harmoniously are blent,
 And rise to greet our ancestor's descent.

Him, the great T'ang, of merit vast, our king
 Asks by this music to descend, and bring
 To us, the worshipers, the soothing sense
 That he, the object of desire intense,
 Is here. Deep are the sounds the drums emit,
 And now we hear the flutes, which shrilly fit
 Into the diapason:--concord great,
 Which the sonorous gem doth regulate!
 Majestic is our king of T'ang's great line,
 Whose instruments such qualities combine. [p. 479]

Large bells we hear, which with the drums have place,
 While in the court the dancers move with grace.
 Scions of ancient kings the service view,
 Pleased and delighted, guests of goodness true.
 Such service we received from former days,
 Down from our sires, who showed us virtue's ways,--
 How to be meek and mild, from morn to night,
 And reverently discharge our parts aright.

May T'ang accept the rites his son thus pays,
 As round the summer comes, and autumn days!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

II

The Lieh Tsu; narrative. Appropriate, probably, like the last piece, to a sacrifice to Tang,--dwelling on the spirits, the soups, and the gravity of the service, and on the assisting princes.

Ah! from our sire, whose merit vast we own,
 What blessings ever upon us come down,
 Abiding, oft-repeated, deeds of grace!
 And you, O king, receive them in this place. [p. 480]
 Here in our vessels shine the spirits clear,
 And Tang himself, much wished for, shall appear.
 Here too are set the soups of flavor rare,
 Tempered, and mixed, with cunning and with care.
 These offerings we set forth, without a word,
 Without contention, and with one accord,
 To beg the presence of the honored lord.
 He will the eyebrows of long life confer,
 And face of wrinkled age, and whitening hair.

With yokes adorned, and naves with leather bound,
 While at the bits the eight bells tinkling sound,
 The feudal princes come, to take their part
 In all the offerings made with rev'rent heart.
 To us the mighty sovereignty was given;
 And prosperous fortune long sent down from Heaven
 Our fruitful harvests clearly prove. And now
 Himself pleased with our service Tang will show,
 And on us blessings without end bestow.
 May Tang regard the rites his son thus pays,
 As round the summer comes, and autumn days!

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 481]

  

III

The Hsuan Niao; narrative. Appropriate to a sacrifice in the ancestral temple of Shang:--intended specially to do honor to the king Wu-ting and the celebrating monarch.

By Heaven sent down, the swallow came to earth,
 And gave to our great Ch'i his mystic birth.
 The sire of Shang, his children long abode
 In Yin-land, waxing great. Thereafter God
 Give to the martial T'ang his charge, that he
 Should to each state assign its boundary.

T'ang grandly thus possessed the regions nine,
 And to each quarter did its lords assign.
 First lord of Shang, the sovereign power who swayed,
 He got his charge, certain and stable made.
 Thus to our king the throne. Wu-ting conveyed.

Wu-ting's descendant is a martial king,
 Whose powers, however taxed, still victory bring.
 Ten lords, whose chariots dragon banners grace,
 His millet dishes in due order place. [p. 482]

A thousand li extends the king's domain,
 And there the people to repose are fain.
 Lo! to the four seas thence our borders spread,
 And from the space within there come to aid
 Our temple service many chiefs arrayed.
 Our hill of King for border has the Ho.
 'Twas right the sovereignty to Shang should go;
 And from its ruler now all honors flow.

     
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV

The Ch'ang Fa; narrative. Celebrating Ch'i, the ancestor of the house of Shang; Hsiang-tu, his grandson; T'ang, the founder of the dynasty; and I Yin, T'ang's chief adviser.

[1]  The lords of Shang wisdom profound had shown,
   And omens of their greatness long were known.
   When the great flood its waters spread around,
   And Yu alone to curb its power was found,-- [p. 483]
   Yu who the regions of the land defined,
   And to the great fiefs boundaries assigned,
   Till o'er the realm was plainly marked each state,--
   Even then the house of. Sung 'gan to be great.
   God viewed its daughter's son with favoring grace;--
 He founded Shang; to him its kings their lineage trace.

[2]  He, the dark king, ruled with a powerful sway,
   Success attendant on his glorious way.
   First with a small state charged, then with a large,
   He failed not well his duties to discharge.
   His rules of conduct he himself obeyed,
   And prompt response all to his lessons made.
   Next came Hsiang-tu, the prince of ardent soul,
   And from Hsia's center, to the four seas' goal,
 Submissively all owned and bowed to his control.

[3]  God in His favor Shang's house would not leave,
   And then T'ang rose that favor to receive.
   T'ang's birth was not from Ch'i too far removed.
   His sagely reverence daily greater proved.
   For long to Heaven his brilliant influence rose,
   And while his acts the fear of God disclose,
 T'ang as fit model God for the nine regions chose. [p. 484]

[4]  To him gave up the princes, great and small,
   The ensigns of their rank; on hint they all,
   Like to the pendants of a banner, hung:--
   So from indulgent Heaven his greatness sprung!
   Tang used no violence, nor was he slow;
   Nor hard, nor soft, extremes he did not know.
   His royal rules abroad were gently spread;--
 All dignities and wealth were gathered round his head.

[5]  To him from all the states their tribute flowed,
   And like a strong steed, he sustained the load.
   Such was the favor he received from Heaven!
   Proof of his valor through the realm was given.
   His steadfast soul 'mid terrors never quailed;
   Nor wavered he by troublous doubts assailed;--
 On to the sovereign seat he struggled, and prevailed.

[6]  The martial king aloft his banner reared,
   And in the field against his foes appeared.
   He grasped his battle-ax with reverent hand;
   'Gainst the attack his foes could make no stand. [p. 485]
   His progress was like march of blazing fire;
   None could resist the torrent of his ire.
   Like root with three shoots was the chiefest fore;--
   Advance none made he, and no growth could show.
   Of the nine regions Tang possession got;
   First with the lords of Wei and Ku he fought,
 And then K'un-wu's strong chief, and Chieh of Hsia he smote.

[7]  In the mid time, between Hsiang-tu and T'ang,
   A shaking came, and peril threatened Shang.
   But Heaven approved T'ang as its chosen son,
   And gave for minister the great I Yin,--
 A-heng, who for the king a prosperous issue won.

    
The Book of Poetry, tr. by James Legge, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

V

The Yin Wu; narrative. Celebrating the war of Wu-ting against King-ch'u, its success, and the general happiness and virtue of his reign;--made, probably, when a special and permanent temple was made for him as the Kao Tsung, "the High and Honored" king of Shang.

[1]  Swift moved with martial force the king of Yin,
   And King-ch'u he attacked, resolved to win. [p. 486]
   Its dangerous passes fearlessly he sought,
   And then its multitudes together brought.
   Soon was the country subject at his feet;
 Such triumph proved him Pang's descendant meet.

[2]  "Ye people," thus to King-ch'u's hosts he said,
   "My kingdom's southern part your home have made.
   Of old, when the successful Tang bore sway,
   The states made haste their offerings to pay.
   The distant Ch'iang of Ti in homage came;
   No chief then dared deny our sovereign claim.
   Shall ye, who dwell much nearer than the Ch'iang,
 Transgress what long has been th' unvaried rule of Shang?

[3]  "'Twas Heaven assigned to all the states their bounds;
   But where within the sphere of Yu's grand rounds
   Their capitals were placed, then every year,
   As business called, their princes did appear
   Before our king, and to him humbly said,
   'Prepare not us to punish or upbraid,
 For we the due regard to husbandry have paid.'" [p. 487]

[4]  When Heaven's high glance this lower world surveys,
   Attention to the people first it pays.
   Aware of this, our king impartial was.
   Nor punished so as justice to o'erpass.
   'Gainst idleness he took precaution sure;--
   So o'er the states his rule did firm endure,
 And all his life he made his happiness secure.

[5]  Well ordered was his capital, and grand,
   And served as model good to all the land.
   Men recognized his energy as great;
   His glorious fame rang loud through every state.
   Long was his life, and tranquil was his end;
 He blesses and protects us who from him descend.

[6]  Eager we climbed the King hill near at hand,
   Where round and straight the pine and cypress stand.
   We felled these to the ground, and hither brought,
   And, reverent, hewed them to the shape we sought.
   Long from the wall project the beams of pine,
   And numerous rise the pillars, large and fine;--
 So have we built this house for Wu-ting's peaceful shrine.

 

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: bot.txt =====


     
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE BOOK OF TALISMANS, AMULETS AND ZODIACAL GEMS

  

by

  

WILLIAM THOMAS & KATE PAVITT

  

Second and Revised Edition

  

With Coloured Frontispiece and Ten Plates

  

LONDON

  

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, LTD.

  

CATHEDRAL HOUSE, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.

  

[1922]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, September 2008 by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece

Click to enlarge
Front Cover

Click to enlarge
Title Page

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE

The subject of Talismans and Gems of the Zodiac covers a wide area, and the difficulty of arriving at a definite conclusion is increase became of the varying opinions between writers on these subjects as to the stones referred to, or intended by the Ancients, complicated still further by the different languages from which these records have been translated, and where Month or Zodiacal gems are referred to many of the writers arc obviously unacquainted with Astrology or Astronomy.

The present volume, being the result of many years of study and research, it is not easy in all cases to specify the original source of our information, which has been collected, not only from ancient and modern writings, but also from personal experience and experiments, noted at the time they occurred, long before this book was contemplated. Again, we find that many, and more especially modern authors, quote from one another in places, and the original source of the information is obscure; we have, therefore, endeavoured to

[p. viii]

give as far as possible our authorities, although, owing to the antiquity of the subject, much is necessarily left to deduction and conjecture; and it than probable dace, may be unintentional omissions, to remedy which we give a list of books that we have at different times consulted and studied with advantage.

We have endeavoured throughout to make the subjects dealt with interesting as possible, believing that the symbols expressing the faiths of bygone days term the basis of occult forces, a proper understanding of which is becoming more and more recognised by scientists as necessary in the interests of progress at the present day.

It will be noticed that many of the gems have similar qualities attributed to them which, according to the ancient authorities, were specifically arranged for the benefit of those types whose planetary aspects brought them into harmony with the particular stone specified.

With regard to characteristics dealt with in the hind part of the book, this must be regarded as general, and liable to variation according to the remaining Planetary influences, which would be indicated in a horoscope. With this proviso, the information given will be found reliable and very helpful in giving a knowledge of our n dispositions and those of our friends and associates

[p. ix]

and should pave the way to a sympathy and understanding impossible without this knowledge. It will also afford a simple and easy means of at least proving there is something in Astrology, and if interest is aroused the fullest information may be obtained by a study of the books mentioned, dealing with the subject.

We have greatly benefited from the assistance given as by Mrs. G. M. Walker in lending us scarce and valuable books for reference, and by G. H. Greenop, Esq., kindly translating many old Greek and Latin writings; we should also like to acknowledge our obligations to the Directors of the British Museum for the facilities given in obtaining information, and their permission to make drawings from the actual Talismans in their collections.

WM. THOS. PAVITT

17, HANOVER SQUARE. LONDON W.
                3rd August, 1914.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. x] [p. xi]

  

CONTENTS

         	PART I

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER I

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES

     
     	The Psychic and Magnetic Influence of Talismans and Gems

      	<page 3>-12

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER II

      	 

     
     	Talismans of Primitive Races--The Axe--Arrow-head--The   Swastika--The Serpent--The Interlaced Triangles

      	<page 13>-22

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER III

      	 

     
     	The Tau Cross--Aum Ma Ni Pad Me Hum--Indian   Talismans--Ganesa the Elephant-headed--Hanuman the Monkey   God--The Eight Glorious Emblems of Buddha--The Wheel of   Life--The Conch Shell--The Two Fishes--The Lucky   Diagram--The Lotus--The Frog--The Three Gems

      	<page 23>-33

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER IV

      	 

     
     	Talisman for Wisdom--Buddha's Footprints--The   Doric.--Knots--Chinese Talismans--The Trigrams--The Five   Bats--The Goose--Stork--Pine Tree--Peach--Lucky   Sentence--The Phoenix--The Dragon--Horse Hoof--Siva's   Charm--The Money Sword--Red in Talismans--The   Lock--Bells--The Tortoise--The Tiger--Pigs--The   Black Cat

      	<page 34>-43

     
     	[p. xii]

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER V

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES

     
     	The Pear Charm--Show Fu--Jade--The Blue Gown for   Longevity--Japanese--The Tiger--Wolf--Fox--The   Thunder, Fire and Echo--The Fan of Power--Hotei, the God of   Contentment--The Eagle--The Millet Dumpling--Carp--Sacred   Dog--Stork--Tortoise--Crane--Child's   Hand--Mitsu-Domoe--Hammer of Daikoku--The   Keys--Anchor--Crystal Ball--Leaf   Talisman--Ota-fu-ku--Bow--Temple at Ise

      	<page 44>-54

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER VI

      	 

     
     	Egyptian Beliefs--Crux Ansata--The Menat--The Two   Plumes--The Single Plume--The Nefer--The Cartouche--The   Angles and Plummet--The God Bes--Aper--The Tat--The Heart

      	<page 55>-65

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER VII

      	 

     
     	The Buckle of the Girdle of Isis--The Scarab--The Eye of Osiris--The   Two Fingers--The Collar--The Hawk--The Sma--The Ladder   and Steps--The Snake's Head--The Serpent--The Sun's   Disc--The Frog--The Fish--The Vulture--The Sa, or Tie

      	<page 66>-75

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER VIII

      	 

     
     	Gnosticism--Abraxas--Sacred Names--Khnoubis--The Seven   Vowels--The Magic Symbols--The Archangels--Lion-headed   Serpent--Aum--The Ineffable   Name--Horus--Osiris--Isis--Etruscan, Greek, and   Roman--The Crescent Symbol--The Horseshoe--Tusk, or   Horn--Stable Keys--Amalthaea's Horn, or   Cornucopia--Serapis--Bull's Head--Diana--Harpokrates--Anubis--Bellerophon--Salus   Ring--Hygiea

      	<page 76>-85

     
     	[p. xiii]

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER IX

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES

     
     	The Bulla--The Tusk--Pine Cone--The Frog--Skull of an   Ass--Key Talismans--Grylli, or Chimerae--Goat--The   Ox--Lion--Eagle--The Caduceus--Mercury--Health   Rings--Boar's Head--Clenched Hand--Open Hand--Figured   Hands--The Lizard--The Spider--The Fish--Snails

      	<page 86>-96

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER X

      	 

     
     	The Orient--The Koran--Jochebed--Bead   Necklaces--Mashallah--Hassan and Hussein--Hand of the Lady   Fatima--Five Principal Commandments--Zufur   Tukiah--Nasiree--Gadiri--Mohammed--Merzoum--The   Diamond--Cube of Amber--Scorpion-charming--Early Christian and   Mediaeval Talismans--Clement of Alexandria--The   Fish--Dag--Palm Branch--The Ship--Sacred   Monogram--Shen--Constantine the Great--Thoth--The   Cross--Household Cross--Yucatan--Hand and Cross--Wheel   Cross

      	<page 97>-106

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER XI

      	 

     
     	The Agnus Dei--The Coventry Ring--Ananizapta--Tau   Cross--Cross of St. Benedict--Byzantine Ring--Simsum   Ring--Abracadabra--Pentalpha, Pentacle, Pentagram, or Five-pointed   Star--The Kabala--The Table of Jupiter--The Ten Divine   Names--The Planetary Angels--The Agla--Dr. Dee

      	<page 107>-117

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER XII

      	 

     
     	Tetragrammaton--Phylactery--Talismans against all mischiefs, the   Magus--Venus   Talisman--Totaphoth--Abraxas--Eye of a Cock--Bells--Gargoyles--Cramp   Rings--Blessing of Rings--Musseltaub--Posie Rings--Gemmel   Rings--Zodiacal Rings--The Signs of the Zodiac in   Rhyme--General Talismans--The Lee Penny--Crystal--The   Moon Talismans--Peacock--Juno--Fire Talismans--Gold   Nugget--Coins--Card Talismans--Badger's   Tooth--Four-leaved Clover

      	<page 118>-130

     
     	[p. xiv]

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	PART II

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER I

      	 

     
     	ARIES--THE RAM

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES

     
     	The Zodiac--Zodiacal and Calendar Months--The New Year--The   Constellation--Hamal--The Passover--Characteristics of Aries   People--Gems of Aries--The Bloodstone and Heliotrope--Mars the   Ruling Planet--Marbodeus Gallus--The Diamond--The Qualities of   the Diamond--Tavernier--The Regent--The Koh-i-Noor--The   Hope Diamond

      	<page 133>-48

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER II

      	 

     
     	TAURUS--THE BULL

      	 

     
     	The Constellation--Aldebaran--The Chaldeans--The   Temples--Apis Bull--Aphrodite--Characteristics of   Taurus--Training--Gems of Taurus--The Sapphire--Bishop's   Ring--St. Jerome--Qualities of the Sapphire--Star   Sapphire--Solomon's Seal--Charlemagne's Talisman--The   Turquoise--Boetius de Boot--Horseman's Talisman--Qualities   of the Stone

      	<page 149>-60

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER III

      	 

     
     	GEMINI--THE TWINS

      	 

     
     	Period--The Twins, Castor and Pollux--The Argonauts--King   Solomon's Pillars--Maia--Ovid and Wedding of Mary Queen of   Scots--Gemini Number--Characteristics--Agates and their   Virtues--Orpheus--Chrysoprase--Alexander the   Great--Virtues of the Stone

      	<page 161>-73

     
     	[p. xv]

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER IV

      	 

     
     	CANCER--THE CRAB

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES

     
     	The Dark Sign--Its Duration--Origins--Summer   Solstice--Hercules and the Crab--Characteristics--Goddess   Esmeralda and the Ancient Peruvians--The Emerald   Isle--Moonstones--Blue Moon--Pearls--Cat's   Eyes--Rock Crystals--Crystal-gazing--Virtues of the Crystal

      	<page 174>-86

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER V

      	 

     
     	LEO--THE LION

      	 

     
     	Period--Constellation--The Fiery Sign--Hercules and the   Lion--Characteristics--Personal Magnetism of the   Type--Disposition--Money-makers--Entertainers--Health   Defects--Marriage and Love Affairs--Artistic Tendencies--Gems   of the House--The Sardonyx Qualities of the Stone--The Chrysolite   and the Romans--The Tourmaline--Peculiarities of the   Stone--Amber--Virtues and Medicinal Uses--The Topaz

      	<page 187>-98

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER VI

      	 

     
     	VIRGO--THE VIRGIN

      	 

     
     	Period--Constellation--Mythology--Symbols--Paris under   Virgo--Reflecting Qualities of the   Sign--Characteristics--Marriage--Professions--Ailments--Harmonious   Types--Gems of the House--Cornelian--Virtues of the   Cornelian--Napoleon's Seal Talisman--Clairvoyant Properties of the   Stone--Jade--New Zealanders' Faith--The Tiki--Jade   as Racing Talisman

      	<page 199>-211

     
     	[p. xvi]

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER VII

      	 

     
     	LIBRA--THE BALANCE

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES

     
     	Period--Constellation--Origin of the Sign--The   Yoke--The Altar--Characteristics of the Type--Influence of   Saturn--Inclination for Companionship--Marriage--Moods--Partnership--Professions--Health   Defects of the Type--Gems of the House--The   Opal--Coral--Lapis Lazuli--The Modern Ill-luck of the   Opal--Its Ancient Virtues--Sensitiveness of the Opal--Its   Virtues as a Libra Gem--Coral--Virtues--As Infant's   Talisman--Lapis Lazuli--Egyptian Talisman--Qualities of the   Stone

      	<page 212>-23

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER VIII

      	 

     
     	SCORPIO--THE SCORPION

      	 

     
     	Period--Ruling   Planet--Mythology--Symbology--Characteristics of the   Type--Effect of the Malefic Aspects--Health   Defects--Professions--Religion--Marriage--The Gems of the   House--The Beryl and Aquamarine differing only in Colour--Qualities   of the Beryl--Clairvoyant Properties--The Carbuncle as Transmitter   of Light--Noah's Lamp--Talisman against Infection--The   Lodestone--Magnetic Qualities as an Amulet against Shipwreck and Gout

      	<page 224>-34

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER IX

      	 

     
     	SAGITTARIUS--THE ARCHER

      	 

     
     	Period--The Constellation--The Bow in the   Cloud--Mythology--Characteristics of the Type--Appropriateness   of the Symbol--Fresh Air a   Necessity--Professions--Ailments--Marriage Relations--Gem   of the House--The Topaz--Nan Ratan--Pliny and the   Topaz--Discovery of the Stone--The Emperor Hadrian and his   Ring--Appropriateness of the Stone to the Type--The Stone of   Strength--As a Talisman against Asthma--Marbodus and the   Topaz--Chrysolite also Favourable

      	<page 235>-44.

     
     	[p. xvii]

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER X

      	 

     
     	CAPRICORNUS--THE GOAT

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES

     
     	Constellation--Period--Ruling Planet   Saturn--Mythology--The Symbol of the   Goat--Characteristics--Constitution and Health Defects--India under   the Rule of Capricorn--Professions--Marriage--Saturn   favourable for the Elderly--Gems of the House--The   Ruby--Spinel--Qualities of the Gem--Sensitiveness for Good or   Evil--The Malachite--Copper as a Talisman against Colic and   Cholera--Black Onyx--Favourable and Unfavourable Influence of the   Stone--Jet--The Afflictions of Saturn--Effects on other Types

      	<page 245>-56

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER XI

      	 

     
     	AQUARIUS--THE WATER-BEARER

      	 

     
     	Constellation--Period--Symbol--Early Religious   Teachings--The Glyph--Rulers of the House--Saturn and   Uranus--Characteristics of the   Type--Temper--Professions--Health Defects--Marriage and   Friendships--Gems of the House--Garnets and Zircons--The   Garnet and Ruby--Qualities of the Stone--Virtue, as a   Keepsake--The Zircon--The Hyacinth--The Jargoon--The   Jacinth as a Talisman for Sleep--Set in Gold for Restlessness--The   Lyncurion of the Ancients: its Virtues

      	<page 257>-68

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	CHAPTER XII

      	 

     
     	PISCES--THE FISHES

      	 

     
     	Period--Constellation--Precession of the   Equinoxes--Ichthyes the Fishes--Mythology--Symbol--The Rulers   of the House--Characteristics--Ailments of the   Type--Professions--Friendship and Marriage--Harmonious and

      	 

     
     	[p. xviii]

      	 

     
     	 

      	PAGES.

     
     	Inharmonious Types--The Gem of the House--The   Amethyst--Virtues of the Stone--Talisman against Inebriety--Its   Calming Influence--The Stone of St. Valentine--As a Lovers'   Talisman--The Effect of Purple Rays--The Amethyst Beneficent to all   Types--Real and Artificial Gems, and how to test and select them

      	<page 267>-81

     
   
      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xix]

  

LIST OF PLATES

 

       	Gems, Symbols, and Glyphs of the Zodiac

      	Frontispiece

     
 DESCRIPTION.

         	1. Aries the Ram, Diamond, Iron.

      	7. Libra the Balance, Opal, Copper.

     
     	2. Taurus the Bull, Sapphire, Copper.

      	8. Scorpio the Scorpion, Aquamarine, Iron.

     
     	3. Gemini the Twins, Agate, Silver.

      	9. Sagittarius the Archer, Topaz, Tin.

     
     	4. Cancer the Crab, Emerald, Silver.

      	10. Capricorn the Goat, Ruby, Lead.

     
     	5. Leo the Lion, Chrysolite, Gold.

      	11. Aquarius the Water-bearer, Garnet, Lead.

     
     	6. Virgo the Virgin, Cornelian, Silver.

      	12. Pisces the Fishes, Amethyst, Tin.

     
    

         	PLATE

      	TO FACE PAGE.

     
     	I.

      	Primeval Talismans; Chinese, Indian, and Thibetan Talismans

      	14

     
     	II.

      	Indian and Thibetan Talismans (continued)

      	30

     
     	III.

      	Chinese and Japanese Talismans

      	40

     
     	IV.

      	Egyptian Talismans

      	60

     
     	V.

      	Egyptian Talismans

      	66

     
     	VI.

      	Egyptian Talismans

      	72

     
     	VII.

      	Egyptian and Gnostic Talismans

      	78

     
     	VIII.

      	Etruscan, Greek, Roman, and Oriental Talismans

      	94

     
     	IX.

      	Early Christian and Mediaeval Talismans

      	104

     
     	X.

      	Mediaeval Talismans

      	120

     
   

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

[p. 3]

  

PART I

  

AMULETS AND TALISMANS

  

CHAPTER I

Introduction.--The Psychic and Magnetic Influence of Talismans and Gems.

From remotest times, back even to the birth of humanity, Precious Stones and Talismans have been held in high estimation by all nations; the former, primarily because of their beauty, and the latter on account of their virtues, as transmitters of good luck and to avert misfortune. The association of Gems with power, civil and religious, has ever been noticeable; and to the fascination of antiquity may be added the allurement of mystery. Moreover, of the many and varied signs of wealth and luxury, jewels have played a most important part in the lives of the great, not only on account of their beauty but because they contained in a small compass the equivalent to a large sum of money and in times of danger could easily be concealed and carried from place to place.

[p. 4]

As tokens or symbols they conveyed joy and confidence to their owners, and were thought to give warning of coming events, inspiring courage and faith in the fearful, and the romances and tragedies in which they have played a part, together with their marked influence on the lives of individuals and nations, intensifies our interest in them so that it is little wonder that faith in the mysterious properties ascribed to them should have survived the growth of ages and still find so many believers in all countries. The philosophers of thousands of years ago, understanding their suitability as a medium for the transmission of astral forces and vibrations, invested them with much importance, attributing to them spiritual as well as material powers, special characteristics and medicinal and curative qualities.

In all probability gems had their origin in the very remote period of the Earth's history when it was still in a molten state subject to deluge and fire, before its solidification made it possible for vegetation to appear, and the translucent lustre of certain gems is due to the action of the floods which preceded the fiery volcanic period. The colouring which forms their greatest fascination is due to various metallic oxides in combination with oxygen which in varying quantities gives red,

[p. 5]

blue, yellow, or green colourings, as shown by the Ruby, Sapphire, Emerald, Topaz, and Amethyst.

It is most difficult to determine with any certainty in what country Precious Stones were first worn as ornaments, but the consensus of opinion seems to point to India, as far as recognised history is concerned, as their birthplace, for every rare and beautiful production of Nature, Gems and Pearls are associated with the East.

The earliest records of humanity do not, however, stop with known histories, for traces of man's love for gems are found in the discoveries of travellers and the traditions of South America, evidence proving an inheritance from past civilisations of great antiquity. There is an innate attraction to the marvellous in mankind, the imagination leading us to endow the rare and precious with peculiar qualities, particularly when the source of its beauty and rarity is not readily perceptible. It is akin to the extraordinary magnetic influence which one person may exercise over another without any tangible evidence of super-physical powers, or the mysterious attraction which the Magnet exercises over Iron, and establishes the inference that other minerals may be similarly endowed with properties at present unrecognised by our ordinary physical senses.

Modern research confirms the old teaching that

[p. 6]

the Universe was created from the four elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, in the order given, each growing as it were from its predecessor and all animated in turn by the Word breathed upon them at the Creation; this force, or energy, permeates all existing things from man, who is the highest of apparent physical manifestations down through the animal and vegetable kingdoms to the mineral, in which this energy, by reason of its very slow atomic changes, is least obvious. This Force manifests in the form of vibrations moving in waves through every composite part of the physical world, and, according to the condition of its medium, helping and giving power when in harmony, and thwarting or nullifying action when under unfavourable conditions. To this Force, or Etheric influence, is due the law of Evolution, or progress, which operates in every department of the Universe, not being confined to any one kingdom, but harmonising each with the other, being naturally most powerful in man whose evolution is the highest, and forms the medium through which man can act on the lower kingdoms and receive desired vibrations from them. We may thus interpret Plato's statement "that gems owe their origins to the stars" as an etheric influence acting on the auriferous matter which forms their composition.

[p. 7]

Evidence of undoubted authenticity of wonderful occult powers and experiences has within recent years become readily accessible to all. Psychometry [the art of sensing past happenings to individuals from the handling of something belonging to them, such as a glove or jewel] may be said to be established as a fact; and that this power is not confined to human affairs but permeates also the lower kingdoms is aptly illustrated by a personal experience which occurred during the summer of 1912. Mr. J. Wedgewood of the Theosophical Society, who is much interested in sensing colours from the touch of Precious Stones, and with whom I have frequently experimented in this direction, called one day at my office with a lady friend, Mrs. Russak, also of the Theosophical Society, and a well-known occultist. In the course of conversation Mr. Wedgewood said, "If you want to know anything about any of your stones, this lady can tell you," and, being desirous of getting a real test, I selected two new stones that I knew had never been used, as will be seen by what follows:--I handed one to Mrs. Russak which she held in the palm of her hand for a moment or so, and then gave me what was, as far as I could judge, a description of the processes of its formation; then, holding it out to me, went on to say, "I am sorry I cannot give you any events connected

[p. 8]

with this stone, but within the last month you have changed its centre of gravity." The stone was a Jargoon that I had only just received back from the lapidary with whom I had left it in the rough to be cut; it was a very decided oval in shape whilst in its rough state, and the lapidary had advised me to have practically half of it cut away, leaving the stone quite circular and only about half its original size, although much more valuable and finer in colour than it would have been had it been cut as an oval twice the size.

The second stone was a piece of Lapis Lazuli, and after holding this for a while the Seer said, "I only get warm friendly vibrations from this stone, and as far as I can tell it has had no history as a finished stone; but it must have come into your possession under very kindly conditions." The stone in question had been cut from a large piece of Lapis Lazuli given to me in its natural rough uncut form by a client, in recognition of quite a slight service I had rendered her, but which had played a rather important part in her life.

This ability to gauge and come into touch with the soul of things is unfortunately at present only confined to the few, although innate in every human being, and must be regarded as a latent sense which will be common to coming generations,

[p. 9]

opening up realms hitherto undreamt of and making a decided forward step in human evolution.

Confusion and doubt have arisen as to the exact stones mentioned by the early writers, owing to their elastic methods of describing all red stones as Rubies, all green stones as Emeralds, and all blue stones as Sapphires; this confusion has not been lessened by reason of the complexity of the many languages of the East, to say nothing of the artistic liberties taken by modern poets and authors, (who, probably unaware of the necessity for astronomical or astrological knowledge as a basis for the Zodiacal placing of the stones,) have taken our calendar as it stands for the Month stones with such embellishments as their fancy dictated.

The Precious Stones ascribed to the twelve months of the year were those worn in the breastplate of the High Priest, and it was believed that the Divine revelations obtained by the shining or dullness of the stones in the Urim and Thummim, due to some virtue inherent in them, were indicative as to whether the atonement had been accepted or not. These twelve stones, engraved with twelve anagrams of the name of God, had a mystic power over the Zodiac, harmonising the twelve Angels and good Spirits who had affinity with the twelve tribes of Israel.

[p. 10]

The origin of Talismans and Amulets is lost in the obscurity of the ages, but as far back as we can trace human records they are to be found; the terms Talisman and Amulet have become from indiscriminate use to be considered synonymous, but in his notes to the Archaeological Journal, the Rev. C. W. King says:--

"The meaning of these two words is entirely distinct. Talisman being the conception in the Arabic tongue of the Greek, meaning the influence of a planet, or the Zodiac, upon the person born under the same. A Talisman in olden times was, therefore, by its very nature a sigil, or symbolic figure, whether engraved in stone or metal, or drawn upon parchment or paper, and was worn both to procure love and to avert danger from its possessor. The latter purpose alone was the object of the Amulet, its Latin signification being to do away with, or baffle, its root being Amalior. Pliny cites the word as the country-folk name for the Cyclamen which ought to be planted in every human home, because where it is grown poisonous drugs have no power to harm, on which account they call it the flower, Amuletum."

The belief in them is by no means so universal as in olden times, and to the thoughtful person many of the attributes claimed for them cannot be admitted; at the same time, with the growing

[p. 11]

knowledge of finer forces opening up new powers to mankind and to which we are slowly coming into touch, many people are prepared to admit that there may be some active power in a thought made concrete in the form of a Talisman or Amulet which may be made for some specific purpose, or for particular wear, becoming to the wearer a continual reminder of its purpose and undoubtedly strengthening him in his aims and desires.

Symbols, frequently of a religious nature, have formed the basis of Talismans and Charms from earliest times, holding a very important place in the affairs of humanity, for symbolism was a power before civilisation was evolved, and by its recognition of a certain order in physical affairs it was undoubtedly a great factor in the establishment of human laws. In modern religions this law is recognised by the use of each symbol in accordance with the character of ceremonial worship, colour also playing a very important part in the service.

Too frequently one hears a religion condemned as idolatrous because its God or Gods were typified in human or animal form. That it was the virtue the figure represented, and not the figure itself that was venerated, is ignored; but Christians would be indignant if the use of the Lamb and Eagle as symbols in their

[p. 12]

services caused them to be accused of idolatrous worship of these emblems!

The force of the Spirit behind the symbol is very apparent with regard to the Cross, as may be understood when we think of the martyrs who have endured unflinchingly the most excruciating tortures human brain could devise, holding fast to their faith by this symbol.

The savage had his Totem, which he believed gave him certain virtues, and helped him to success in his combats and in his struggle for existence.

Those of our readers who have any knowledge of Astrology and Planetary influences will readily understand the sympathy between any metal, or stone, ruled by any particular planet, and any person coming under the influence of that planet.

In the writing of the philosophers and Alchemists of the Middle Ages directions are given that these Talismans should be made, or commenced, under favourable aspects, so that the Work may receive the vitalising rays proceeding from the planet represented.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

CHAPTER II

Talismans of Primitive Races--The Axe--Arrow-head--The Swastika--The Serpent--The Interlaced Triangles.

Amongst primitive races the Axe was the symbol for Chief, God, or Divine Being, and had its origin in the Neolithic or later Stone Age, which ended in Europe about 2000 B.C.

It was doubtless the earliest weapon of prehistoric man, and in addition to its uses as a weapon would have been in constant service in clearing the way when moving from place to place, and in cutting and shaping the wood used in forming his shelters. This being so, it is easy to conceive of its association with strength, power, and utility; and its symbolic use to express these virtues is a logical conclusion, whilst from remains found in various parts of the world it is evident that its use for this purpose was universal, and amongst primitive races the Axe became the recognised hieroglyphic for God, Chief, or Ruler; moreover, as a symbol of power, its place is taken by the State Sword

[p. 14]

which is carried before the King at important ceremonies even to the present day.

Amongst the remains of the Stone Age, Talismans formed in the shape of Axe-heads have been found pierced with holes for suspension, and Illustration No. 13 (Plate I) is an example in Slate of the Neolithic period found in Portugal, and its ornament is the Divine in its feminine aspect as represented by prehistoric man, who placed the feminine first in his beliefs, tracing his own descent and his position in the tribe through the Mother.

Illustration No. 16 (Plate I) is of a blue flint Talisman from Egypt; and No. 15 (Plate I) is in Haematite, and comes from the Upper Congo, where the natives of the present day regard it as an effective Talisman against disease.

The Arrow-head in its symbolism had a similar significance to that of the Axe, and in Japan flint Arrow-heads were thought to have been rained from Heaven, or dropped by flying spirits. They were very popular in the early days of the present civilisation as Amulets to protect the wearer from disease and to avert the Evil Eye; whilst throughout Europe they were regarded as the product of Elves (Elf-shots, or fairy weapons), water in which they had been dropped or dipped, being considered very efficacious in.

Click to enlarge
PLATE I. PRIMEVAL, CHINESE, INDIAN AND THIBETAN TALISMANS.

[p. 15]

curing feminine ailments (see Illustration No. 17, Plate I).

The Swastika, one of the oldest and certainly the most universal Talisman known, can be traced back to the Neolithic Age, and it has been found engraved on stone implements of this period. It is to be met with in all parts of the Old and New Worlds and on the most ancient ruins and remains, it thus living through the Ages in active use down to the present time. In spite of its antiquity and the fact that some writers quote it as being in use among the Egyptians, we have not been able to find it, as a symbol used by them, amongst their remains in the British Museum, and authorities whom we have consulted are also unaware of its existence in Egyptian records.

It was used long before its present name was given it, and extensive discussion has been carried on as to whether its correct form is with its arms turned to the left, or to the right, without, as far as we have been able to ascertain, any definite conclusion being arrived at. Both forms seem equally popular, and are so found in all countries; whilst on the rock walls of the Buddhist caves of India they are used in great numbers, with their arms turned both ways often in the course of the same inscription.

[p. 16]

In Sanskrit its name means Happiness, Pleasure, Good Luck, Su--good, or well; Asti--being, making it = "Good Being"; and it is still used in India, China, and Japan as an Amulet for long life, good fortune, and good luck.

The illustration shown on Plate I, No. 14 is from a shield of the Bronze Age, the background being of dull red enamel, and the arms turned to the left; whilst No. 18, which turns to the right, is taken from between the feet of a statue of Buddha from Ceylon, and is also commonly found in the footprints of this Deity, sometimes both forms being used in the same impression. In China the Swastika sign is pronounced Wan, meaning a great number, a multitude, great happiness, longevity; both forms are used, but most commonly that which is turned to the left. The Jains of India regard it as a symbol of human progress, the right arm A (Illustration No. 18) representing the lowest stage of life, as protoplasm; the lower arm B indicating the soul's evolution, and through plant and animal life C representing human evolution, and D the spiritual life, the plane on which the soul is entirely freed from matter by the practice of the three jewels, right belief, right knowledge, and right conduct. In their temples at their service of baptism or its equivalent rite, this symbol is traced on the fore,

[p. 17]

head of the candidate as a benediction for protection from evil influences. It is used as an emblem of the highest of all, the Almighty maker of the heavens and earth, indicating the Divine Force radiating through the Universe; it is also regarded as a sign of Benediction and good augury amongst Buddhists and all Eastern nations, and as a symbol of the Sun, when represented turned to the left, the Autumnal period, and when turned to the right the Vernal.

It has been identified as the Hammer of Thor, the Lord of Thunder and Lightning, the God of the Air; and amongst the Scandinavians was believed to have dominion over the Demons of the Air, and the coat-of-arms of the Isle of Man--a Swastika formed of three human legs, is a legacy from the early settlers of their race. It may occasionally be met with, having five or six limbs, and is then probably intended to represent the Wheel of the law, or Buddha's Wheel; whilst a three-limbed figure is much used in the Punjaub and other parts of India by the Mohajin Log (the banking, or moneyed class) as a charm which was not only worn, but used as an ornament in their houses, generally over the door.

It is also the symbol indicated by the silent ascetic sitting with arms folded over the breast, the legs crossed, and each foot placed on the

[p. 18]

opposite thigh, which accounts for this pose, so familiar amongst the images of the Indian gods.

Dr. Eitel says this symbol was frequently cast on bells during the Middle Ages, and he instances as being still in existence those of Appleby, Scotheim, Waldingham, Bishop's Norton, and Barkwith in Lincolnshire, Hathersage in Derbyshire, Maxborough in Yorkshire and many others.

The fact that this symbol is found universally throughout India, Africa, North and South America, Asia and Europe forms a very strong argument for a common origin lost in the far distant past, and is considered by some writers as evidence of a connection between these continents and the lost continent of Atlantis.

The Serpent throughout all ages has appealed to the imagination of man, to whom its various characteristics afforded opportunities for symbolic expression; from its length of life it has been used as the symbol of Eternity, and as a Talisman for Longevity, Health, and Vitality, and when depicted with its tail in its mouth (this form being particularly noticeable in ancient rings) it indicates perpetual union, whilst to the Aztecs, who used it in this way as a symbol of the Sun, it signified unending Time, ever beginning, ever creating, and ever destroying, and was considered to have great protective and enduring virtues.

[p. 19]

When shown coiled, its folds signify succession of ages, and if the tail is hidden, unfathomable antiquity (see Illustration No. 22, Plate I, which is taken from an ancient Japanese example in the British Museum).

In primeval days, serpents of the Python family attained huge dimensions, and would naturally be held in dread and awe by early man; and in all primitive religions we find the belief held that the soul of man passed at death into a serpent to undergo regeneration and renewal, so symbolised because the serpent casts its skin once a year and becomes a new serpent.

To the Eastern mind the Sun in its passage through the heavens formed a curve similar to that of the Snake, and by its progression spirally, with great quickness at will, though without feet and hands or organs by which other animals perform their movements, it was supposed to symbolise lightning or fire, the vitalising principle of life in its good aspect, and, when antagonistic, it became typical of evil and misfortune.

In Egypt the Serpent in the form of the Uraeus was worn round the head as a mark of Royalty, and to symbolise Divine Power, Wisdom, and Energy, every tomb of the Kings yet opened has the Serpent sculptured erect on each side of the doorway to guard and protect the body within.

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] It first became a type of the Evil One when this form was assumed by Sut (after killing Osiris) in his endeavour to escape from the vengeance of Horus.

In Indian religions the Serpent is known as Ananta, or endless, a symbol of infinite duration and Eternity; Vishnu, the Creator, is represented sleeping on this serpent whose numerous heads form a canopy over the God, each giving constant attention to his expected awakening, when new creations and a new order of things will be established, and was valued as a talisman for Knowledge, Wisdom, and Understanding.

Serpents were sacred to the Great God of Medicine because of the idea that they have the power of renewing their youth by casting their skins, hence the wand of Aesculapius is represented as entwined by two serpents, the emblem of Medical Science, and in the temple of Epidaurus, the most important sanatorium of the Metropolis, a large serpent was kept, typical of Health and Vitality. As a symbol, it was used in connection with Ceres, Mercury, and Diana in their most beneficent qualities; whilst Python in monstrous form represented all that was evil.

Solomon's Seal, also known as the Interlaced Triangle, is another ancient Talisman that has been universally used in every religion; but though

[p. 21]

it is said to have been the symbol by which the wise King ruled the Genii, it could not have originated with him as its use dates back much further than the Jewish Dispensation.

As a Talisman it was considered all-powerful, being the perfect sign of the Absolute, and was worn for protection against all casualties, dangers, and mischief, and to preserve its wearer from all evil.

In its composition the Triangle with its apex upwards symbolises Good, and with the inverted Triangle, Evil: the Triangle with its apex up being typical of the Trinity that exists in all religions; in India, China, and Japan its three angles represent Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer or Regenerator; in Egypt it represented Osiris, Isis, and Horus, and in the Christian Church the Holy Trinity. As a whole it stood for the elements of fire and spirit, composed of the three virtues, Love, Truth, and Wisdom. The Triangle with its apex downward represented the element of water, and typified the material world, or the three enemies of the soul, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and the cardinal sins, Envy, Hatred, and Malice.

Therefore, the meaning of the two Triangles interlaced, is the triumph of spirit over matter,

[p. 22]

and at the commencement of our present civilisation was considered an all-powerful Talisman, particularly when used with either a Tau Cross, the Hebrew Yod, or the Crux Ansata in the centre.

The Illustration No. 23, Plate I, is from an Indian form of the Talisman, and has the Sun's symbol in the centre.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

CHAPTER III

The Tau Cross--Aum Ma Ni Pad Me Hum--Indian Talismans--Ganesa the Elephant-headed--Hangman the Monkey God--The Eight Glorious Emblems of Buddha--The Wheel of Life--The Conch Shell--The Two Fishes--The Lucky Diagram--The Lotus--The Frog--The Three Gems.

OF the many and various Symbols and Talismans which have come down to us through the ages, the Tau Cross is one of the most ancient, and is undoubtedly the prototype of all modern crosses; it probably had its origin in the double-axe hieroglyphic used by primitive man, and symbolised the Divine attributes of rule and power appertaining to the single axe as mentioned in the previous chapter, and is still recognised as an emblem of authority in the form of the Gavel, or Mallet, with which the auctioneer conducts sales of property and the chairman controls meetings both in public and in the various lodges of secret societies. Formerly it was also universally worn as a talisman of powerful efficacy to protect its wearer from diseases of an inflammatory nature and against bites of serpents and other venomous reptiles (see Illustration No. 19, Plate I). Moses,

[p. 24]

who from his training in the Egyptian temples would be familiar with its symbolic significance, also used this cross, with the brazen serpent attached, to save the Israelites in the Wilderness when they were afflicted by the fiery serpents. This form of cross is to be found in all known religions of both hemispheres, and has ever been regarded as the symbol of eternal life and of regeneration, and in relation to this, John Dudley, writing in 1846, says: "that such deep mysterious meaning was possibly intended by our Saviour dying upon the Cross, giving spiritual life and immortality to all mankind." It was also the mark mentioned in Ezekiel ix. 4 which was set in the foreheads of those destined for exemption from Divine punishment in Jerusalem; and the Tau is conspicuous in various old stained-glass representations of the subject depicted as described in Scripture. A further instance of significance is that it also figured on the roll-call of the Roman Legions, a Tau Cross being placed against the names of all those who had survived the battle, and a Theta against the slain.

The Tau Cross was also the sign adopted by Anthony the Copt, an Egyptian hermit gifted in the cure of Erysipelas (a diffusive inflammatory affection of the skin) and as an Amulet against St. Anthony's Fire, as this disease was subsequently

[p. 25]

called, this cross came into great favour, particularly among the Jews, who used it in conjunction with various magical formulas both for Erysipelas and Epilepsy, or the falling sickness, as stated by the Rev. C. W. King. We also learn from Grose that a brotherhood known as the Order of St. Anthony was instituted in 1095 by one Gaston Frank. The friars of this order made it their object in life to minister to those afflicted with St. Anthony's Fire, the relics of this saint being believed to be most efficacious in the cure of this complaint. We are also told that this fraternity wore a black habit with the letter T in blue on their breasts, this symbol being known as St. Anthony's Cross. As this saint was habitually invoked for the cure of Epilepsy as well as Erysipelas, the Tau Cross became regarded as a Talisman against both maladies.

In the Archaeological Journal we note the following 

"Among Stothard's effigies are those of Sir Roger de Bois and lady, each of whom wears on the right shoulder a circular badge graven with a Tau Cross on which appears the word ANTHON," thus testifying to the fact that Sir Roger also belonged to the Brotherhood, whilst in Ireland to this day St. Anthony's Cross is still used as a charm against sickness.

[p. 26]

Aum, the mystic emblem of the Deity, was first introduced into Europe by the translation of the Gita, in which we are told it is forbidden to be pronounced aloud, and in its complete expression is still in universal use as a Talisman throughout Asia. It is usually spelt om, but being tri-literal seems, according to most Sanskrit scholars, better expressed by AUM, or AOM, or AWM, being formed of the three Sanskrit letters that are best so expressed. The date generally believed for its universal use is the thirteenth century B.C. It represents the Hindu Triad, or triform Deity, three in one, A the Creator, U the Preserver, and M the Destroyer, or Transformer, and is the image of the Ancient of Days; and in the Book of the Pitris it is written: "The husband is as ancient as the wife, and the wife is as ancient as the husband, and the son is also as ancient as the husband and wife, and the one that contains all these is called AUM."

The signification of the invocation AUM MA NI PAD ME HUM (AUM! the Jewel in the Lotus HUM) is therefore very important, and accounts for the great veneration in which it is held (see Illustration No. 12a, Plate I), and in Buddhism in Thibet, by Waddell, we note that it is stated in the MANI KAHBUM that this charm will bring the greatest happiness, prosperity, all knowledge, and the

[p. 27]

means of deliverance from enemies and all evil on earth, whilst the devout firmly believe that as they revolve the magical sentence within their prayer-wheels by day and night they are preventing the series of re-births otherwise inevitable, and that when their lives have ended here they will pass straightway to the Paradise of Buddha, for the

"Aum closes re-birth among the gods,
  Ma among the Titans,
  Ni as a man,
  Pad as a beast,
  Me as a Tantalus, and
  Hum as an inhabitant of Hell."

To each of these words is given the distinctive colour of these six conditions of re-birth:

"Aum the godly white,
  Ma the Titanic blue,
  Ni the human yellow,
  Pad the animal green,
  Me the tantalic red,
  Hum hellish black."

There is also a special Rosary used for the repetition of this charm, composed either of the Conch Shell, or crystal beads; in use, the right hand is passed through the Rosary, which hangs down knotted end up, and the hand with the

[p. 28]

thumb upward is carried to the breast and held there. On the first syllable AUM being pronounced, the first bead is grasped by raising the thumb and quickly depressing the tip to reach the bead against the outer side of the second joint of the first finger, during the remainder of the sentence the bead, still grasped, is gently revolved to the right, and on conclusion of the invocation is dropped down the palm side of the string; and with another AUM, the next bead is proceeded with until, on conclusion of each cycle of the rosary, each of the keeper beads are touched, saying respectively,

Om!     Ah!     Hum!

In countries where Buddhism is practised, particularly in Thibet and India, this charm is depicted on silk flags, flown from lofty flagstaffs, so that when the flag is blown out by the wind the sentence may be wafted to heaven to bring down blessings to the entire district.

The prayer-wheel, which contains this mystic sentence printed on long lengths of silk ribbon coiled on cylinders, is revolved by the Lama priest sunwise, and he is very strict in this observance, believing that the reversing of the prayer would also reverse the results of the invocation.

Aum is recognised throughout India as an emblem of the Deity, carrying with its pronunciation

[p. 29]

a thousand good things to the faithful; and a Brahmin teacher when addressing an assembly will use this word when commencing his discourse, and also at the close, so that he may not lose his knowledge and understanding.

Indian Talismans.--In India we find, as in most countries, that Talismans very frequently have religious origins, and representations of the Deities are in common use for the protection of their wearers, as well as for their spiritual and material well-being. A belief in a Trinity of gods is universal, with Brahma as the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver and Restorer, and Siva the Destroyer or Regenerator. In the course of the developments of the various sects Vishnu, originally regarded as a manifestation of Solar energy, became the supreme god, and the worshippers of Vishnu attribute to him all the qualities of the triune gods, his image and various symbols being amongst the most common of Indian Talismans. He is believed to have ten Avataras, or Incarnations, in which his spirit descended in human form to effect great reformations and to regenerate the world; the tenth incarnation, yet to come, is for the final destruction of the wicked, and to regenerate and purify the world.

Gotama Buddha, the founder of Buddhism, was Vishnu's ninth incarnation, and his images and

[p. 30]

symbols are extremely popular Talismans for protection and good fortune. Buddhism, which was founded about the fifth century B.C., has established itself throughout India, China, Ceylon, Japan, Thibet, and Central Asia, inculcating a very high system of theology, the ultimate end of which is Union with the Divine. The Brahmins place Buddha foremost amongst the gods, as opposed to Brahma of the Hindus.

Amongst other sects, Siva is regarded as the greatest of the gods, and there is much overlapping amongst these beliefs, and numerous minor gods exist, typifying various virtues and gifted with powers and attributes which bring them into intimate relations with humanity, for which reason their symbols and personifications are in common use as Talismans. Talismans of Ganesa, the elephant-headed god, the son of Siva, (who is regarded as the God of Wisdom and Prudence, and the Remover of obstacles,) are always worn when any important undertaking is begun. He is represented with four arms holding respectively a Lotus, a Shell, a Goad or Club, and the Discus or Wheel, and the rotundity of his body is symbolic of his high importance and good standing, and not, as might be supposed, intended as evidence of good living (see Illustration No. 28, Plate II).

Hanuman, the Monkey god, is the most popular

Click to enlarge
PLATE 2. INDIAN AND THIBETAN TALISMANS.

[p. 31]

form of Talisman for Luck, Health, and Good Fortune amongst the Hindus, and his wonderful exploits are a constant theme of interest from childhood to old age.

He was unequalled in learning, knowledge of medicine, and magic, and his skill and cunning in defeating his enemies were superhuman; he fought for Rama, who was an incarnation of Vishnu, performing on his behalf prodigious feats of valour. On one occasion, whilst fighting against Ravana the King of Demons, his enemies greased his enormous tail and set it on fire, but only to their own discomfiture, for with it Hanuman burnt down Lanka, their capital city (see Plate 2, No. 29). The eight glorious emblems of Buddha are all used as Talismans; they consist of the Wheel of the Law, the Conch Shell, the Golden Fish, the Lucky Diagram, the Lotus, the Umbrella, the Vase, and the Trumpet of Victory.

Buddha at his birth had the marks of two feet upon his head and a wheel, or disc, in his hand, by which symbols the Pandits foretold that he would become a great ruler.

The Wheel of Life was drawn by Buddha in a rice field from grains of rice, to illustrate his teaching that the perpetual succession of cause and effect during life resembles the turning of a wheel; and the symbol is worn as a wheel of fortune, so that

[p. 32]

misfortunes may roll by and good fortune come uppermost. The wheel was also used to explain the vision seen by a disciple on other spheres, the five spokes divided the Hells, the place of Animals, Ghosts, or evil spirits, Gods, and men (illustrated Plate II, No. 34).

The Conch Shell was taken from a demon of the sea by Krishna, who used it for a horn (see Illustration No. 35, Plate II), and is prized as a Talisman for oratory and learning, as well as a bringer of wealth, the latter being no doubt suggested by the fact that shells were the current coin of primitive people.

The Fish is the symbol of the first incarnation of Vishnu, who in this form saved Manu from the Flood to become the progenitor of the new race. Because of its fertility it is used as a Talisman for increase of riches, and is illustrated on Plate II, No. 32.

The Lucky Diagram is very common in Thibet, and is worn as a Talisman for Longevity (see Illustration No. 30, Plate II).

The Lotus expresses the idea of superhuman origin, as it grows from the body of the water without contact with the solid earth, and no matter how muddy the water may become still preserves its purity undefiled. It is one of the symbols of Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, who is the goddess

[p. 33]

of Fortune and of Beauty; it is worn as a Talisman of Good Luck and Good Fortune, and as Lakshmi is particularly favourable for children it is worn to avert all childish diseases and accidents, as well as to protect from the Evil Eye (see Illustration No. 33, Plate II).

Frogs made of amber or gilded metal are also frequently worn as amulets by children in Burmah, that they may not decline in health through the evil glance. Brightly coloured ribbons are hung upon houses and attached to the heads and tails of horses to distract the attention of the Evil Eye, and protect the animals from harm, which probably accounts for the origin of the gaudy decorations we frequently see in our own country tied to the heads and tails of fine cart-horses on their way to the fair or horse show.

The Three Gems Talisman (Illustrated on Plate II, No. 31) is to be met with wherever Buddhism is established, and symbolises Buddha His Word, and the Church; it is worn to promote the three virtues, Endurance, Courage, and Obedience, the Buddhist Law.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

CHAPTER IV

Talisman for Wisdom--Buddha's Footprints--The Dorje--Knots--Chinese Talismans--The Trigrams--The Five Bats--The Goose--Stork--Pine Tree--Peach--Lucky Sentence--The Phoenix--The Dragon--Horse Hoof--Siva's Charm--The Money Sword--Red in Talismans--The Lock--Bells--The Tortoise--The Tiger--Pigs--The Black Cat.

Illustration No. 24, Plate II is a Talisman for Wisdom and Perseverance, and is of great power amongst the Hindus; the circle is indicative of infinity, the border of triangles signifies that all nature is subject to the laws of the Trinity, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva; the serpent is the symbol of Wisdom and Perseverance, and indicates that without these attributes the revelation of the higher truths cannot be attained. The seven-knotted Bamboo represents the seven degrees of power of invocation which Initiates must acquire.

Impressions of Buddha's Footprints, another very popular Talisman (see Illustration No. 25, Plate II), are to be met with not only in the form of personal ornaments, but in gigantic proportions of which an example may be seen at the British Museum, beautifully carved and ornamented with

[p. 35]

numerous sacred emblems. The most celebrated "footprint" is on Adam's Peak, near Colombo, which attracts from all countries pilgrims who have adopted the religion of Buddha, Mohammed, or the Hindu gods, each claiming it as the Impression of their respective Deities.

Sir Gardiner Williamson says that the Mohammedans of Egypt show a footprint of the Prophet which gives the name to a village on the banks of the Nile--Attar a Nebbee. Herodotus mentions the impression of the foot of Hercules, two cubits in length, on a rock near the bank of the River Tyras, in Scythia. In Italy, tablets dedicated to Isis have been found. From this we gather that this practice of carving footprints on rocks and stone is one which dates from the remote Bronze Age, and that the area over which they are found embraces the whole world.

In Thibet, the Lamaist Sceptre, or Dorje, the thunderbolt of Indra, is greatly valued as a Talisman (see Illustration No. 26, Plate II) . This symbol is prized as a Talisman against Demons, and to bring fruitfulness. Indra, as the deity of the atmosphere, governs the weather and dispenses the rain, sending forth lightnings and thunder against Ahi the demon of drought, whom he overcomes with his thunderbolt, compelling him to pour down the fertilising showers.

[p. 36]

Knots are used in India and Thibet as Talismans for Longevity and to avert the Evil Eye (see Illustration No. 27, Plate II), the Knot being considered potent to bind that which is good and precious, and to prove an obstacle or hindrance to that which is evil; for instance, at the time of marriage knots are lucky, and the ceremonies connected with a Chinese marriage include knotted red and green ribbons, which are held by the newly wedded pair, the bride holding the green ribbon whilst the bridegroom seizes the red; and in our own country the true-lover's knot is frequently used in the decoration of the wedding dress; but at childbirth and death, there must be no knots about the person to hamper the coming or going of the spirit.

Chinese Talismans. The origin of the ancient religion of China is unknown, and the faith has been handed down from generation to generation from periods many centuries B.C. It is based on the belief that the Universe was ruled by Divinities arranged in three groups, one ruling the heavens, the second the earth, (having dominion over mountains,) streams, and vegetation, and the third ruling the affairs of mankind. Illustration No. 21, Plate I is a Talisman that had its origin at this period, and was given to the Emperor Fu-hsi, the founder of the Chinese

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] Empire, by a mystical dragon horse which rose from the waters of the Yellow River about 2800 B.C. These Trigrams, known as Pa-kwa, formed the basis of the written characters introduced by this wise Emperor. They are familiar to all Chinese, being worn as a Talisman for long life and to ward off evil influences. The Talisman is made of all sizes and shapes, from large ones on boards, one or two feet square, down to tiny medals for personal wear, no larger than a sixpence. It is also frequently used in circular form, as shown in the central part of the Bat Talisman (No. 20, Plate I), and is known as Tho, the symbol of longevity. The Pa-kwa Trigrams are based upon the ancient theory of the Yang Yin, or two first causes, indicated by the circular figure divided by a spiral line in the centre of the Talisman into two equal gadroons, which represent the Creative principle in its masculine and feminine manifestations; the active principle being Yang, and the passive Yin. This symbol also represents Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon, Light and Darkness, and everything that is in contrast, or positive and negative.

The whole lines in the figures are described as strong in contrast to the short-divided lines, which are weak, the whole representing the two forms of subtle matter which forms the composition

[p. 38]

of all things. This Talisman is also a favourite in Japan and Thibet.

Confucianism, advocating the fulfilment of all duties to the utmost of one's power, in accordance with the position in life, socially and officially, ranging from the love of the child for his father to the Emperor's responsibility for his people's welfare, is still firmly believed in at the present time; and the Talisman of the five bats, the Weefuh, is for the five great happinesses that all men desire, Luck, Wealth, Longevity, Health, and Peace. The five bats are frequently used alone, but sometimes, as in Illustration No. 20, Plate I, the Trigrams, or some other symbol, is used in conjunction.

Two Bats signify good wishes; a Goose is depicted as a Talisman for domestic felicity, and a Deer for success and honour in study; a Stork, or Pine Tree, and a fabulous Peach which takes a thousand years in ripening, for longevity and good fortune. Another graceful way of wishing a guest good luck is to depict one of these symbols, or a lucky sentence, at the bottom of his tea-cup, such as "May your happiness know no bounds," enclosed by a border of the five bats.

The Phoenix, like the bird Feng, is a mystical bird said to live 500 or 600 years and then to build for itself in the desert a funeral pyre of dried grasses

[p. 39]

and sweet spices. To this it sets fire by fluttering its wings whilst hovering over it, is then consumed, but from the ashes it rises again renewed in youth and in its gorgeous plumage; an idea appropriated by old-established fire insurance offices, the symbol of which is familiar to all.

The Phoenix is believed by the Chinese to uphold their Empire and preside over its destiny; it is also worn as a Talisman for Longevity and Conjugal Happiness; whilst in the mystic sense it typifies the- whole world, its head the heavens, its eyes the Sun, its beak the Moon, its wings the wind, its feet the earth, and its tail the trees and plants.

To the Japanese the Phoenix, or ho-wo bird, is a Talisman for Rectitude, Obedience, Fidelity, Justice, and Benevolence, and they consider it a manifestation of the Sun, its appearance on earth being considered a portent of great events. The torii, a kind of gate elaborately carved and decorated at the entrances of Shinto temples, is erected for the Phoenix to perch upon should it visit the earth (see Illustration No. 40, Plate III). This fabled bird has also played a conspicuous part in British and foreign heraldry.

The Dragon is symbolical of everything imposing and terrible, and forms the Imperial coat-of-arms;

[p. 40]

the Emperor's throne being called the Dragon One.

There are three forms of Dragon--the "Lung," or sky dragon, the "Li," which lives in the sea, and the "Kiao," which inhabits the marshes. The dragon is worn for Longevity and Domestic Felicity (see Illustration No. 38, Plate III).

The type of the Dragon was thought to have been the boa-constrictor, until the researches of geology brought to light in the iguanodon such a near counterpart of the dragon that this is now regarded as more probably its prototype. The Lung is represented as a dragon-headed horse which carries on its back the book of the Law. It is very popular in Thibet, where it is known as the Wind Horse; but the Lamas have substituted for the book of the Law the emblems of the three gems (see Illustration No. 31, "Plate II"}), which include the Buddhist Law, and is thus worn by the Thibetans to bring material gain, wealth, and good luck; in this form it is painted on luck-bringing flags, which are hung from the ridges of the houses and in the vicinity of dwellings. The all-potent horse-shoe is not used by the Chinese, but the hoof of a horse has to them the same preservative virtue as the horse-shoe with us. Another charm extensively used in China amongst women, is a small gold or silver triangle bearing two swords

Click to enlarge
PLATE 3. CHINESE AND JAPANESE TALISMANS

[p. 41]

suspended from the outer angles, and a trident from the centre of the base; on the triangles lucky characters frequently appear (see Illustration No. 39, Plate III). This is undoubtedly an imported Hindu Talisman of Siva, who is regarded as the Regenerator and Controller of reproductive power; and in addition to the acquirement of these qualities, this Talisman is worn for protection against Ghosts and Goblins who are under the control of Siva, and written charms of triangular shape are frequently made for this purpose.

The Money Sword is regarded as all-powerful against ill-luck to the house and against the machinations of evil spirits, and it attracts cash to its fortunate possessor when suspended from right to left above the head of his bed. This Cash Sword is composed of two iron rods along which a quantity of coins, having holes in the centre, are tied with red silk, making a potent charm which is very popular (see Illustration No. 44, Plate III).

For talismanic purposes, Red is indispensable in China. It is interwoven with the pig-tail, and must form a part of children's clothing. Written charms must also be in red ink on yellow paper to be efficacious against the multitudinous ill-omens and evil spirits which seem to surround the Chinaman, and for this reason all Imperial decrees are written in vermilion. One of the commonest

[p. 42]

amulets worn by an only son is a small silver lock (see Illustration No. 45, Plate III). The father collects coins from about a hundred different heads of families and has them exchanged for silver, which is converted into a native padlock used to fasten a silver chain round the boy's neck; this it is believed will preserve him from evil spirits, lock him to life, and contribute to his health and longevity.

Bells are also worn by Chinese children to avert the Evil Eye and preserve the teeth.

The Tortoise is regarded as a symbol of the Universe in China, Japan, and India, its dome-shaped back representing the vault of the sky, its belly the earth which moves upon the waters, whilst the great age to which it attains and the endurance and strength of its shell make it a fitting emblem of the longevity for which it is worn as a Talisman. It also repels black magic.

It represents the feminine principle in Nature and, as such, it penetrated to the West, so that in Greek and Roman art Aphrodite and Venus are frequently found associated with the Tortoise, whose virtues or gifts were said by Pliny to number sixty-six (see Illustration No. 36, Plate III).

The Tiger is the god of the gambler in China, and a tiger's tooth is regarded as a Talisman for

[p. 43]

good luck in speculation and in games of chance; whilst the claws and whiskers are worn as love charms, and for success and good fortune generally.

Pigs are also considered lucky; and luck-bringers in the shape of little pigs made of gold and silk are worn to attract fortune's favours, but the black cat, which in our own country is regarded as a mascot, is not favoured by the Chinese, who believe it to be a harbinger of poverty, misfortune, and sickness.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

CHAPTER V

The Pear Charm--"Show Fu"--Jade--The Blue Gown for Longevity--Japanese--The Tiger--Wolf--Fox--The Thunder, Fire, and Echo--The Fan of Power--Hotei, the God of Contentment--The Eagle--The Millet Dumpling--Carp--Sacred Dog--Stork--Tortoise--Crane--Child's Hand--Mitsu-Domoe--Hammer of Daikoku--The Keys--Anchor--Crystal Ball--Leaf Talisman--Ota-fu-ku--Bow--Temple at Ise.

A Personal charm, the efficacy of which depends entirely on the merits of its owner, consists of five thousand open dots arranged in the shape of a pear on a piece of paper; each dot being filled up when some good action is performed. There is a standard of value for each meritorious action; he who is able to claim credit for repairing a road, building a bridge, or digging a well, may fill up ten dots on his paper, whilst the cure of a disease, or to give enough money to purchase a grave counts thirty dots. To be the originator of a scheme of mutual benefit to all allows fifty dots to be filled up.

There is a debit as well as a credit side to this charm, and, therefore, he who reproves another unjustly has to fill up three extra dots; and the levelling of a tomb, which is a serious offence, adds

[p. 45]

fifty dots more to the account. At the end of the year the account is balanced, and all outstanding dots are settled by fasting and charitable deeds. When all the dots have been duly filled up the paper is burnt, so that the record may pass to the other world and be placed to its owner's credit.

All through life the Chinaman regards himself as surrounded by demons, to combat whom innumerable charms and amulets are necessary. A favourite charm to keep evil spirits from crossing the threshold is a leaf of the Sweet Flag (Acorus gramineus), or Artemisia, nailed on either side of the doorway; always providing that the leaf is placed in position early in the morning of the fifth Moon. The Chinese New Year starts when the Sun and Moon are in conjunction, in Aquarius, so that the fifth Moon would be at the time of the conjunction in Gemini.

Another household charm is to write "Show Fu" (long life and happiness) in red on a piece of paper and to fix it opposite, or upon the door, to ensure prosperity and good fortune.

Jade has always been prized by the Chinese for its talismanic virtues, and is used extensively in various forms for personal adornment, particularly as a wristlet to give physical strength and protect from all ills.

[p. 46]

Kwan Chung, writing in the seventh century B.C., relates that a piece of Jade symbolises to the Chinese nine of the highest attainments of Man--

"In its smoothness he recognises Benevolence,
  In its high polish--Knowledge Emblematic,
  In its unbending firmness--Righteousness,
  In its modest harmlessness--Virtuous Actions.
  In its rarity and spotlessness--Purity,
  In the way it exposes every flaw--Ingenuousness,
  In that it passes from hand to hand without being sullied--Moral Conduct,
  And in that when struck it gives forth a sweet note which floats sharply and distinctly to a distance--Music."

It is for these qualities that the Chinaman regards Jade as the most precious of his possessions, both as a diviner of judgments and as a valued charm of happy omen.

As a birthday gift to parents a long silken gown of the deepest blue is frequently presented as a Talisman for longevity. In reality it is the shroud which, sooner or later, will be worn by its owner to the grave; but, as a man is thought by the Chinese to lay in a large stock of renewed vital energy on his birthday, it is considered a

[p. 47]

fitting robe for that occasion, being made by young unmarried girls with a long life (it is presumed) before them. In a year which has an intercalary month, its capacity for prolonging life is considered to be of unusually high degree; moreover, it is embroidered all over with the word "longevity" in thread of gold, the influence of this word being, it is believed, absorbed into the being of its wearer, so that he may enjoy plenty of health and vigour and prolong his life. It is considered an act of the utmost piety to present one of these garments to an aged parent or relative who, decked in this gorgeous shroud, receives the congratulations of children and friends on festive occasions.

Japanese. Buddhism when it came to Japan about the sixth century was readily accepted and allowed to establish itself side by side with Shinto beliefs. A good many of its tenets and symbols having been adopted and being still in use at the present time, Buddhist Talismans similar to those worn in India and China are prevalent, the god Fulgen being regarded as an incarnation of Buddha. The Shintos believe their country was the birthplace of the Sun Goddess, whose descendants they are, being also predestined to rule the country for ever and ever; thus it is that ancestor-worship forms the basis of Shinto beliefs. The

[p. 48]

country, it is believed, was in the first place begotten by two gods, whose actions and impulses it is considered impossible for man with his limited intelligence to judge.

There are numerous deities of Heaven and Earth, typifying human beings of high degree, all brave men who are dead, or impressive formations of Nature, such as the Sea, Mountains, Trees; also, by reason of something strange, fearful, or wonderful in their nature, certain animals, the Tiger, the Wolf, and Fox; and all forces that manifest in the elements, such as Thunder, the Echo, Fire; in fact all things strange and wonderful are deified under the name Kami, and have shrines dedicated to their worship or are used in various forms as Talismans.

The Japanese believe that errors are the result of human weaknesses, and can be expiated, or forgiven, and that the steadfast following of the path of truth will win the approval of the gods, and bring them finally to eternal life and the companionship of their beloved dead. The female element is considered equal with the male, and occupies a very high rank in the Shinto system in contrast to China, where women have no status.

Fu-ku-ro-ku-jiu, the god of Fortune and Wisdom,

[p. 49]

[paragraph continues] Fu-ku, Luck and Happiness,
 Ro-ku, Wealth and Prosperity,
 Jiu, Longevity, represented by a long-headed man with a staff, attended by a Crane (sometimes he has the Fan of Power in one hand and a scroll in the other), and is valued as a Talisman for the qualities he represents;
 Ebisu, the god of Plenty, the giver of daily food; and the household god
 Daikoku, the god of Love,
 Benzaiben, the god of Grace and Beauty,
 Bishamon, the god of Glory, with the Spear of Power in his right hand, and in his left the Pagoda for Inspiration and Hope;
 Benton, who gives fruitfulness to women, and
 Hotei, the god of Contentment and Good Fortune

are all Talismans for the virtues which they express.

Hotei (Illustration No. 42, Plate III), the children's god, bringing happiness and good fortune, is found in every household; he is represented seated on his bag, which is well-filled with the good things he dispenses, his corpulent figure denoting his high attainment and personal importance.

The Eagle, because of his courage, fearlessness, tenacity, and aggressiveness, is worn as a Talisman

[p. 50]

for good fortune, and Captain Brinkley, in his book Japan and China, says:

"In November tens of thousands flock to the Eagle shrine to purchase harbingers of luck in the shape of big rakes, parent potatoes, and Millet dumplings. The Rake, as part of the paraphernalia of the pursuer of gain, explains itself; the parent potato denotes humble ambition, buried in the ground and grown in oblivion is at any rate the parent of a family. Millet dumplings are associated with the orthodox group of lucky articles by a play upon words--'to clutch Millet with wet hands' is a popular metaphor for greed; Mochi, which signifies a dumpling, therefore, signifies grasping largely and holding firmly."

The Dumpling is also regarded as a charm against the perils of wave and flood, it being the sacred bread of the Nation, and in its circular shape is the symbol of the Sun.

The Carp (Illustration No. 37, Plate III) is worn as a Talisman for endurance and pluck, because according to an old legend a Carp by the exercise of these virtues succeeded in leaping all cataracts, and in finally reaching the Chariot Cloud, which carried him to Heaven and eternal happiness. On all festival days, the Carp plays a very important part as a symbol of good fortune,

[p. 51]

and it is customary on these occasions to send up large fish-shaped kites, one for each son, the Carp being essentially a masculine Talisman.

As in China, Talismans frequently consist of inscriptions on paper, invocations to one or other of the gods for success and good fortune, the symbol of the god being used according to the purpose of the Talisman. The sacred dog of Mitsumine is used as a protection from robbers, the god Jurojin, the Stork, the Tortoise, or the Crane for health and longevity.

A very popular charm for the latter purpose is the impression of a child's hand made by inking the hand, which is then pressed on to a piece of paper. These paper Talismans are pasted up both inside and outside the house and are considered to avert all evil influences.

In Tokio a popular charm consists of a thin piece of wood on which is written the name of the famous shrine Narita; this is worn as a luck-bringer, and for protection from all dangers.

Symbols of the Houses of the Zodiac are also used as Talismans, worked in metal varying according to the House occupied by the Sun at the time of birth.

A very important Talisman is the symbol Mitsu-Domoe, the triple form of the source of life, representing the elements of Fire, Air, and

[p. 52]

[paragraph continues] Water. It is worn to protect the household and person from Fire, Flood, and Theft (see Illustration No. 43, Plate III). This diagram is considered to symbolise ceaseless change, and is said by some authorities to have had its. origin in a three-limbed Swastika Cross.

The Fan, which is regarded as an emblem of Power and Authority, is .a Talisman to ensure the safety of its wearers (Illustration No. 41, Plate III).

The Hammer of Daikoku, the god of Wealth, is worn for success and good fortune.

On the , Illustration No. 46 represents the Keys of the Granary, or storehouse, which are worn for love, wealth, and happiness.

The Anchor is worn for security and safety.

Rock Crystal Balls, mounted as charms, are worn as a preventative of dropsy and other wasting diseases.

A charm popular with travellers is the leaf of the Teg-a-shiwa; the Japanese say that the movements of this leaf in the wind resemble the beckoning of a hand. When a relative is about to start on a journey he is served with a meal of fish on one of these leaves in lieu of a plate; when the meal is finished the leaf is hung over the door in the belief that it will

[p. 53]

ensure well-being on his journey and a safe return.

A Talisman for luck and good fortune is a representation of Ota-fu-ku, the joyful goddess, who is depicted with a chubby laughing face which is painted on purses and little gifts exchanged between friends, and it is thought that to look upon her face will bring prosperity, joy, and good fortune.

At the New Year it is customary to hang a rope before dwellings, in front of shrines, or to suspend it across the road to thwart evil spirits and avert ill-luck; it is called Shinenaka, and is made of rice-straw plucked up by the roots, the ends being allowed to dangle down at regular intervals.

To protect the house from demons, and to keep its occupants secure, a bow is fixed to the roof ridge, and if tiles are used impressed with an ornament like bubbles an efficient Talisman for protection against fire is obtained. The Japanese believe that the materials, principally wood, of which their temples are made become impregnated with favourable influences, as the result of the services that are held in them, and as these temples are entirely pulled down every twenty years there is a great demand for the old wood, from which Talismans are made.

One of the most ancient temples is at Ise, where

[p. 54]

a shrine has been in existence many hundreds of years B.C., and when this temple is broken up thousands of pilgrims assemble to secure fragments of its precious wood.

The temple is rebuilt of new wood exactly on the lines of the old one.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

CHAPTER VI

Egyptian Beliefs--Crux Ansata--The Menat--The Two Plumes--The Single Plume--The Nefer--The Cartouche--The Angles and Plummet--The God Bes--Aper--The Tat--The Heart.

Of all civilisations known to us through history, that of ancient Egypt is the most marvellous, most fascinating, and most rich in occult significance; yet we have still much to discover, and although we have the assurance of Herodotus that the Egyptians were "beyond measure scrupulous in all matters appertaining to religion," the ancient religions--or such fragments as survive--appear at first glance confusing and even grotesque. It is necessary to remember that there was an inner as well as an outer theology, and that the occult mysteries were accessible only to those valiant and strenuous initiates who had successfully passed through a prolonged purification and course of preparation austere and difficult enough to discourage all save the most persistent and exalted spirits.

It is only available to us to wander on the outskirts of Egyptian mythology. The most familiar symbolic figures are those of Isis the

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Moon goddess, traditional Queen of Egypt, and Osiris her husband; and when we read that Isis was the sister, wife, and mother of Osiris we must seek the inner meaning of the strange and impossible relationship. It has been lucidly explained by Princess Karadja (in her King Solomon: a Mystic Drama, 1912, pp. 130-31):

"Originally the dual souls are part of the same Divine Ego. They are golden fruits upon the great Tree of Life: 'male and female He created them.'

 Isis is the Sister of Osiris because she is of Divine origin like himself, and is a spirit of equal rank.

 She is his Wife, because she alone can fill his highest cravings.

 She is his Mother because it is the mission of Woman to restore Man unto spiritual life."

How Osiris was slain by his brother Typhon (or Set), the Spirit of Evil, and dismembered into fourteen fragments which were scattered and hidden by the destroyer; how Isis, widowed and broken-hearted, sought patiently until she found each fragment, and how Horus her son when he grew to manhood challenged and conquered Typhon,--all this is the figurative rendering of the eternal battle between light and darkness.

[p. 57]

Typhon or Set symbolises autumn, decay, and destruction; Osiris springtime, light, and the fertilising and growing powers of nature. Isis is typified in many forms, but was especially revered as the goddess of procreation, Universal Mother of the living, and protectress of the spirits of the dead. Her symbol was the cow, and she is usually depicted wearing cow's horns, and between them the orb of the moon.

But more ancient and more exalted than Osiris was Ra, the Sun god, whose worship was blended with that of Isis and her husband and son. The priests of Ra established a famous temple at Heliopolis, and founded a special system of solar worship. Just as the Emperor Constantine subsequently fixed as saints' days in the Christian Church the days which had been dedicated to the ancient pagan gods, so the priests of Ra adapted their cult to the tastes and notions of the people, and a whole company of subordinate gods figured in the religions of Lower Egypt for many centuries. Sometimes divine virtues were portrayed in very material forms.

Between 4000 and 2000 B.C. the worship of Amen, or Amen Ra, as the greatest god of the Egyptians, was established at Thebes, which became the centre of religious teaching. The priests grew more and more powerful until finally

[p. 58]

the High Priest of Amen--whose name means the "hidden one"--became the King of Upper Egypt. Amen was regarded as the Creator, with all the power and attributes of Ra the Sun god, and as ruler of the lesser gods.

It has been asked why the Egyptians, who had no belief in a material resurrection, took such infinite trouble to preserve the bodies of their dead. They looked forward to a paradise in which eternal life would be the reward of the righteous, and their creed inculcated faith in the existence of a spiritual body to be inhabited by the soul which had ended its earthly pilgrimage; but such beliefs do not explain the care and attention bestowed upon the lifeless corpse. The explanation must be sought in the famous Book of the Dead, representing the convictions which prevailed throughout the whole of the Egyptian civilisation from pre-dynastic times. Briefly, the answer to our question is this: there was a Ka or double, in which the Heart-Soul was located; this Ka, equivalent to the astral body of modern occultists, was believed to be able to come into touch with material things through the preserved or mummified body. This theory accords with the axiom that each atom of physical substance has its relative equivalent on the astral plane. It will therefore be understood how, in the ancient

[p. 59]

religions, the image of a god was regarded as a medium through which his powers could be manifested. "As above, so below"; every living thing possessed some divine attribute.

Faith in prayer was an essential article of the Egyptian religion, and the spoken word of a priest was believed to have strong potency, because it. had been the words of Ra uttered by Thoth which brought the universe into being. Amulets inscribed with words were consequently thought to ensure the fulfilment of the blessing expressed, or the granting of the bliss desired.

The Book of the Dead was not only a guide to the life hereafter, wherein they would join their friends in the realms of eternal bliss, but gave detailed particulars of the necessary knowledge, actions, and conduct during the earthly life to ensure a future existence in the spirit world, where everlasting life was the reward of the good and annihilation the fate of the wicked, thus showing that the belief in the existence of a future life was ever before them. Various qualities, though primarily considered a manifestation of the Almighty, were attributed each to a special god who controlled and typified one particular virtue. This partly accounts for the multiplied numbers of the Egyptian gods, and with the further complications that resulted from invasions

[p. 60]

and the adoption of alien beliefs, the religious philosophy of Egypt is not easy to follow, and is often seemingly contradictory; but when we take into consideration the vast period during which this Empire flourished it is natural that the external manifestations of faith should have varied as time went on.

A knowledge of the life, death, and resurrection of Osiris is assumed, and his worship in association with Isis and Horus, although not necessarily under these names, is continuous. Horus is frequently alluded to as the god of the ladder, and the mystic ladder seen by Jacob in his vision, and the ladder of seven steps known to the initiates of Egypt, Greece, Mexico, India, and Persia will be familiar to all students of occultism.

Throughout the whole of the Egyptian civilisation, which lasted for at least 6000 years, the influence and potency of Amulets, and Talismans, was recognised in the religious services, each Talisman and Amulet having a specified virtue.

Certain Amulets not only were worn during life, but were even attached to the dead body. They are described in the following notes:

The Crux Ansata, or Ankh (see Illustrations Nos. 47, 48, 49, Plate IV), was known as the symbol of life, the loop at the top of the Cross consisting of the hieroglyphic Ru (O) set in an

Click to enlarge
PLATE 4. EGYPTIAN TALISMANS.

[p. 61]

upright form, meaning the gateway, or mouth, the creative power being signified by the loop which represents a fish's mouth giving birth to water as the life of the country, bringing the inundations and renewal of the fruitfulness of the earth to those who depended upon its increase to maintain life. It was regarded as the key of the Nile which overflowed periodically and so fertilised the land.

It was also shown in the hands of the Egyptian kings, at whose coronations it played an important part, and the gods are invariably depicted holding this symbol of creative power; it was also worn to bring knowledge, power, and abundance. Again, it had reference to the spiritual life, for it was from the Crux Ansata, or Ankh, that the symbol of Venus originated, the Circle over the Cross being the triumph of Spirit, represented by the Circle, over matter, shown by the Cross.

The Menat (Illustrations Nos. 50, 53, Plate IV) were specially dedicated to Hathor, who was a type of Isis, and was worn for conjugal happiness, as it gave power and strength to the organs of reproduction, promoting health and fruitfulness. It frequently formed a part of a necklace, and was elaborately ornamented; No. 50, from the British Museum, is a good specimen, the Cow being an emblem of the maternal qualities which

[p. 62]

were the attributes of the goddess, who stood for all that is good and true in Wife, Mother, and Daughter.

The Two Plumes (Illustration No. 51, Plate IV) are Sun Amulets and the symbols of Ra and Thoth, the two feathers being typical of the two lives, spiritual and material. This was worn to promote Uprightness in dealing, Enlightenment, and Morality, being symbolical of the great gods of Light and Air.

The Single Plume (Illustration No. 52, Plate IV) was an emblem of Maat, the female counterpart of Thoth, who wears on her head the feather characteristic of the phonetic value of her name; she was the personification of Integrity, Righteousness, and Truth. Illustrations Nos. 54, 55, 56, Plate IV, show three forms of

The Nefer, a symbol of Good Luck, worn to attract Success, Happiness, Vitality, and Friends.

The Cartouche, or Name Amulet (Illustration No. 61, Plate IV), was worn to secure Favour, Recognition, and Remembrance, and to prevent the name of its wearer being blotted out in the next world. This is a very important Amulet, as the name was believed to be an integral part of the man, without which his soul could not come before God, so that it was most essential that the name should be preserved, in order, as described

[p. 63]

in the Book of the Dead, "thou shalt never perish, thou shalt never, never come to an end," the loss of the name meaning the total annihilation of the individual.

The Amulets of

[paragraph continues] The Angles (see Illustrations Nos. 58, 59, Plate IV) and

[paragraph continues] The Plummet (No. 60 on the same Plate) were symbols of the god Thoth, and were worn for Moral Integrity, Wisdom, Knowledge, Order, and Truth.

Thoth was the personification of Law and Order, being the god who worked out the Creation as decreed by the god Ra. He knew all the words of power and the secrets of all hearts, and may be regarded as the chief recording angel; he was also the inventor of all arts and sciences.

Bes, shown in Illustration No. 57, Plate IV, was a very popular Talisman, being the god of Laughter, Merry-making, and Good Luck; by some authorities he is considered to be a foreign importation from pre-dynastic times, and he has been identified with Horus and regarded as the god who renewed youth. He was also the patron of beauty, the protector of children, and was undoubtedly the progenitor of the modern Billiken.

Illustrations Nos. 62, 66, Plate V, are examples of

[p. 64]

The Aper, which symbolised Providence and was worn for Steadfastness, Stability, and Alertness.

The Tat (Illustrations Nos. 63, 64, 65, Plate V) held a very important place in the religious services of the Egyptians, and formed the centre of the annual ceremony of the setting-up of the Tat, a service held to commemorate the death and resurrection of Osiris, this symbol representing the building-up of the backbone and reconstruction of the body of Osiris. In their services the Egyptians associated themselves with Osiris, through whose sufferings and death they hoped to rise glorified and immortal, and secure Everlasting Happiness. The four cross-bars symbolise the four cardinal points, and the four elements of Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, and were often very elaborately ornamented (see Illustration No. 64, Plate V, taken from an example at the British Museum). It was worn as a Talisman for Stability and Strength, and for Protection from enemies; also that all doors, (or opportunities,) might be open both in this life and the next. Moreover, a Tat of gold set in sycamore wood, which had been steeped in the water of Ankham flowers, was placed at the neck of the deceased on the day of interment, to protect him on his journey through the underworld and assist him in triumphing over

[p. 65]

his foes, that he might become perfect for ever and ever.

The Heart was believed to be the seat of the Soul, and Illustrations Nos. 67, 68, 69, Plate V, are examples of these Talismans worn to prevent black magicians from bewitching the Soul out of the body. The importance of these charms will be realised from the belief that if the Soul left the Heart, the Body would quickly fade away and die. According to Egyptian lore at the judgment of the dead the Heart is weighed, when if found perfect, it is returned to its owner, who immediately recovers his powers of locomotion and becomes his own master, with strength in his limbs and everlasting felicity in his soul.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

CHAPTER VII

The Buckle of the Girdle of Isis--The Scarab--The Eye of Osiris--The Two Fingers--The Collar--The Hawk--The Sma--The Ladder and Steps--The Snake's Head--The Serpent--The Sun's Disc--The Frog--The Fish--The Vulture--The Sa, or Tie.

The Buckle of the Girdle of Isis was worn to obtain the Good Will and Protection of this goddess, and symbolised "the blood of Isis" and her strength and power. Frequently made of Carnelian it was believed to protect its wearer from every kind of evil; also to secure the good will of Horus; and, when placed like the golden Tat at the neck of the dead on the day of the funeral in the soul's journey through the under-world it opened up all hidden places and procured the favour of Isis and her son, Horus, for ever and ever (see Illustrations Nos. 71, 72, 73, Plate V).

The Tie, or Sa (Illustration No. 70, Plate V) is the symbol of Ta-urt, the Hippopotamus-headed goddess, who was associated with the god Thoth, the personification of Divine Intelligence and Human Reason; it was worn for magical protection.

Click to enlarge
PLATE 5. EGYPTIAN TALISMANS.

[p. 67]

The Scarab was the symbol of Khepera, a form of the Sun god who transforms inert matter into action, creates life, and typifies the glorified spiritual body that man shall possess at the resurrection. From the enormous number of Scarabs that have been found, this must have formed the most popular of the Talismans. The symbol was derived from a Beetle, common in Egypt, which deposits its eggs in a ball of clay, the action of the insect in rolling this ball along the ground being compared with the Sun itself in its progress across the sky; and as the ball contained the living germ which, (under the heat of the Sun,) hatched out into a Beetle, so the Scarab became the symbol of Creation. It is also frequently seen holding the disc of the Sun between its claws, with wings extended, and it is thought by some authorities that the Scarab was taken as an emblem of the Sun, because the burial of its ball was symbolic of the setting sun from which new life arises with each dawn.

Scarabs of green stones with rims of gold were buried in the heart of the deceased, or laid upon the breast, with a written prayer for his protection on the Day of Judgment, whilst words of power were frequently recited over the Scarab which was placed under the coffin as an emblem of immortality so that no fiend could harm the dead in his journey through the under-world. It is said

[p. 68]

the Scarab was associated with burial as far back as the IVth dynasty (about 4600 B.C.); it represented matter about to pass from a state of inertness into active life, so was considered a fitting emblem of resurrection and immortality, typifying not only the Sun's disc, but the evolutions of the Soul throughout eternity. It was also worn by the Egyptian warriors in their signet rings for Health, Strength, and Virility, it being thought that this species of Beetle was all males, so that it would attract all manly qualities, both of mind and body. For this reason it was very popular as presents between friends, many scarabs being found with good wishes or mottoes engraved on the under side, and some of the kings used the back of scarabs to commemorate historical events; one in the British Museum records the slaughter of 102 fierce lions by Amenhetep III, with his own hand (see Illustrations Nos. 74, 75, Plate VI).

Next to the Scarab, the ancient Egyptians attached much importance to the

Eye Amulet, which, from the earliest Astral Mythology, was first represented by the point within the circle  and was associated with the god of the Pole Star, which, from its fixity, was taken as a type of the Eternal, unchangeable as time rolled on, and thus a fitting emblem of Fixity

[p. 69]

of Purpose, Poise, and Stability. Later it was one of the hieroglyphic signs of the Sun god Ra, and represented the One Supreme Power casting his Eye over all the world, and instead of the point within the circle is sometimes represented as a widely open Eye. This symbol was also assigned to Osiris, Isis, Horus, and Ptah; the Amulet known as the Eye of Osiris being placed upon the incision made in the side of the body (for the purpose of embalming) to watch over and guard the soul of the deceased during its passing through the darkness of the tomb to the life beyond.

It was also worn by the living to ensure Health and Protection from the blighting influence of workers in black magic, and for the stability, strength, and courage of Horus, the wisdom and understanding of Ptah, and the foresight of Isis.

It was also extensively used in necklaces on account of the idea that representations of the Eye itself would watch over and guard its wearer from the malignant glances of the envious, it being universally believed that the fiery sparks of jealousy, hatred, and malice darting from the eyes of angry persons, envious of the good looks, health, and success of the fortunate ones, could so poison the surrounding atmosphere as even to cause sickness, decay, and death; horses were thought particularly liable to this injurious influence, and Talismans

[p. 70]

to avert such a misfortune to them were hung on their foreheads, or over the left eye.

Examples of Eye Amulets are illustrated on Plate VI, Nos. 79, 80, and 81.

'When two eyes are used together the right eye is symbolic of Ra, or Osiris and the Sun; whilst the left eye represents Isis, or the Moon, and is sometimes called the Amulet of the two Utchats: the word Utchat, signifying "strength," being applied to the Sun when he enters the summer solstice about June 22nd, his strength and power on earth being greatest at that time.

The Talisman of the

Two Fingers (Illustration No. 82, Plate VI) was symbolical of Help, Assistance, and Benediction, typified by the two fingers extended by Horus to assist his father in mounting the ladder suspended between this world and the next. This Amulet was frequently placed in the interior of the mummified body to enable the departed to travel quickly to the regions of the blest. Amongst the ancient Egyptians the fingers were ever considered an emblem of Strength and Power, the raising of the first two fingers being regarded as a sign of Peace and Good Faith; the first finger being the indicator of divine will and justice and the only one that can stand erect by itself alone; the second representing the Holy Spirit, the Mediator, a

[p. 71]

symbolism handed down to us in the extension of the index and medius in the ecclesiastical benediction. It is also interesting to note that at the marriage ceremony in olden days the ring was first placed on the thumb, as typical of Man's allegiance to God, and lastly on the third finger of his bride to show that next to God in the Trinity, a man's life should be devoted to his wife.

The Collar Amulet (Illustrations Nos. 83, 84, Plate VI) was a symbol of Isis, and was worn to procure her protection and the strength of her son Horus. In both examples the head of the Hawk appears, this bird being attributed to Horus as well as to Ra. This collar, which was made of gold, was engraved with words of power and seems to have been chiefly used as a funeral amulet.

The Sma (Illustration No. 85, Plate VI) was a favourite Amulet from the dawn of Egyptian history, and is frequently used in various forms of decorated art. It was symbolical of Union and Stability of Affection, and was worn to strengthen love and friendship and ensure physical happiness and faithfulness.

The Ladder is a symbol of Horus, and was worn to secure his assistance in overcoming and surmounting difficulties in the material world, as well as to form a connection with the Heaven world, or Land of Light. The earliest traditions

[p. 72]

place this Heaven world above the earth, its floor being the sky, and to reach this a ladder was deemed necessary. From the Pyramid texts it seems there were two stages of ascent to the upper Paradise, represented by two ladders, one being the ladder of Sut, forming the ladder of ascent from the land of darkness, and the other the ladder of Horus reaching the Land of Light (Illustration No. 86, Plate VI).

The Steps (Illustrations Nos. 87, 88, Plate VI) are a symbol of Osiris, who is described as the god of the staircase, through whom it was hoped the deceased might reach the Heaven world and attain everlasting bliss.

The Snake's Head Talisman (Illustration No. 89, Plate VI) was worn to protect its wearer from the attacks of Rerek, or Apep, the servant of Set, who was typified as a terrible serpent, which when killed had the power of rising in new forms and who obstructed the passage to the Heaven world. The serpent, although sometimes assumed to be a form of evil, was generally regarded as a protecting influence, and for this reason was usually sculptured on either side of the doorways to the tombs of kings, temples, and other sacred buildings to guard the dead from enemies of every kind, and to prevent the entrance of evil in any shape or form. It was also placed round the heads

Click to enlarge
PLATE 6. EGYPTIAN TALISMANS.

[p. 73]

of Divinities and round the crowns of their kings as a symbol of royal might and power, being one of the forms or types of Tern the son of Ptah, who is thought by some authorities to have been the first living man god of the Egyptians, and the god of the setting sun (in contrast to Horus, who was the god of the rising sun) Tern was typified by a huge snake, and it is curious to note in connection with this that amongst country folk at the present day there is a popular belief that a serpent will not die until the sun goes down.

The Sun's Disc Talismans (Illustrations No. 90, 92, Plate VII) are symbols of the god Ra, No. 92 being appropriately placed upon the head of a Ram, the symbol of the Zodiacal house Aries, in which sign the sun is exalted. It was worn for Power and Renown, and to obtain the favours of the great ones, being also an emblem of new birth and resurrection.

The Frog Talisman (Illustration No. 91, Plate VII) was highly esteemed, and is an attribute of Isis, being worn to attract her favours and for fruitfulness. Because of its fertility its hieroglyphic meaning was an immense number. It was also used as a symbol of Ptah, as it represented life in embryo, and by the growth of its feet after birth it typified strength from weakness, and was worn for recovery from disease, also for Health

[p. 74]

and Long Life, taking the place sometimes of the Crux Ansata or Ankh, as a symbol of Life.

The Pillow (Illustration No. 93, Plate VII) was used for preservation from sickness and against pain and suffering; it was also worn for the favour of Horus, and was placed with the dead as a protection and to prevent violation of the Tomb.

The Lotus (Illustrations No. 94, 95, Plate VII) is a symbol with two meanings. Emblematical of the Sun in the ancient days of Egypt and typifying Light, Understanding, Fruitfulness, and Plenty, it was believed to bring the favours of the god Ra. Later it is described as "the pure Lily of the Celestial Ocean," the symbol of Isis, who is sometimes alluded to as "the White Virgin." It became typical of Virginity and Purity, and having the double virtue of chastity and fecundity it was alike prized for Maiden- and Motherhood.

The Fish Talisman (Illustrations Nos. 96, 97, Plate VII) is a symbol of Hathor (who controlled the rising of the Nile), as well as an Amulet under the influence of Isis and Horus. It typified the primeval Creative principle and was worn for domestic felicity, Abundance, and general Prosperity.

The Vulture Talisman (Illustration No. 98, Plate VII) was worn to protect from the bites of

[p. 75]

[paragraph continues] Scorpions, and to attract Motherly Love and Protection of Isis, who (it was believed) assumed the form of a vulture when searching for her son Horus, who, in her absence, had been stung to death by a Scorpion. Thoth, moved by her lamentations, came to earth and gave her "the Words of Power," which enabled her to restore Horus to life. For this reason, it was thought that this Amulet would endow its wearer with power and wisdom so that he might identify himself with Horus and partake of his good fortune in the fields of eternal bliss.

The Sceptre (Illustrations Nos. 76, 77, 78, Plate VI) is a symbol of Isis, typifying power over the fruits of the earth, and was worn to preserve and renew youth and vigour, and to attract physical strength and virility.

It is, of course, difficult and futile to speculate as to the extent of the influence these Egyptian Amulets and Talismans exercised over this ancient people, but in the light of our present knowledge we feel that the religious symbolism they represented, the conditions under which they were made, the faith in their efficacy, and the invocations and "words of power" which in every case were a most essential part of their mysterious composition makes them by far the most interesting of any yet dealt with.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

CHAPTER VIII

Gnosticism--Abraxas--Sacred Names--Khnoubis--The Seven Vowels--The Magic Symbols--The Archangels--Lion-headed Serpent--Aum--The Ineffable Name--Horus--Osiris--Isis--Etruscan, Greek, and Roman--The Crescent Symbol--The Horseshoe--Tusk, or Horn--Stable Keys--Amalthaea's Horn, or Cornucopia--Serapis--Bull's Head--Diana--Harpokrates--Anubis--Bellerophon--Salus Ring--Hygiea.

Gnosticism is the name given to a system of religion which carne into existence in the Roman Empire about the time Christianity was established; it was founded on a philosophy known in Asia Minor centuries previously and apparently based upon the Egyptian beliefs, the Zendavesta, Buddhism, and the Kabala, with their conception of the perpetual conflict between good and evil.

The name is derived from the Greek Gnosis, meaning knowledge, and, in brief, the Gnostics' belief was that the intellectual world, with its Spirits, Intelligences, and various Orders of Angels were created by the Almighty, and that the visible matter of creation was an emanation from these powers and forces.

The attributes of the Supreme Being were those of Kabala: Wisdom--Jeh, Prudence--Jehovah,

[p. 77]

[paragraph continues] Magnificence--El, Severity--Elohim, Victory and Glory--Zaboath, Empire--Adonai; the Gnostics also took from the Talmud the Planetary Princes and the Angels under them.

Basilides, the Gnostic Priest, taught that God first created (1) Nous, or mind, from this emanated (2) Logos, the Word, from this (3) Phronesis, Intelligence, and from this (4) Sophia, Wisdom, and from this last (5) Dynamis, Strength. The Almighty was known as Abraxas, which signifies in Coptic "the Blessed Name," and was symbolised by a figure, the head of which is that of a Cock, the body that of a man, with serpents forming the legs; in his right hand he holds a whip, and on his left arm is a shield. This Talisman (see Illustrations Nos. 102, 103, Plate VII) is a combination of the five emanations mentioned above: Nous and Logos are expressed by the two serpents, symbols of the inner sense and understanding, the head of the Cock representing Phronesis, for foresight and vigilance; the two arms hold the symbols of Sophia and Dynamis, the Shield of Wisdom and the Whip of Power, worn for protection from moral and physical ill.

The Gnostics had great faith in the efficacy of sacred names and sigils when engraved on stones as Talismans; also in magical symbols derived principally from the Kabala.

[p. 78]

One of the most popular inscriptions was IAW (Jehovah), and in Illustration No. 99, Plate VII, this is shown surrounded by the Serpent KHNOUBIS, taken from the Egyptian philosophy, representing the Creative principles, and was worn for Vitality, Understanding, and Protection. The Seven Greek Vowels (Illustration No. 100, Plate VII) symbolised the seven heavens, or Planets, whose harmony keeps the Universe in existence, each vowel having seven different methods of expression corresponding with a certain Force, the correct utterance of these letters and comprehension of the forces typified being believed to confer supreme power, bringing success in all enterprises and giving complete control over all the powers of darkness.

Illustration No. 101, Plate VII, is an example of the use of the Magic Symbols, the meaning of which has been lost. It is probably a composition of the initial letters of some mystical sigil, enclosed by a serpent and the names of the Archangels Gabriel, Paniel, Ragauel, Thureiel, Souriel, and Michael. It was worn for Health and Success; also for Protection from all evils, and it is cut in an agate and set in a gold mount.

A figure of a serpent with a lion's head, usually surrounded with a halo, was worn to protect its wearer from heart and chest complaints and to drive away demons.

Click to enlarge
PLATE 7. EGYPTIAN AND GNOSTIC TALISMANS.

[p. 79]

The mystic Aum, already described in the chapter on Indian Talismans, was also a favourite with the Gnostics, and equally popular was a Talisman composed of the vowels I A U, repeated to make twelve, this number representing the Ineffable Name of God, which, according to the Talmud, was only communicated to the most pious of the priesthood. They also adopted from the Egyptians the following symbols: Horus, usually represented seated on a Lotus, for fertility; Osiris, usually in the form of a mummified figure, for spiritual attainment; and Isis for the qualities mentioned in the previous chapter.

Etruscan, Greek, and Roman. The Etruscans, Greeks, and Romans were all familiar with and great believers in the virtues of Talismans and Amulets, a belief based not only on the symbols of their own faith but largely influenced by the beliefs of the surrounding nations, that of the Egyptians being particularly noticeable. Amongst the earliest and most popular Talismans are many Scarab rings with inscriptions cut in the under sides; these were frequently used as seals.

In the course of the amalgamation of beliefs which took place under the Ptolemies, Isis and Osiris were associated with all kinds of Asiatic and Greek gods; but, as time went on, Isis became

[p. 80]

the most universal goddess, ruling heaven and earth and all Mankind, her worship quickly spreading throughout all the Roman dominions. Her name is usually understood to mean Wisdom, and upon the pavement of her temple was inscribed, "I am everything that has been, and is, and shall be, nor hath any mortal opened my veil."

The most common symbol of Isis was a Crescent Moon, which was worn by Roman women upon their shoes as a safeguard from witchcraft and to prevent the evil spirits of the moon from afflicting them with delusions, hysteria, or lunacy; also to attract the good-will of Isis that they might be successful in love, happy in motherhood, and fortunate in life. From this Crescent symbol (Illustration No. 113, Plate VIII) the Horseshoe undoubtedly became regarded as a Talisman, and as such was used by the Greeks and Romans, who nailed it with the horns upward as a charm against the Plague. In an old publication of 1618 we are instructed that the horseshoe should be nailed upon the threshold to keep Luck within the house and to keep out witches and nullify their evil powers; but in order to obtain the best results the horseshoe must be found by the owner of the house or by a member of the household. In the Middle Ages horseshoes were frequently buried amongst the roots of an Ash tree, which imparted

[p. 81]

such virtue to the Ash that a twig from it stroked upward over cattle that had been overlooked, charmed away the evil. In Suffolk the fishermen still believe that a horseshoe nailed to the mast of a smack will protect it against bad weather, and their Newfoundland brothers use the horseshoe as a specific against many dangers, especially as a charm to keep away the Devil. In this superstition they resemble the miners of Devon and Cornwall who fix a horseshoe to the mine with the horns upward, it being common knowledge that the Devil travels in a circle and is consequently frustrated in his evil course when he arrives at either of the horns and is obliged to take a retrograde course. To this day, it is still regarded by the country-folk as essential to the well-being of the finder of this charm to suspend it horns upward over the door of his dwelling to hold the luck in, it being thought to run out at each end of the horseshoe if reversed. In Gay's fable of the Old Woman and Her Cats the witch complains:

      "Crowds of boys
 Worry me with eternal noise.
 Straws laid across my path retards,
 The Horse shoes nailed each threshold guards.
 The stunted broom the Wenches hide
 In fear that I should up and ride."

The Single Horn, or Tusk, both singly, or as

[p. 82]

a pendant to another Talisman, as Illustration No. 106, Plate VIII, in all probability had its origin in the double horns, or Crescent, of Isis. It was worn to protect from harm, danger, and the evil influences of enemies, and also as a powerful charm to attract good fortune and success.

It is frequently mentioned in the Old and New Testaments, and in 2 Samuel xxii, 3, and Psalm xviii, 2 the Almighty is described as the "Horn of my Salvation"; and St. Luke in the first chapter, 69th and 71st verses, writes:

"Hath raised up an horn of Salvation." "That we should be saved from our enemies and from the hands of all that hate us."

The Horn, being a symbol of Isis, was considered a powerful charm to which to attach the keys of stables and cowsheds, ensuring the safety of the cattle and their protection from the evil spirits of the night, a practice that has been followed from remote ages to the present day, although its origin is not generally known amongst its modern users.

In India it is also a common belief amongst the natives that a Tiger's tooth will ensure protection from the ghosts of men and animals, making its wearer formidable to his foes and respected by his friends.

[p. 83]

According to Pliny, the tooth of a Wolf was thought by the Romans to be a powerful Talisman for children, it being hung horizontally or suspended round the neck. It assisted them in cutting their teeth, and preserved them from maladies in connection with dentition.

The Cornucopia, or Amalthaea's Horn of Plenty, is the symbol of Abundance, Fruitfulness, and Prosperity, and is represented by a horn filled to overflowing with fruits and flowers, as Illustration No. 118, Plate VIII. Amalthaea was the daughter of Melissus (the King of Crete) who nursed the infant Jupiter, feeding him with the milk of a goat. Jupiter afterwards gave the goat's horn to his nurse, endowing it with magical properties, so that whosoever possessed it should immediately obtain in abundance all he desired and find it a veritable "horn of plenty." It is also a symbol of the goddess Fortuna, and was worn as an Amulet to attract good fortune in abundance.

With the introduction of Isis came also that of Osiris-Apis with whom the Greeks identified their god of the under-world Hades under the name of Serapis. His symbol is the Bull Apis, which was of divine origin and known by special markings, being black in colour and having a white triangle upon its forehead, the figure of a Vulture on its

[p. 84]

back, double hairs in its tail, and a scarab under its tongue.

The symbol of the Bull's Head (see Illustration No. 108, Plate VIII) was commonly worn as earrings, for success in love and friendship, and as the god of Hades could lengthen or shorten men's lives as he thought fit, the Bull's Head was also worn by men for Strength and Long Life.

To gain favour and protection small images of the Deities were worn as ornaments, such as Diana of Ephesus, Mithras, and especially Harpokrates and Anubis (Illustrations Nos. 104, 107, Plate VIII).

Harpokrates, the god of eternal youth and fecundity, was typified by the figure of a boy holding his tongue, representing all that is ever fresh and young; he is the type of the Vernal Sun, bringing fertility to the land, enabling it to produce both food and drink. He is also frequently represented seated on a Lotus, the symbol of the Sun and fecundity.

Anubis is symbolised as a Jackal-headed god who, in the Egyptian religion, is depicted in the Judgment as weighing the souls of the dead; he is the Guardian of Souls in the under-world.

Gems bearing the figure of Bellerophon mounted on the winged steed Pegasus were believed to confer courage and were much prized by the Greek and Roman soldiers, Bellerophon being reputed to

[p. 85]

have first taught the art of governing horses with a bridle; this service to mankind and the valour he displayed when he slew the Chimaera, made him a fitting prototype to adorn a warrior's device.

Another engraved Talisman in great favour was the figure of Andromeda, heroine of one of the most romantic and popular of ancient myths. The sea-nymphs, jealous of her beauty, chained her to a rock in mid-ocean, that she might be at the mercy of a vile monster of the deep. But the warrior Perseus slew the monster, and married Andromeda. Her image was thought to promote harmony between lovers and peace between man and wife.

The Salus Ring (Illustration No. 112, Plate VIII) was worn by the devotees of Salus, or Hygiea, daughter of Aesculapius, who was worshipped as the goddess of Health. Several holy days were appointed in her honour and worship, and she was publicly invoked for the welfare of the rulers and for the general peace and prosperity of the community; also for an abundant harvest. She is usually represented with a serpent as a tribute to her attainments in the art of medicine, and her symbol was worn for Health and Success in all undertakings, as well as for general Good Fortune.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

CHAPTER IX

The Bulla--The Tusk--Pine Cone--The Frog--Skull of an Ass--Key Talismans--Grylli, or Chimerae--Goat--The Ox--Lion--Eagle--The Caduceus--Mercury--Health Rings--Boar's Head--Clenched Hand--Open Hand--Figured Hands--The Lizard--The Spider--The Fish--Snails.

Bulla is the name given to a gold case, circular or heart-shaped, used in necklaces or worn separately as a pendant, sometimes attached as an ornament to a belt or badge which was placed over one shoulder and under the opposite arm. Macrobius says it was the special decoration of the victorious general in the triumphant processions, having enclosed within it such remedies as were esteemed most efficacious against the evil glance of envy.

Introduced into Rome by the Etruscans, it became very popular and was adopted as the badge of free-born boys; it usually contained an invocation to one or more of the gods. Among the poorer classes the golden case was replaced by a leathern pouch, with contents of similar virtue.

It was a common practice to wear on the Bulla some grotesque object (see Illustration No. 106, Plate VIII)

[p. 87]

which added to its efficacy as a Talisman, and in particular averted the evil glance; to save its wearer from the Evil Eye a tusk in the form of a pendant was frequently added to accentuate its efficacy.

The Pine Cone, the symbol of Cybele the goddess of abundant benefits, was worn by her votaries for Health, Wealth, and Power, and all good and necessary things which flow in abundance without ceasing from her influence. She had many names, and was called by the Greeks, Pasithea, signifying Mother, as she was the great mother of all the gods. Her priests were famous for their magical powers, and it was customary to fix her symbol, the Pine Cone, on a pole in the vineyards, to protect them from blight and witchcraft, a practice still to be seen in Italy at the present time, and presumably this was the origin of the Pine Cones which surmount the gateways at the entrances of some of the carriage drives of old country seats (see Illustration No. 117, Plate VIII); it also survives as an ornament to the spikes of iron railings enclosing the grounds of old-fashioned houses on the outskirts of many of our provincial towns.

The Frog (Illustration No. 119, Plate VIII) is a symbol of Aphrodite, the goddess of love born from the foam of the sea. In Rome a special

[p. 88]

temple was dedicated to her worship. Her symbol, the frog, was worn for fertility and abundance. Pliny attributes to it the power of keeping the affections true and constant, and of promoting harmonious relations between lovers and friends.

It is a very popular Talisman amongst the Italians, Greeks, and Turks at the present day and is worn not only against the Evil Eye but is particularly valued as a Health Amulet, especially when cut in Amber.

The Skull of an Ass, set up on a pole in the midst of a cornfield, was considered a potent charm against blight, and in Greece and Rome was placed in vineyards for the same purpose; it was sacred to Priapus, the god of the gardens, which he was thought to protect from thieves, wild beasts, and mischievous birds. There is a legend that the Ass was held in high estimation, as by gnawing the branches of the vine it taught the art of pruning.

The Key Talisman was a very important one with both Greeks and Romans. It is the joint symbol of Janus (or Apollo) and Jana, his wife (Diana, or the Moon), and was worn for Prudence, and for Remembrance of things past, and foresight of things to come, Janus being represented as the God with two faces, typifying the prudent

[p. 89]

man who with sagacity and ripe judgment observes things past and future possibilities, and so discerns the causes and effects of all happenings. Janus was also the inventor of locks, doors, and gates, and was the Janitor of the year, for which reason twelve cities were dedicated to him, according to the months; and he held the Key of the. Door through which the prayers of the faithful had access to the gods.

Diana, or Jana, his wife, presided over doors and thresholds and was the special protectress of childbirth, and as keeper of the Gate of Heaven held the key of light and life.

Some of these ancient key Amulets were made in silver (Diana's own metal) and have heart-shaped handles, implying, it is thought by some writers, that the affections must be prudently guarded. The key was also attributed to Hecate Proserpine, who was the guardian of the underworld and could release the spirits of the departed. The key (Illustration No. 110, Plate VIII) is shown attached to a finger ring, which was a very popular form of its use.

Grylli, or Chimerae, were grotesque figures belonging to an early period of Roman art, and not, as sometimes asserted, characteristic of Gnostic remains. They consist of strange combinations of various animal forms, representing

[p. 90]

some strange, ludicrous, impossible monster such as a Goat, Ox, Lion, and Eagle united into one. They were used as Talismans and Amulets according to the ideas they portrayed, being sometimes Astrological in their significance and at other times representative of some form of Grecian or Roman religion. Plutarch writes that these composite objects were fixed up to ward off witchcraft and the evil effects of the first glance of the Evil Eye, it being thought that if the mischief-working eye could be diverted from the object to be protected on to the strange and ridiculous figures represented by the "GRYLLI" the glance would be absorbed and its effects destroyed. "Grylli" is derived from the modern Italian word "grillo," meaning caprice. The Rev. C. W. King in his interesting book on engraved gems instances a Talisman of this kind intended to attract Sunshine and Abundance, also designed as a protection against dangers on land or sea. It was made up as follows:--

"A Ram with a Cornucopia on his head, holding a Rabbit by its tail (signifying fruitfulness and plenty) and a Cock bestride a Dolphin (the Cock being a symbol of the Sun, the Rabbit the Land, and the Dolphin the Sea). These Chimerae often encircled a portrait of the owner, thus unmistakably conveying to him their protective virtues."

[p. 91]

The Caduceus, the wand of Mercury (Illustration No. 105, Plate VIII), was considered an extremely efficient Talisman, being worn to render its possessor wise and persuasive, to attract Health and Youthfulness, as well as to protect from the Evil Eye.

The Rod was given to Mercury by Apollo, and had the wonderful faculty of deciding all controversies and conferring irresistible eloquence on its owner. Its efficacy was proved, when one day whilst travelling Mercury came upon two serpents fighting, and by placing his rod between them and exercising his eloquence, he immediately reconciled the combatants. Mutually embracing they became attached to the rod, thus forming the Caduceus. Mercury received his name from his shrewd understanding of merchandise; he was the inventor of contracts, weights and measures, and of the arts of buying and selling; for this reason he was regarded as the patron of Merchants and Traders.

He invented letters, excelled in eloquence, and was so skilful in making peace, that he is said to have pacified not only men but the immortal gods of Heaven and Hell, whose quarrels he adjusted; for this reason he was known by the Greeks as Hermes. In its composition the Pine Cone, which surmounts the staff, was credited with great

[p. 92]

health-giving powers; is a symbol of Apollo, or the Sun; the wings are emblematic of the flight of thoughts in the minds of men, the two serpents in amity signifying love prototypes of Aesculapius and Hygiea who influence the health-giving attributes of the Sun and Moon respectively, both deities being associated with serpents because by their aid maladies are sloughed off and vigour renewed, just as serpents were believed to renew their lives each year by casting their skins.

With the Romans the Serpent was a household god, and Livy records that, by the advice of the Delphic Oracle, the bringing of a sacred serpent from the temple of Aesculapius to Rome immediately stayed the pestilence then raging. The wearing of a ring in the form of a serpent coiled round the finger, signified an invocation to the God of Health for preservation from sickness. Health rings were much in vogue amongst the Ancient Romans, who frequently presented their friends with such tokens on their birthdays, these anniversaries being considered the most important festivals. A favourite device was an intaglio cut in the ring itself, portraying the head of a youth, and the word "Vivas" (Mayst thou live). It was also believed that a Boar's Head engraved upon a ring conferred perpetual health and preservation from danger (the Boar being

[p. 93]

sacred to Demeter); whilst a ring engraved with three Ravens was worn for conjugal fidelity. Another device was that of a human head attached to an elephant's trunk, holding a trident (the symbol of Neptune), which was worn as a protective charm against peril by sea. Charmed rings have also been much in favour with many nations, the Greeks being very partial to enchanted rings, which were made according to the favourable positions of the planets, their power being strengthened when the head and neck of the owner was cut in green jasper and set in a ring engraved with the letters B.B.P.P.N.E.N.A., which signified "Wear this and thou shalt in no wise perish." Whether hallowed in the name of God or consecrated by the touch of the Pope, or of Royal personages, the ring has ever been the chosen Talisman through which Health, Wealth, and Love was transmitted to its wearer.

The Hand, aptly described by Aristotle as the "Tool of Tools," was used in many forms as a Talisman against fascination, and similar specimens to Illustration No. 109, Plate VIII have been found in early Etruscan tombs, dating back about 800 B.C. This particular form, the thumb placed between the first and second fingers with the hand clenched and pointing downwards, was considered an infallible protection against all

[p. 94]

evil influences, particularly against the Evil Eye. Another form was to close the second and third fingers with the thumb and to hold the hand pointing downward with the first and fourth fingers extended, a form which is known in Italy at the present time as making the Devil's Horns. The position of the hand in these ancient Amulets was very important; the open hand denoting Justice and Victory, and in this form sometimes surrounded by a wreath of laurel was used by the Romans as a finial to their standards, and carried in triumphal processions. In the British Museum may be seen a life-sized hand in bronze in the form assumed in the Benediction of the Christian Church, the third and fourth fingers being closed, with thumb and first two fingers extended; this form has its efficacy as a Talisman against the Evil Eye increased by numerous other symbols (already dealt with), a pine cone being balanced on the finger-tips, a serpent running along the whole length of the back of the hand and towering above the third finger; and, amongst others, the Asp, Lizard, Caduceus, Frog, and Scales may be seen, all probably connected with the worship of Isis and Serapis. This form, known as Mano Pantea, and the life-sized hands were kept in the house as Talismans to protect it against every evil influence of magic

Click to enlarge
PLATE 8. ETRUSCAN, GREEK, ROMAN, AND ORIENTAL TALISMANS.

[p. 95]

and of the Evil Eye, whilst small replicas were worn as Amulets for personal protection.

The Lizard and the Tortoise were symbols of Mercury, and the Caduceus is frequently depicted placed between them on ancient Talismans. The Lizard is also to be found engraved on many of the old Roman rings, and was used as

charm against weak eyesight, the brilliant green of its body, like the Emerald, causing it to be held in high esteem, both spiritually and physically. It was a type of the Logos, or "Divine Wisdom," and was placed upon the breast of Minerva, as frequently seen on ancient engraved gems. It is also found in Portugal made of painted porcelain and affixed to the walls of houses to attract Good Fortune.

The Spider, like the Lizard, was sacred to Mercury and was considered a most fortunate symbol engraved on precious stones, its remarkable quickness of sight recommending it as a Talisman for shrewdness in business matters and foresight generally; and according to an old writer, prognostications were made from the manner of weaving spiders' webs, and it was deemed a sign that a man would receive money if a little spider fell upon his clothes.

The Eagle was typical of Jupiter because it predominates over birds of highest flight, and it

[p. 96]

was worn as a Talisman for Dignity, quickness of Perception, and the Favour of those who sit in high places.

Marcellus Empiricus prescribes the wearing of a ring as a preservative from Colic and Watery Diseases. This Talisman was made of gold thread melted down and engraved with the figure of a fish; such a ring exists in the Florentine Cabinet and may be seen at the present day.

Snails were also used in love divinations by the Ancient Romans; they were set to crawl upon the hearth and were thought to trace in the ashes the initials of the lover's name.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

  

CHAPTER X

The Orient--The Koran--Jochebed--Bead Necklaces--Mashallah--Hassan and Hussein--Hand of the Lady Fatima--Five Principal Commandments--Zufur Tukiah--Nasiree--Gadiri--Mohammed--Merzoum--The Diamond--Cube of Amber--Scorpion-charming--Early Christian and Mediaeval Talismans--Clement of Alexandria--The Fish--Dag--Palm Branch--The Ship--Sacred Monogram--Shen Constantine the Great--Thoth--The Cross--Household Cross--Yucatan--Hand and Cross--Wheel Cross.

A belief in Talismans and Charms of every kind is universal in the Orient; written prayers, verses from the Koran, the name of the Prophet, and even miniature editions of the Koran itself enclosed in leather or cloth cases, suspended from the neck or tied to the arm, being the most favoured. The belief in the power of the Evil Eye is also widespread, and charms of the kind above-recorded are frequently written on pieces of wood which are fixed to door-posts or trees in the gardens to prevent the harmful glance from resting on the house or plants; should the wood crack it is believed that the injury would have been done had not the glance been intercepted by the Talisman on guard.

Another charm of great potency is the name

[p. 98]

[paragraph continues] "Jochebed," being the name of the Mother of Moses. By its constant repetition it is believed to reveal hidden secrets, unfasten locked doors, and discover treachery and evil doings.

Whilst necklaces and armlets made of the beads of Kerbela are worn upon the person, or put into bales of goods to protect them from thieves, Amulets enclosed in leather are hung on the necks of horses to prevent them from stumbling. Other Talismans consist of discs of gold, or silver, with the word "Mashallah" (God is Great) engraved upon them. These are worn for protection from all calamities, whilst sentences such as "There is no God but God and Mohammed is his prophet" are also considered powerful charms. The names of the grandsons of Mohammed, Hassan and Hussein, engraved on beautifully polished Agate stones, are suspended from the neck or tied to the arms of children to protect them from falling. Blue beads are often sewn on the caps of poor children, and are frequently threaded on the hairs of the tails and manes of horses, being considered very efficacious in averting ill-wishing. A hand with one finger extended, not of coral as in the Levant, but of metal or of blue glass, is worn for the same reason; and at the present day small hands of blue glass made in this form are tied round the necks of children or

[p. 99]

attached to the part of the body to be protected from the Evil Eye. A hand with thumb and fingers outstretched, known as the Hand of the Lady Fatima (see Illustration No. 111, Plate VIII), is still regarded as a powerful charm amongst all Moslems, and is made in all metals, often very crude in execution, its material and detail varying according to the wealth and position of its wearer. This Hand is regarded as a sacred symbol representing Generosity, Hospitality, Power, and Divine Providence; as a whole it represents the Holy Family, the prophet Mohammed being typified by the thumb, the Lady Fatima by the first finger, Ali, her husband, by the second, and the third and fourth fingers respectively being allotted to Hassan and Hussein, the sons of Fatima and Mi. It also serves to keep the faithful in constant remembrance of the Five Principal Commandments, i.e. to keep the Fast of Ramadan, to accomplish the Pilgrimage to Mecca, to Give Alms, to Perform the necessary Ablutions, and to Oppose all Infidels.

Paintings of hands are to be met with throughout Italy, Syria, and Turkey, Asia, and India as symbols of good luck and for protection from witchcraft, showing how widespread and universal is the idea of the efficacy of the human emblem to push away and combat trouble and evil.

[p. 100]

A form of Mussulman Talisman is

The Zufur Tukiah, or sacred crutch, single and double, which is formed of a combination of letters making the name of a saint or holy man, of which three examples are shown on Plate VIII. Illustration No. 114 is formed in the shape of the letters that compose the name Nasiree, or the Preserver, one of the names of God; No. 115 is a double crutch forming the letters that compose the name Gadiri, or the Powerful, also one of the names of God and No. 116 is formed in the shape of the letters which comprise the name of MOHAMMED. The Talismans of the Shah of Persia are very numerous, and it is said exceed two hundred, the principal and most important being the following:

One called Merzoum, in the shape of a gold star, is said to have the power of making traitors confess; some years ago one of the Shah's brothers was suspected of treachery and this Talisman shown him, when terrified and overcome by remorse, he is said to have confessed his crime.

Another powerful Talisman is a diamond set in a scimitar which renders him invincible. He also possesses a cube of Amber, said to have fallen from Heaven in the time of Mohammed; the virtue of this is to render its wearer invulnerable if worn round the neck.

Another marvellous charm is a golden box set

[p. 101]

with emeralds and blessed by the prophet. This is said to render members of the Royal Family invisible as long as they remain unmarried; the Shah, however, had numerous wives before he became its possessor, so that its powers remain untested.

Persians of high rank make use of Rubies, Emeralds, and other Gems, tied round the arm with pieces of red and green silk, as charms against the fascinations of the Devil whom they call "Deebs."

No journey is ever undertaken without first consulting a Book of Omens, each chapter of which begins with a particular letter of the alphabet, some fortunate and some inauspicious; should they unluckily pitch on one of the latter the journey is immediately postponed.

Persians have also a curious custom of charming Scorpions, of which, says Pinkerton, there are great numbers in that country, and they believe that by making use of a prayer, a person gifted with power of "binding" (as it is called) can deprive the Scorpion of its sting. To do this the charmer turns his face towards the sign Scorpio in the heavens, repeating a special prayer, and at the conclusion of each sentence claps his hands. After the ceremony his hearers do not scruple to handle scorpions, so great is their faith in the efficacy of the charm.

[p. 102]

  

EARLY CHRISTIAN AND MEDIAeVAL TALISMANS.

At the time of the founding of the Christian religion and onwards through the Middle Ages the symbols used during the services, certain texts, mottoes, and prayers were very popular as Talismans. They are often found in combination with symbols used in preceding religions, and were worn for protection from temptation and all kinds of perils, dangers, and diseases.

In the earliest days when open avowal of faith meant peril and persecution, these Talismans were of great service in making fellow-believers known to each other, and when Christianity was established were extensively worn, with the approval of Clement of Alexandria.

One of the oldest Talismans of this kind is

The Fish, said to have been adopted because its Greek name IKhThYS formed the initials of the sentence "Jesus Christ, Son of God, Saviour." The form of the Fish is very similar to that used by the Egyptians and is illustrated on Plate IX, No. 120.

Another explanation of its use is that in the Talmud the Messiah is often designated by the name "Dag," the Fish, and the sign of His second coming, it is said, would be the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Pisces, which is the origin of the three fishes interlaced into a

[p. 103]

triangle, a very popular ornament in mediaeval architecture.

The Palm Branch was another popular Talisman used to symbolise triumph over sin and temptation; this undoubtedly was adapted from the pagan mythology, in which the Palm represented the Sun, and was also a token of victory and success. In Illustration No. 122, Plate IX, it is shown surrounding the Greek name for Fish.

Stones were also frequently used, and although valuable gems were in use, semi-precious stones such as the Carnelian, Sardonyx, and Jasper were the most general, the device illustrated on Plate IX, No. 126, being cut in a Sapphire, the usual method of treatment in those days being very seldom to cut in relief, as in more modern times.

A favourite gift was a ring with the name of the recipient cut in the stone with some appropriate motto, as in Illustration No. 124, Plate IX: "Rogate, Vivas in Deo" (Rogatus, Live in God). Bronze and silver rings were freely used for this purpose.

The Ship (Illustration No. 127, Plate IX) was a symbol universally used to represent the Church, and signified the belief of its wearers in their salvation and safety from temptations of the flesh. It was frequently used in combination with other symbols, as shown in Illustration No. 127, Plate IX,

[p. 104]

where the Sacred Monogram appears above the deck of the Ship. It is worthy of note, as the sign which encloses it is probably the Egyptian symbol of Eternity, Shen. This monogram is reputed to have been revealed in a vision to Constantine the Great, Emperor of Rome, on the evening of the battle in which he overcame Manentius. In consequence he adopted it as the device for the Imperial Standard. It was also commonly used as an abbreviation of the name of Christ. Nos. 126 and 131 are other examples of this symbol, and No. 126 is interesting as being in combination with the Tau Cross, which has been treated fully in a preceding chapter. This Cross when placed upon the top of a heart signified goodness, and was at the same time regarded as a Talisman for protection from evil. It was the monogram of Thoth, the Egyptian god of Wisdom, and when used with a circle at its base signified the eternal preserver of the world.

The Cross with four arms symbolises the four Cardinal Points, or Universe, the dominion of the Spirit. Making the sign of the Cross has always been considered efficacious in the treating of spells, the exorcising of the Devil, and also as a protection from evil spirits. For these reasons, in olden days kings and nobles used the sign of the Cross whether they could write or riot, regarding it as a

Click to enlarge
PLATE 9. EARLY CHRISTIAN AND MEDIAeVAL TALISMANS.

[p. 105]

symbol of good luck; even at the present time people ignorant of writing when called upon to sign a document mark it with a cross to show that it is their mark and deed. The primitive inhabitants of Yucatan prayed to the Cross as the god of Rain, and in Martin's Western Islands of Scotland we are told that "in the Island of Uist, one of the Outer Hebrides, opposite St. Mary's Church, there is a stone cross which was called by the natives the 'Water Cross,' and when they needed rain they set the cross up, and when sufficient had fallen, they laid it flat upon the ground."

Illustrated on Plate IX (No. 121) is a Cross with Greek inscription for Life and Health, which is made in the form of a mould, or stamp; a household Talisman, in all probability used for making an impression upon bread, or cakes, its size being three and a half inches each way.

The combination of the Hand and the Cross as a Talisman is one of the most remarkable of all the composition charms of ancient times against the Evil Eye, and to break a Cross of this kind, or, in fact, any charm of this nature, was thought to be most unfortunate.

On ornaments belonging to the later Bronze Age, the Wheel Cross was symbolic of the Wheels of the Chariot which the Sun was supposed to drive through the sky; whilst the Golden Wheel

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Cross, so often placed behind the figure of the Saviour, is symbolic of His title as the "Sun of Righteousness." It was also used on the shields of ancient warriors as a symbol of the Sun and its worshippers. This same Wheel Cross, in the shape of a large Waggon Wheel, is said to be still used in Denmark and Holland, and is placed on the roofs of houses and stables to entice storks to build their nests thereon, the red legs of the bird suggesting to the inhabitants that it is a fire bird and will prevent the building from being destroyed by fire, whilst the wheel will bring good luck. Even in England the Wheel Cross, in the shape of a brass ornament, is still to be seen upon the foreheads of fine cart-horses; it was intended in olden days to ward off witchcraft and the Evil Eye and to attract Good Fortune.

The Irish Cross is also a type of the Wheel Cross.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

CHAPTER XI

The Agnus Dei--The Coventry Ring--Ananizapta--Tau Cross--Cross of St. Benedict--Byzantine Ring--Simsum Ring--Abracadabra--Pentalpha, Pentacle, Pentagram, or Five-pointed Star--The Kabala--The Table of Jupiter--The Ten Divine Names--The Planetary Angels--The Agla--Dr. Dee.

The Talisman known as the Agnus Dei came into use after the Christian religion had become general; and it is in use at the present day. It consists of a Lamb carrying a flag and cross, as in Illustration No. 129, Plate IX, with the motto "Ecce Agnus Dei" (Behold the Lamb of God). It was made not only in various metals, but in wax, and is believed to possess the virtue of preserving its wearers from the danger of accidents, tempests, and pestilence.

The Coventry Ring is another good example of a religious Talisman of the fifteenth century, and is illustrated by No. 128, Plate IX. The outside is engraved with a scene representing Our Lord rising from the tomb, with the five wounds arranged on either side, and the following inscriptions:

[p. 108]

"The Well of Everlastingh Life,"

"The Well of Pitty,"

"The Well of Merci,"

"The Well of Comfort,"

"The Well of Gracy."

The Five Wounds symbolise the five senses through which we have the power of wounding Our Lord by yielding to the temptation of the Flesh and the Devil, and in themselves alone were regarded as an efficacious Talisman against all evil. Inside the ring is engraved the names of the Three Kings of Cologne (so named because their relics are preserved at Cologne), or the Magi--the Three Wise Kings--Caspar, signifying the White One; Melchior, King of Light; Baltasar the Lord of Treasures; also in Latin the verse Luke iv. 30, I.H.S.: "Autem transiens per medium illorum ibat" (Jesus passing through their midst went His way.) This text was worn as a charm against danger by sea and land, and especially against dangers from robbers; and to commemorate his escape in the great naval battle off Sluys in the year 1340 Edward III had this same verse struck upon his gold nobles.

The sigil Ananizapta is also engraved inside the ring and has been translated as meaning, "Have mercy on us, O Judge"; it was considered a powerful protection against disease, epilepsy,

[p. 109]

and intoxication, particularly when associated with the Tau Cross, as in Illustration No. 133, Plate X.

The Cross of St. Benedict was another popular charm, worn as a protection against disease and dangers. Each letter stands for a word, the four letters in the angles of the Cross, making the first line, then the upright of the Cross, next the horizontal bar, finally the lettering round the outside, as in Illustration No. 130, Plate IX.

The following is the Latin text and its translation:

1. Crux Sancti Patris Benedicte.
 2. Crux Sancta sit mihi lux.
 3. Ne daemon sit mini dux.
 4. Vade retro Satana,
    Ne suade mihi vana;
    Sunt mala quae libas,
    Ipse venena bibas.

1. Cross of the Holy Father Benedict.
 2. Holy Cross be my light.
 3. Let no evil spirit be my guide.
 4. Get thee behind me Satan,
    Suggest no vain delusions;
    What thou offerest is evil,
    Thou thyself drinkest poison.

[p. 110]

The Ring illustrated on Plate X, No. 132, is Byzantine, and was worn as an Amulet for protection against disease and accident, the grotesque head being against the Evil Eye; the seven radiating spirits symbolise the seven gifts of the Spirit--Power, Wisdom, Honour, Glory, Blessing, Strength, and Riches. Round the hoop is engraved the inscription, "Lord preserve the wearer."

A popular astrological Talisman for good fortune was the formula in which the word Simsum was emphasised as containing the initial letters of each Planet and the Sun in their relative order, Saturni, Jovis, Martius, Solis, Veneris, Mercurii--the whole inscription reading:

"Post Simsvm sequitur septuna Luna subest,"

which has been translated as:

"After possibility follows certainty, the seventh moon is at hand."

[paragraph continues] The seventh New Moon of our Calendar would fall in Cancer, the Moon's own Zodiacal house in which she is exalted, or at her strongest, and when there marks a very auspicious time for pushing public affairs or undertaking new business enterprises (see Illustration No. 137, Plate X).

The most famous Talisman, however, of the Middle Ages is the

[p. 111]

Abracadabra, which, says the Rev. C. W. King, was first mentioned by Serenus Sammonicus, the most learned Roman of his time, and physician to Caracalla. Serenus Alexander, a great admirer of Serenus Sammonicus, ordered the word to be written in the form of an inverted cone, and declares it to be of virtue against all diseases.

"Thou shalt on paper write the spell divine
  ABRACADABRA called in many a line,
  Each under each in even order place,
  But the last letter in each line efface,
  As by degrees the elements grow few,
  Still take away but fix the residue,
  Till at the last one letter stands alone,
  And the whole dwindles to a tapering cone.
  Tie this about the neck with flaxen string,
  Mighty the good 'twill to the patient bring,
  Its wondrous potency shall guard his head
  And drive disease and death far from his bed."

The Illustration No. 136, Plate X, is from an example in the British Museum, and the probable origin of this Talisman is that it is a composition of the Hebrew words Ha--Brachab--Dabarah--"Speak or pronounce the Blessing"; "Blessing" standing for "The Blessed One," being equivalent to invoking the Holy Name of Jehovah.

Defoe mentions this Talisman as being worn written as described, for a safeguard against infection during the time of the Great Plague, the

[p. 112]

prescription being that the word Abracadabra be written on parchment and worn for nine days (nine being the number of the Planet Mars ruling fevers and infectious illnesses generally). It was then to be thrown backwards before sunrise into a stream running eastward (the East Wind being also under the influence of the Planet Mars). Another signification given to the word Abracadabra is said to be of Jewish origin, and means "God sends forth His lightning to scatter His enemies," which sentence occurs in a Psalm of David. It was also believed to have the power of curing the toothache, as an extract from an old MS. in the British Museum contains the following interesting information:

"Mr. Banester sayeth that he healed two hundred in one yer of an ague, by hanging Abracadbra about their necks, it would stanch blood or heal the toothache although the parties were ten miles off."

Other writers affirm that in order to cure mild attacks of ague it is only necessary to repeat the word Abracadabra, dropping each time one letter, but in severe cases the word was to be written as prescribed and eaten by the patient!

The Pentalpha, Pentacle, Pentagram, or Five-pointed Star, has always had very mysterious

[p. 113]

powers ascribed to it, and Rennet, Bishop of Peterborough, says: "When it is delineated on the body of a man it points out the five places wherein the Saviour was wounded, and, therefore, the devils are afraid of it." No evil spirit could pass where it was displayed, and for this reason it was always used in magic ceremonies to "bind with," as the spirits of darkness can have no power over the magician who stands within this Pentacle or is provided with this symbol. Audrey says: "It was used by the Christian Greeks (as the sign of the Cross was later), at the heading of MS. and at the beginning of books for 'good luck's sake.'"

In the Middle Ages it was looked upon as a symbol of immense power, and was worn for health and safety, both in the spiritual as well as in the physical sense; and the magical Pentacle in the western window of the southern aisle of Westminster Abbey is one of the emblems still existing to prove that the worshippers of old were deeply read in Occult lore. Eliphas Levi describes it "as the seal of the Microcosm through which Man can command the powers and beings of the Elements and restrain Elementals from evil." In Illustration No. 134, Plate X, it is shown with the symbols of the Planets and the Sacred Names of God which give it added power and efficacy.

[p. 114]

[paragraph continues] Scott, in Marmion, describing a wizard, also alludes to this Talisman as follows:

"His shoon were marked with cross and spell,
  Upon his breast a pentacle";

and in Germany it is still considered a Talisman against the powers of witchcraft.

The Kabala, the source and inspiration of numerous Talismans, came into being very soon after the establishment of the Christian Religion, when the Jewish Rabbis developed a complete science of Divine things, received, as the name implies, by direct revelation, according to which all created things from the highest to the lowest are ruled, through the ten principal names of God, acting first through the nine orders of the Angelic Hosts and blessed souls, and through them to the Celestial Spheres, Planets, and Mankind. Lower degrees of Angels and celestial influences, known as Intelligences, ruling each element, nation, language, animal and vegetable life, atmospheric conditions, emotions and aspirations. The early Christians had great faith and belief in the power of numbers, and their magical formulas were largely composed of letters having numerical values, usually expressed in Hebrew. Sometimes Greek letters were used, which, combined with

[p. 115]

astrological formulas, attracted the good influences of the Angels and Intelligences ruling through the Planets, the houses of the Zodiac, their triplicities and degrees.

One form described as the

Table of Jupiter, which is illustrated on Plate X, Illustration No. 139, contains sixteen numbers which total up to thirty-four whichever way they are added. This, with the Divine names around it, is to be made in a plate of silver when Jupiter is strong, and was worn for riches, favour, peace, and concord, to appease enemies, and to confer honours and dignities.

The Good Spirits were always working to preserve mankind from the machinations of Evil Spirits; the Jupiterian Spirits working especially to preserve Justice and Mercy on Earth. This Talisman may be seen reproduced in Albrecht Durer's picture of "Melancholy." The complete set of the Planetary Tables with their Angels and Intelligences, together with full instructions for their making, may be found in the Magus by Francis Barrett.

The Ten Names of God were used to attract the virtues and powers they represent, or to accomplish some desire signified.

The first is the name Eheia, the essence of Divinity, influencing the angelic order of Seraphim

[p. 116]

through whom the gift of being is bestowed on all things.

The second is Jod, signifying wisdom, ruling through the order of Cherubim.

The third is Elohim, signifying providence and understanding, ruling through the order of Thrones.

The fourth is El, signifying clemency and goodness, grace, piety, and magnificence, ruling through the order of Dominions.

The fifth name is Elohim Gibor, signifying power and judgment, ruling through the Seraphim.

The sixth name is Eloha, meaning Beauty and Glory, and has power through the order of Virtues.

The seventh name is Adonai Sabaoth, the God of Hosts, triumph and victory, justice and eternity, ruling through the order of Principalities.

The eighth is Elohim Sabaoth, signifying Piety and Agreement, ruling through the Archangels.

The ninth is called Sadai, that is, Omnipotent, and has influence through the Cherubim, ruling the increase and decrease of all things.

The tenth name is Adonai Melech, signifying Kingdom and Empire, and has rule through

[p. 117]

the Blessed Souls giving knowledge and understanding.

Very powerful in Talismans were the names of the Angels ruling the Planets, as follows:

         	Saturn

      	ruled

      	by

      	Zaphiel.

     
     	Jupiter

      	"

      	"

      	Zadkiel.

     
     	Mars

      	"

      	"

      	Camael.

     
     	Sun

      	"

      	"

      	Raphael.

     
     	Venus

      	"

      	"

      	Haniel.

     
     	Mercury

      	"

      	"

      	Michael.

     
     	Moon

      	"

      	"

      	Gabriel.

     
   Names of power were compounded from letters taken from verses of Scripture: for example, the Agla is formed from the initial letters of the words Ate Gebir Leilam Adonai--"Thou art mighty for ever, O Lord"; a popular charm during the fourteenth century against Fever, frequently found on rings and brooches of this period. It was used by Dr. Dee, as illustrated on Plate X, Illustration No. 138.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 118]

  

CHAPTER XII

Tetragrammaton--Phylactery--Talismans against all mischiefs, the Magus--Venus Talisman--Totaphoth--Abraxas--Eye of a Cock--Bells--Gargoyles--Cramp Rings--Blessing of Rings--Musseltaub--Posie Rings--Gemmel Rings--Zodiacal Rings--The Signs of the Zodiac in Rhyme--General Talismans--The Lee Penny--Crystal--The Moon Talismans--Peacock--Juno--Fire Talismans--Gold Nugget--Coins--Card Talismans--Badger's Tooth--Four-leaved Clover.

Tetragrammaton, or mystic name, had its derivation in a Hebrew word, "Yod-he-vau-he," which signified the unutterable name of Jehovah, its meaning being "He that is and shall be." The sigil is composed of letters formed from the following four texts: Exodus xiii. 2nd and 10th verses, also verses 11 and 16; and Deuteronomy vi. 4th and 9th verses. It was very popular as a Talisman in the Middle Ages for protection from enemies, also to bring peace, harmony, and long life, and was usually made in the form of a pentacle with the five syllables engraved in each corner (see Illustration No. 142, Plate X) with the Hebrew letter Yod, or Shin, in the centre.

It was also worn by the Jews in the form of a Phylactery, which was a strip of cowhide parchment inscribed with verses from the Talmud,

[p. 119]

or with the Tetragrammaton and the sigil formed from the four passages of Scripture already referred to. It was enclosed in a black calfskin case which had thongs attached to it for binding on the forehead, or round the left arm. Worn when attending worship in their synagogues, it was considered to have great potency as a Talisman.

The illustration of the Tetragrammaton is taken from Barrett's Magus, as are also Nos. 140 and 141, Plate X, which are described as containing "the beginnings and ends of the first five verses of Genesis, and representation of the creation of the world; and by this ligature they say that a man shall be free from all mischiefs if that he firmly believes in God, the Creator of all things."

No. 135, Plate X, is a Talisman of Venus which is in the British Museum, and is also described in the Magus as worn for success and good fortune in love, joyfulness, and to make travellers fortunate. The written inscription is an addition probably made personally, and reads:

"Accipe my petitione, O domine, keep me as apple of an eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings from all evel, up Lord and help us for thou art my strong rock and my castle. Amen."

The Totaphoth was another species of Talisman

[p. 120]

worn by the Hebrews as a frontlet, consisting of a plate slightly curved, inscribed with passages from the Talmud, which covered the forehead from ear to ear and was bound with a fillet of gold or silver by those who could afford it, and with strips of coloured cloth by the poor. Scapulars, or pieces of brown cloth, in which were stitched certain verses from the Gospel of St. John written on paper, or parchment, guarded against perils by flood or field, and a Dove with a branch of Olive in its mouth engraved in pyrites, ensured for the pilgrim the utmost hospitality wheresoever he journeyed.

The Gnostic god Abraxas is frequently depicted with the head of a Cock, this bird being considered a powerful Talisman for vigilance, and also a symbol of the Sun, as well as of Mercury. It is sometimes represented with an ear of corn in its beak, denoting that "vigilance produces plenty."

The Eye of a Cock was considered a potent Talisman against witchcraft and the wiles of the Devil, even the lion being afraid of its hypnotic glance; and as Christ was thought by the early Christians to have arisen from the tomb at cockcrow, the Cock was from an early period used as a symbol of the Resurrection, and its image was engraved on many of the ancient tombs. Placed

Click to enlarge
PLATE 10. MEDIAeVAL TALISMANS.

[p. 121]

as it still is, on the highest point of the church tower or spire, it is singularly appropriate as a church Talisman.

Bells were another form of Talisman used in olden days, the traditional idea being that any great noise would terrify the Devil and all evil spirits, so that bells were attached to the heads of. horses and to the playthings of children to protect them from harm; and were also hung in church towers to scare the ears of demons, whilst the Gargoyles struck terror to the eyes of the evil ones.

Cramp Rings were another form of Talisman worn for the prevention or cure of cramp. These rings were at one time hallowed by the Kings and Queens of England, but the custom was discontinued in the reign of Edward VI. An old MS., emblazoned with the arms of Philip and Mary, gives the prayers used in the consecration of these rings. The rings were placed in a dish and the ceremony commenced with the reading of a Psalm and a prayer for the communication of the divine gift of healing, after which the sovereign hallowed the rings by saying:

"O God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, hear mercifully our prayers, Spare those who feare thee, and be propitious to thy suppliants, and

[p. 122]

graciously be pleased to send down from heaven, thy holy angel, that he may sanctify and bless these rings to the end that they may prove a healthy remedy to such as implore thy name with humilitie. Amen."

[paragraph continues] After the blessing of the rings, the King rubbed them between the palms of his hands, saying:

"Sanctify, O Lord, these rings and graciously bedew them with the dew of thine benediction and consecration, and hallow them by the rubbing of our hands which thou hast been pleased according to our ministry, to the end that what the nature of the metal is not able to perform may be wrought by the greatness of thy grace."

Then holy water was sprinkled on the rings:

"In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost."

These rings were considered most efficacious if formed out of the screws and nails taken from old coffins, and were frequently considered most beneficial in the cure of epileptic fits if hallowed on Good Friday. This custom, according to Hospinian, took its rise from a famous ring long preserved in Westminster Abbey; this ring had been brought from Jerusalem by Edward the

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] Confessor, and was believed to be efficacious against cramp and epilepsy when touched by those afflicted. Another Talisman ring of the sixteenth century was of Jewish origin, engraved with a Hebrew word "Musseltaub," meaning "We wish you good luck," inscribed inside.

Within the hoop of the betrothal or wedding ring it was customary to inscribe sentences, or poesies (posies), and this custom appears to have lasted into the latter part of the eighteenth century, when it fell into disuse. It has been revived of late years, devices, mottoes, and hieroglyphics being once more inscribed in engagement rings, to express the sentiment of the giver and to act as a mutual token of love and friendship. Some of these ancient posies may be found interesting, such as:

"The eye did find, the heart did chuse, the hand doth bind, till death doth loose."

"Let Love Encrease."

"God did decree the Unitie."

"Where Hearts agree there love will be."

"Hearts united live contented."

"Keep fayth till deth."

"I seek to be, not thine, but thee."

"Let lyking laste."

"Hearts truly tied none can divide."

[p. 124]

"Joye sans cesse."

"Let us be one till we are none."

"Fear the Lord and rest content, so shall we live and not repent."

"This and the giver are thine for ever."

A very old ring (says the author of Ring Lore) is in the collection of J. Evans, Esq.; it is of gold set with a small sapphire, inscribed:

JE, SVI, ICI, EN, LI'V, D'AMI.
 (I am here in place of a friend.)

Other devices express the sentiment of the giver in the setting of the gems of the ring, as, for instance, the word "Regard" is represented by a

Ruby
 Emerald
 Garnet
 Amethyst
 Ruby
 Diamond

placed in sequence round the ring.

The Gemmel, Or Gemmow, rings were frequently double or even triply made, the word "Gemmel" denoting jointed hinges, or jimmers. At the time of the betrothal the parties concerned broke away the upper and lower rings over an

[p. 125]

open Bible, each wearing the respective ring severed (the third ring being held by the witness of their betrothal) until the marriage took place, when the rings were reunited and became the Wedding Ring. It was considered most unlucky for a ring to hurt its wearer, or fall to the ground during the betrothal or marriage, and it is said to be a curious fact that when this has happened the incident has been followed by disappointment or misfortune to one or both of the persons concerned.

The Ancients had great faith in Zodiacal Rings, in the construction of which the aspects and positions of the planets were of the utmost importance. They were worn for the gift of eloquence and were in great favour with lawyers, poets, and orators, being worn on the fourth finger (Mercury ruling speech and the tongue).

These Zodiacal rings, engraved with the representation of the twelve signs of the Zodiac in their order, are aptly described in the following rhyme, for which we are indebted to the Rev. C. W. King's book, The Natural History of Precious Stones and Gems, although it is not from that author's pen, but merely quoted by him:

[p. 126]

"THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC IN RHYME

"Hear how each sign the body's portion sways,
  How every part its proper lord obeys
  And what the members of the human frame
  Wherein to rule, their several forces claim.
  First to the Ram, the Head hath been assigned;
  Lord of the sinews, Neck, the Bull we find;
  The arms and shoulders joined in union fair
  Possess the Twins, each one an equal share.
  The Crab, as sovereign o'er the Breast presides;
  The Lion, the shoulder blades and sides.
  Down to the flank, 'the Virgin's' lot descends,
  And with the buttock Libra's influence ends;
  The fiery Scorpion in the groin delights,
  The Centaur in the thighs exerts his rights,
  While either knee doth Capricornus rule,
  The legs the province of Aquarius cool;
  Last, the twain Fishes as their region meet,
  Hold jurisdiction on the pairs of feet."

  

General Talismans

An historic Talisman of Oriental origin which was famous during the fourteenth century, is the

Lee Penny, which is described as a small red stone of triangular or heart shape, and of unknown origin, set in a groat of Edward IV.

According to tradition, it was brought from the Holy Land by Sir Simon Locard of Lee, who accompanied Sir James Douglas to Palestine bearing the heart of Robert Bruce enclosed in a golden casket, and, for his services in connection

[p. 127]

with this, was given the name of Lockhart, and for armorial bearings, a lock and a heart. Fighting in the Holy Land, Sir Simon captured a Saracen Emir whom he held to ransom. The Emir's lady willingly paid the ransom; but while handing out a goodly supply of golden bezants, she dropped a small jewel. So marked was her anxiety to recover it, that the canny Sir Simon, with a true Caledonian instinct for a bargain, conjectured the apparently valueless stone must be a potent Talisman. Consequently he refused to set his prisoner at liberty unless the stone was included in the ransom.

Amongst its many merits it cures hydrophobia, takes away disease from horned cattle, and counteracts the poison of infectious complaints if it is soaked in water and the water is used as a cordial.

For its use during an epidemic of the plague Newcastle is reputed to have granted a bond of L6000 for its safe return.

Another Scottish Talisman is a Crystal set in silver, which is worn hung round the back for diseases of the kidneys; it is also directed to be steeped in water seven times, the water to be drunk by the patient.

The Moon is another symbol of importance in connection with the talismanic properties of

[p. 128]

water, upon which it has a vitalising influence. In Oudh a silver basin is filled with water by the people, who hold it so that the orb of the full moon is reflected therein, their doctors recommending this as a remedy for nervous hysteria and palpitation, patients being directed to look steadfastly for a while at the reflection, then to shut their eyes and drink the water at a gulp.

Many and various are the ways in which lunar sympathy and influence were turned to account in olden days, warts being considered particularly susceptible to its influence, and a charm repeated over them at the junction of four cross roads as the moon waned in light was believed to be most efficacious in removing the blemishes. The formula prescribed:

"As the moon decreases
  So may these warts disappear,"

is still in vogue in certain remote country villages in England. Christians and Moslems alike turn silver money in their pockets that their goods and money may increase when the moon is new and gaining in light, and their ills decrease as it wanes. The Moon's image in crescent shape was also considered a fortunate Talisman for expectant mothers.

The Peacock was regarded in very ancient

[p. 129]

times a symbol of triumph over the grave; its flesh was believed to be incorruptible, which probably accounts for its presence in church decoration; and because it renews its plumage yearly it was taken as the symbol of immortality.

It was the bird of Juno, the goddess and protectress of Malta; and on one of the old gateways her statue is still in existence bearing her symbolic bird. The supposition that the feathers of a Peacock are unlucky is said to have had its origin in the anger of the goddess Juno, having been aroused by the plucking of the feathers of her favourite bird; in her wrath she decreed that no suitors should come for the daughters of any house wherein should be found Peacocks' feathers, that the children should never be well, nor the occupants of a house healthy where these feathers were used as ornaments. It is believed the Egyptians also considered the feathers a perpetual emblem of the Evil Eye.

In many parts of the country old houses are still to be seen with one, or even two pieces of iron in the shape of the letter S attached to the outer walls. These are intended to protect the building from being destroyed by fire, and are not, as is generally supposed, employed as a support; sometimes the S will have a bar across its centre;

[p. 130]

another form is shaped like two crescents, placed back to back, also with a bar across the centre; but in each case they are only bolted at one point, and their meaning is the same--a charm against destruction by fire, and in all probability. it was intended as a form of the Swastika Cross.

Gold Nuggets are considered lucky charms for speculators in mines, and miners; and Leap Year Pennies should always be kept in the kitchen to bring unexpected windfalls to the house.

To card players the Deuce of Clubs is said to be the Talisman of the pack, and is generally the sign of four or five trumps in the dealer's hand; whilst the Four of Clubs is the most unlucky card, the holder of it seldom if ever winning the game; in old writings this card is known as "the devil's bedstead."

A Badger's Tooth sewn inside the right-hand pocket of the waistcoat is also a well-known Talisman for luck at cards.

The Four-Leaved Clover is another well-known charm for good luck, generally, for--

"One leaf is for fame,
  And one leaf is for wealth
  And one for a faithful lover,
  And one to bring you glorious health
  Are all in the four-leaved clover."

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

PART II

  

THE GEMS OF THE ZODIAC

[p. 132] [p. 133]

  

CHAPTER I

  

ARIES--THE RAM

The Zodiac--Zodiacal and Calendar Months--The New Year--The Constellation--Hamal--The Passover--Characteristics of Aries People--Gems of Aries--The Bloodstone and Heliotrope--Mars the Ruling Planet--Marbodeus Gallus--The Diamond--The Qualities of the Diamond--Tavernier--The Regent--The Koh-i-Noor--The Hope Diamond.

The Sun enters the Zodiacal House of Aries on March 21st of each year, and remains in occupation until April 10th, his entrance to this House marking the commencement of the Zodiacal year, with days and nights of equal length, and also signifying the advent of Spring.

The Zodiac is an imaginary belt in the heavens which extends for several degrees on either side of the apparent path of the Sun, called the Ecliptic, which is divided into twelve sections of thirty degrees each, known as the Houses of the Zodiac; and it is in this belt that the planets move and form aspects.

The Sun takes a year to travel through the twelve houses, remaining a month in each; the months are not, however, the familiar ones of the

[p. 134]

[paragraph continues] Calendar, but are for periods from the 21st of one Calendar month to the 10th of the next approximately. The time of the Sun's entry into Aries marks the Zodiacal beginning of the year, as from this time the days are longer than the nights, and are still increasing in length; the fact remains, however, that the First of January was fixed by Act of Parliament as the beginning of the New Year, although our law-makers in 1752, when re-forming the Calendar, would have been wiser and more accurate had they fixed the New Year at the Vernal Equinox instead of adopting the System of the Romans which was originally formed out of compliment to Julius Caesar.

The Constellation of Aries is situated in the Northern Celestial Hemisphere near the Pleiades, between the Constellations of Pisces and Taurus. In its group it has three very bright stars visible to the naked eye, the brightest of which is known as Hamal, or the Sheep, and was much more poetically described in the Akkadian tongue as "Dilkur," the dawn proclaimer. The Chinese have a tradition giving the greatest prominence to Aries from the fact that it was believed to have occupied the centre of the heavens at the Creation of the World, a belief that was also held by the Babylonians.

The Symbol of this House is the Ram (see Frontispiece, No. 1),

[p. 135]

which in the early religions was considered symbolic of sacrifice, and in connection with this may be noted the fact that the Jewish Passover was commenced in this sign when Moses was commanded to sacrifice a young Ram, a sacrifice which was the forecast of our Easter Services. Chemical evidence reveals the fact that the human body is composed of separate elements, common to all physical formations, and that the differences between individuals is caused by different and varying combinations of these elements, portions of which are vivified to a greater or lesser degree by the Planets of our Solar System. The influence of this force should be taken into account when the relative effect of one person's mind qualities, or magnetic emanations, on any other person is under consideration. Aries rules the Head and Face, and brain-workers are consequently typical of this sign, Reason being their ruler, and this the most positive of the twelve houses. Those born under the influence of Aries must be leaders, the brain being the most active part of their bodies. Having unbounded confidence in their own abilities when working out their plans, difficulties are scorned, or even welcomed, for they have the true Martian spirit--the love of conquest.

Pioneers in thought and action, ever exploring

[p. 136]

and originating, they bring unflagging energy and fearlessness in emergency to their pursuits, seeming specially gifted by Nature to tread the thorny paths of life, making the ways smoother for their weaker brethren. Their methods must, however, be their own. If required to work on conventional lines they are never happy, and seldom successful; understanding what they require, they must be left to accomplish it according to their own ideas. Optimistic in regard to their enterprises, difficulties are underrated; but where any matter requires to be dealt with quickly and promptly, they are at their best.

Aries people are very enthusiastic, brave, venturesome, generous, and impulsive, self-willed and opinionated, fond of change, romance, and adventure, ever ready to champion the cause of the weak and suffering, this tendency frequently leading them to acts of indiscriminate charity often wasted on undeserving subjects. They have great ideality, are highly strung, often hypersensitive, with remarkably keen perceptions in which they are rarely deceived. They are naturally ambitious, and often lacking in caution; but, as they are ruled by their reasoning powers, it is in this direction they are open to control and should find their Zodiacal and Planetary Stones of great benefit to them. In matters of business, friend-

[p. 137]

ship, and the affections this type will harmonise best with those between April 21st and May 21st, July 22nd and August 21st, also November 22nd and December 10th.

The gems of this House are the Bloodstone and Diamond, which, as a rule, will not be good for people born between June 21st and July 21st, unless Mars was very favourable at their birth.

The Bloodstone is a variety of green Jasper which derives its distinctive name from a number of blood-red specks formed by iron oxide with which it is impregnated. It is an opaque stone, but as its surface is capable of taking a very high polish, and in consistency being very suitable to the graver, it has from time immemorial been a great favourite for the cutting of seals and cameos. It exists in large quantities and is, in consequence, inexpensive, and is found in India, Bokhara, Siberia, Tartary, and in the Hebrides.

There is much disagreement between ancient writers with regard to the Heliotrope and Bloodstone, some asserting there is no difference, the name Heliotrope having been conferred upon this variety from the idea that when plunged in water it presents a red reflection of the image of the Sun; others maintain that the Heliotrope is a translucent

[p. 138]

green Chalcedony with crimson spots, and the Bloodstone a green Jasper flecked with red.

An old tradition records that the Bloodstone had its origin at the Crucifixion, being formed by drops of blood which, following the thrust of the Roman soldier's spear, fell upon some green jasper on which the cross was erected, the stains penetrating the stones and thus originating this particular variety. From this time onwards the stone seems to have been endowed with magical and divine powers in arresting hemorrhage from wounds, and was worn by Roman soldiers for this reason; among the natives of India it is customary to place the Bloodstone itself upon wounds and injuries after dipping it in cold water. Its curative properties in this respect have been explained in modern times by the fact that the iron oxide in this stone is an active and effective astringent even now used in surgery.

Rings of dark green Jasper flecked with red were favourite ornaments amongst the Egyptians, who frequently wore them upon the thumb, probably because the thumb is under Martian influence, Mars being the ruling planet of the House of Aries.

One of these talismanic stones was worn by

[p. 139]

[paragraph continues] Nechepsos, an Egyptian king, to strengthen the digestive organs, and was engraved in the form of a dragon surrounded by rays. The Gnostics wore the Bloodstone as an Amulet to prolong life, and to make its wearer courageous and wealthy, as well as to strengthen the stomach and dispel melancholy; and in the Middle Ages it was considered good for those engaged in. husbandry and the breeding of cattle.

Amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans, the Bloodstone was worn to bring renown and the favour of the great; to inspire constancy and endurance, and as a charm against the bites of scorpions and all venomous creatures. It was also a great favourite with their athletes, who wore it as a Talisman for success in the games.

In an essay written by a certain Thomas Boyle on "The Origine and Virtues of Gems," dated 1675, we read that a gentleman of sanguine habit having been long troubled with excessive bleeding from the nose, was unable to find a cure until "an ancient gentleman presented him with a Bloodstone the size of a pigeon's egg, to be worn round the neck, and upon the use of this stone he not only cured himself, but stopped hemorrhage in a neighbour."

Marbodeus Gallus, writing in verse on this stone,

[p. 140]

after mentioning its virtue against the Ague and Dropsy, says:

"Againe it is believed to be a safeguard frank and free
  To such as ware and beare the same; and if it hallowed bee,
  It makes the parties gratious and mightier too that have it
  And noysome fancies as they write who ment not to deprave it
  It doth dispel out of the mind. The force thereof is stronger
  In silver, if this stone be set, it doth endure the longer."

The Chinese advise its being set in gold to obtain the best results; and the Rev. C. W. King tells us that a Bloodstone, engraved with the figure of a scorpion when the Sun was entering the sign of Scorpio, was believed by the Ancients to be a sure preservation against the formation of stone in the bladder.

The Diamond.--Amongst the many precious crystallised stones the diamond stands pre-eminent for beauty, brilliancy, and strength. It is the hardest stone known, hence the name of Adamas, meaning "the Indomitable," given it by its ancient discoverers, as with it every known substance can be cut, although it cannot be cut, nor be scratched by other stones; nor have acids nor solvents any effect upon it. It also resists the action of the file.

When found, the diamond is covered with a thick crust, so hard that there is no substance

[p. 141]

known that will remove it but that of itself, and it is only by grinding and polishing with diamond dust and minute diamonds that it is shaped and its wonderful brilliancy developed.

It was believed by the old writers to be the most powerful of all precious stones in its influence and effect upon humanity both spiritually and physically, and it is connected with marvellous records of adventure and enterprise, as well as representing Purity, Innocence, and protection from witchcraft and evil. To this day in India, amongst natives sufficiently wealthy, tiny diamonds are sprinkled from a white cloth over the heads of infants during the ceremony of naming the child, to keep it pure and virtuous.

The Romans also regarded the diamond with much reverence, fastening it upon the left arm so that the gem should touch the flesh, believing it powerful in making its wearer brave and daring, giving him the victory over his enemies; and when set in fine steel, was considered a charm against insanity.

It was thought by the old astrologers to be particularly powerful when worn by a subject born under a strong aspect of the planet Mars, bestowing fortitude, strength of mind, and constancy in wedded love; it repelled sorcery, poison, and nightmares, calmed anger, and strengthened friendship.

[p. 142]

[paragraph continues] It is often referred to as the Stone of Reconciliation; and was worn to promote love and harmony between man and wife.

Sir John Mandeville writes the following:

"A diamond should be worn on the left side of the body for it is of greater value there than on the right, for the strength of their growing is towards the North, that is, the left side of the world, and the left part of a man is when he turns his face to the East."

Another old writer says:

"He who carries a diamond on the left side shall be hardy and manly; it will guard him from accidents to the limbs; but nevertheless a good diamond will lose its power and virtue if worn by one who is incontinent, or drunken."

In the Middle Ages the diamond was thought to protect its wearer from the plague, and for this reason Queen Elizabeth was given a diamond to guard her against infection, which she is said to have worn in her bosom. It was a diamond worn in the girdle of Queen Donna Isabel II of Spain that saved her on the day when the murderous attempt was made upon her life. The point of the assassin's dagger struck the stone and glanced off, so the wound, which might otherwise

[p. 143]

have proved fatal, resulted in a flesh wound only. Napoleon, too, attached great value to the qualities of the diamond, and wore the famous Regent diamond in the hilt of his sword. The history of this remarkable stone is so curious that a brief account of its discovery and subsequent owners may be interesting. It was found at Parteal, south of Golconda, by a slave who concealed it by making a gash in the calf of his leg and hiding the stone in the folds of the bandage until he could escape to Madras. Deceived by the promises made to him by a sailor in whom he had confided, he consented, when a purchaser had been found for the stone, to share profits, but was thrown overboard by the seaman, who disposed of the diamond to a dealer named Jamchund for L1000, which he quickly spent, afterwards hanging himself.

The stone was next purchased by Thomas Pitt, grandfather to the Earl of Chatham, who purchased it after much bargaining for L20,400; but the jewel brought him no happiness. So fearful was he of losing it, it is said that he never slept twice at the same house whilst it was in his possession; also serious reflections were made on his character as to when and under what conditions he had obtained it. About the year 1717, having offered the gem to several sovereigns, the Regent

[p. 144]

of France was persuaded that his country should possess the most beautiful and perfect diamond known, so the purchase was effected for L135,000.

In its natural state it weighed 410 carats, but after its cutting, which took two years to complete, it was reduced to 137 carats, and was the size of a large plum, perfectly white, without spot or flaw, and of admirable water.

In the disorder attendant on the French Revolution the Regent diamond was stolen from the public treasury. Twelve years afterwards it was recovered, and subsequently was amongst the stones set in the Imperial diadem of France.

Another celebrated diamond is the Koh-i-Noor, or "Mountain of Light." Its history, according to Tavernier, the French traveller, can be traced back to half a century B.C. This stone is reported by Baber, the founder of the Mogul Empire, to have come into the treasury at Delhi from the conquest of Malwa in 1304, since when it has passed through the hands of many Indian rulers, who believed that the safety of their dynasty depended on the possession of this fateful jewel.

After many vicissitudes it came into the possession of Runjeet Singh King of Lahore, who wore it on his arm set between two smaller diamonds. So convinced was he of its mystical

[p. 145]

powers, that he bequeathed it to the Shrine of Juggernaut so that he might obtain benefits for his soul after death. His successors, however, would not allow the treasure to be disposed of in this manner, and it was subsequently presented to the late Queen Victoria by Lord Dalhousie on the annexation of the Punjaub, and was brought to London in 1850. The Brahmins believe that the Crimean War and Sepoy Mutiny, which occurred seven years afterwards, were due to its influence, and they say that misfortune will follow the possessor until it is restored to the line of Vikramaditya; but we are justified in the hope that as England is under the influence of the Zodiacal House of Aries, the house of the diamond, our Empire may still flourish and prosper.

Since the Koh-i-Noor came into our possession it has been recut, an operation which has decreased its size but greatly improved its brilliancy.

According to ancient lore, very large diamonds should never be worn as ornaments, as they bring disaster and anxiety; nor should they be used as sleeve-links or buttons or they will bring misfortune and sudden death. The losing of a diamond was considered (and still is), apart from its material value, an omen of mishaps. To be efficacious as a Talisman the diamond should be given freely, never sold, never lent, never coveted, and never

[p. 146]

taken by fraud or force. It is a curious fact that large diamonds have ever brought anxiety and often death to those who have taken them by violence and sold them; and the strange fatality which, for so many years, seems to have surrounded the famous HOPE diamond is an example.

The Hope Diamond was originally owned by Tavernier, the French traveller, already mentioned. Born in Paris in 1605, he spent some years in the East, traded extensively in precious stones, and accumulated a vast fortune. In the year 1668 the gem, subsequently known as "the Hope Diamond," was sold by Tavernier in a parcel of fine diamonds to Louis XIV, the Grand Monarque. Tavernier was soon after robbed by his son of an immense sum of money; left destitute, at the age of eighty-one he died in exile. The King's haughty and arrogant favourite, the Duchesse de Montespan, prevailed upon her Royal lover to allow her to wear the dazzling gem at a Court Ball. From that hour she lost her fascination for the fickle monarch, and the circumstances of her fall confirmed the sinister superstition as to the fateful nature of the blue diamond. Most beautiful and most unhappy of all its wearers was Marie Antoinette. She not only wore it herself, but lent it to her dearest friend the Princesse de Lamballe.

[p. 147]

[paragraph continues] When Madame de Lamballe's head was paraded on a pike by the revolutionary mob, and shown to the King and Queen--then practically prisoners--and when subsequently the ill-fated Louis XVI perished on the guillotine, and finally was followed by his Queen, who was driven slowly to the scaffold so that she should be made to "drink long of death," the superstitious remembered the reputed curse which the blue diamond was said to bring upon its possessors. For thirty years after this the ill-fated diamond was lost to the public gaze, until it was found in the possession of a lapidary of Amsterdam, whose son stole it from his father and disappeared, Fals, the gem-cutter, dying in absolute want. The son gave the jewel to a Frenchman named Beaulieu, and after disposing of it committed suicide. Francois Beaulieu brought the gem to London and sold it to a dealer named Daniel Eliason, Beaulieu himself dying the next day mysteriously.

Mr. Henry Thomas Hope was the next purchaser, paying Eliason the sum of L18,000 for it. The stone remained in the Hope family until 1901, when Lord Francis Hope (who had married and divorced an actress) sold it to a diamond merchant, who resold it to an American, who, becoming financially embarrassed, disposed of it to M. Jacques Colot. He in his turn disposed of it to a

[p. 148]

[paragraph continues] Russian Prince who was stabbed; and the French dealer from whom he purchased it ended his own life. Next a Greek merchant met with a violent death after selling the diamond to Abdul Hamid, the ex-Sultan of Turkey, who narrowly escaped with his life after losing his throne. A firm of New York jewellers next bought the sinister gem, and although a story was circulated that they had disposed of it to a gentleman who had gone down in the ill-fated Titanic, it is believed to be, at present, in the possession of Mr. McLean, an American millionaire, to whom so far nothing untoward has happened.

The preceding paragraph was written in 1914, and in May, 1919, further proof was given of the strange fatality that accompanies this stone in the announcement in all European papers of the death of Vincent Walsh McLean, aged eleven years, who was accidentally killed by a motor-car whilst playing in the road (having escaped from his nurse) near his father's estate.

Great importance was attached by the Hindus to the original shape of a diamond, a triangular stone being thought to cause quarrels, a square diamond terrors; but a six-cornered stone was thought to bring the best of good fortune and to renew the strength in old age.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

  

CHAPTER II

  

TAURUS--THE BULL

The Constellation--Aldebaran--The Chaldeans--The Temples--Apis Bull--Aphrodite--Characteristics of Taurus--Training--Gems of Taurus--The Sapphire--Bishop's Ring--St. Jerome Qualities of the Sapphire--Star Sapphire--Solomon's Seal--Charlemagne's Talisman--The Turquoise--Boetius de Boot--Horseman's Talisman--Qualities of the Stone.

The Sun enters the Celestial House of Taurus, the second sign of the Zodiac, on April 21st, and remains in occupation until May 22nd. Taurus is situated between the constellations of Aries and Gemini, and its position is marked by a beautiful cluster of stars named Hyades, from a Greek word meaning rain, because the influence of these stars was considered to be conducive to rainfalls. Its most brilliant star is Aldebaran, a star of the first magnitude; Taurus also contains the Pleiades, and it is a generally accepted theory amongst astronomers that the motion of the Sun, probably in a circle, has its centre in one of these stars. According to ancient mythology, the Pleiades were the seven daughters of Atlas and Pheione, who, because of

[p. 150]

their great virtue and purity, were rewarded by a place in the heavens as a constellation of stars.

The symbol of this House is the Bull (as illustrated Frontispiece, No. 2), which was selected by the early Chaldean astrologers as typifying the nature of those born under this sign, and not from any fancied resemblance of its stars to a Bull. Undoubtedly the Zodiac had a prehistoric origin, and one of the ancient names given to this sign was Te, meaning foundation, which is interesting from the fact that it was in this sign period that the foundations of the two Jewish temples were laid.

As Taurus is the first of the earthly signs it typifies the creative forces of Nature; Apis, the sacred Bull of the Egyptians, was used as its symbol and was adopted by the Greeks as typical of fecundity, and is mentioned in Part I, Chapter VIII, on Greek Talismans. In Ancient Greece, Venus, the ruling planet of this House, was represented by the goddess Aphrodite, usually shown with horns on her head (not intended to represent the goddess Isis as has been sometimes imagined, but the planet Venus, which occasionally in the course of her revolution round the Sun is seen in crescent form) .

The dominating characteristic of Taurus subjects

[p. 151]

is their tenacity of purpose, which makes them staunch friends but determined enemies; and although this may to some extent cause difficulty in adapting their opinions to those of others, on the other hand it enables them, when once they have grasped existing conditions, to reap the benefit of their industry and application.

They possess strong mental and physical powers, and are persistent students, their qualities of concentration making them capable of high educational attainments. They are determined, fearless, enthusiastic, and unyielding in carrying out their schemes; and, when not irritated, are generous. The temper is, under normal circumstances, even, if at times sullen, not easily provoked, but very hot and tempestuous when aroused. They can be influenced through their enthusiasm, but will resent to the utmost with dogged obstinacy any attempt to drive them against their inclinations. Their memories are, as a rule, good, and their tenacity of purpose is usually accompanied by a great deal of patience, so that they usually accomplish aims, although not always with a due regard to cost. Their outlook is practical, but not miserly, and money is valued as a medium of power, and for the use that can be made of it. Owing to their strong vitality, they generate life forces very rapidly, which gives them the power of healing,

[p. 152]

making them very helpful to people of nervous temperament lacking in vitality which this type possesses in excess. When attracted their friendship is sincere and trustworthy; and, although they are undoubtedly shrewd in business matters, they are also sensitive to psychic and emotional influences, being apt to allow their feelings and emotions to rule, laying themselves open to deception, and the unscrupulous, by working upon their sympathies, can prejudice their judgment, so that as a rule it will be best for this type to make all important decisions when alone, either in the early morning or after retiring at night.

They do not usually suffer from lack of appetite, and their tastes are of an epicurean nature, the masculine subjects being critical and not easily satisfied; the gentler sex are apt to be hypercritical and with a strong bias in favour of their own culinary theories or methods over those of others.

Their success in life comes, as a rule, after thirty, when they have their dispositions well in hand and are able to benefit by their experiences.

In this sign the Moon is in exaltation, and subjects born when she is so placed have their characters strengthened, and have more reserve and self-control. Their ambitions become practical

[p. 153]

and successful; the constitution is stronger, and there is less liability to disease.

With Taurean subjects, the early impressions of life are vivid and lasting, and their future career and welfare depend very largely on their training and influences through childhood and youth, surrounding conditions and early attachments being never forgotten.

Although producing practical business people, this sign has also its artistic side natural to the planet Venus. Many talented musicians and singers are born during this period, and the type as a whole, even when personally unaccomplished, is greatly influenced by music and singing which make a strong appeal to their emotional tendencies.

Unless following a very active vocation, their abundant vitality predisposes them to put on flesh, and it is through this tendency that disease attacks them and they become liable to stomach troubles, dropsy, affections of the heart, kidneys, and generative system; they are also prone to complaints affecting the throat, such as quinsies, diphtheria, and laryngitis.

They will harmonise best with people whose birthdays come between August 22nd and September 22nd; December 21st and January 20th; and June 21st and July 22nd.

[p. 154]

The Gems of this House are the Sapphire and Turquoise, which are especially suitable for the expression of the Taurean qualities.

The Sapphire.--The Sapphire, one of the earliest gems known to man, is found in riverbeds and torrents, the force of the water washing the stones from their matrix; and to this day are still found under these conditions. In its finest quality the sapphire is of a deep blue colour, and the more it resembles the dark velvety blue of the Pansy the greater is its value.

Of coloured gems, the Sapphire has been the most venerated amongst all nations, and particularly in the East it is the stone most frequently consecrated to the various deities. Amongst Buddhists it is believed to produce a desire for prayer, and is regarded as the Stone of Stones to give Spiritual Light, and to bring Peace and Happiness as long as its wearer leads a moral life.

In the early days of the Christian Church, the stones and metal used in making the ring of a Bishop was left very much to the taste of the individual, but in the twelfth century Innocent III decreed that these rings should be made of pure gold, set with an unengraved stone, the Sapphire being the gem selected, as possessing the virtues and qualities essential to its dignified position as

[p. 155]

the badge of Pontifical rank and "a seal of secrets," for there be many things "that a priest conceals from the senses of the vulgar and less intelligent; which he keeps locked up as it were under seal."

Of this gem St. Jerome writes that "it procures favours with princes, pacifies enemies, frees from enchantment, and obtains freedom from captivity."

The Jews also held this stone in high veneration, the seal-stone in the ring of King Solomon being said to be a Sapphire, and in Exodus xxiv. 10, we read in the description of a manifestation of Jehovah:

"There was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness."

This description of clearness, if taken as meaning transparency, would indicate a familiarity with the qualities of the stone as we know it, although in most of the ancient writings all blue stones are loosely described as Sapphires, including the Tables of the Law, which it is practically certain could not have been of Sapphire and in all probability were of Lapis Lazuli.

During the Middle Ages the qualities attributed to the Sapphire were that it preserved Chastity, discovered Fraud and Treachery, protected from

[p. 156]

[paragraph continues] Poison, Plague, Fever, and Skin Diseases, and had great power in resisting black magic and ill-wishing; in smallpox it preserved the eyes from injury if rubbed on them. It also gave concentration; but if worn by an intemperate or impious person, it lost its lustre, thus indicating the presence of vice and impurity. It is recorded that in the Church of Old St. Paul's, London, there was a famous Sapphire given by "Richard de Preston, Citizen and Grocer of that city, for the cure of infirmities in the eyes of those thus afflicted who might resort to it."

Cloudy Sapphires are sometimes found which owing to a peculiarity in their composition show six rays of light running from the top of the stone. These are known as Asteria, or Star Stones, and this Star Sapphire was much valued by the Ancients as a love charm; they considered it peculiarly powerful for the procuring of favours, for bringing good fortune and averting witchcraft. Six is the number given to Venus, and is also the number of the true Solomon's Seal, whose virtues and qualities (treated of under Talismans, Part I, Chapter II) this stone represents.

The wife of the Emperor Charlemagne is reputed to have possessed a very powerful Talisman composed of two rough Sapphires and a portion of the Holy Cross, made by the Magi in the train of

[p. 157]

[paragraph continues] Haaroon Al Raschid, Emperor of the East. This Talisman was made for the purpose of keeping Charlemagne's affections constant to his wife, and it was so efficacious that his love endured after her death. He would not allow the body, on which the Talisman hung, to be interred, even when decomposition had set in; and burial was only permitted when Charlemagne's confessor, who knew of the Talisman and its virtue, removed it from the body. The confessor kept the Talisman and was raised to high honours by Charlemagne, becoming Archbishop of Mainz and Chancellor of the Empire. It was, however, restored to the monarch on his death-bed when he was suffering great agony, and it enabled him to pass peacefully away.

The Turquoise.--The Turquoise is universally recognised as a Venus stone, though sometimes erroneously attributed to the Zodiacal House of Capricorn, which is ruled by the planet Saturn. It responds to the vibrations of both Venus Houses, but seems strongest in Taurus.

This stone was, in ancient times, known as the Turkis, or Turkeystone, as most of the specimens found in Europe in those days came from Persia through the hands of Constantinople merchants. The best specimens still come from Persia, although Turquoises are also mined in Arizona,

[p. 158]

[paragraph continues] U.S.A.; in China and Thibet and Russia; and in the Crown Jewels of Spain are many Turquoises brought from New Mexico over two hundred years ago.

The Turquoise is more frequently used for Amulets than any other stone, as much for its mystic virtues as for its beauty, particularly in the East, where sentences from the Koran are engraved upon it and the characters gilded.

Amongst its many virtues it was believed to warn of poison by becoming moist and changing colour; and it is said that King John, by these indications, detected the poison that caused his death. This gem has always been regarded as a pledge of true affections, and is also credited with the power of drawing upon itself the evil that threatens its wearer; but this quality belongs only to the Turquoise that has been given, and not purchased. Boetius de Boot tells of a stone that had been in the possession of a Spanish gentleman living near his father; the stone was of exceptional beauty, but at the time of its owner's death it had entirely lost its colour and was said to resemble Malachite more than Turquoise. Because of this de Boot's father bought it for a very small sum, but not liking to wear so shabby-looking a gem, he gave it to his son, saying, "Son, as the virtues of the Turkois are said to exist only when the stone

[p. 159]

has been received as a gift, I will try its efficacy by bestowing it upon thee." De Boot, although he did not much appreciate the gift, had his crest engraved upon it, but had not worn it a month before it regained its original beauty. Shortly after this the stone gave evidence of its power, for as de Boot was riding home in the dark his horse stumbled and fell from a bank to the road ten feet below, neither horse nor rider being any the worse for the fall; in the morning the stone was found to be split in two.

It is for qualities such as these that it is prized by the Turks as a horseman's Talisman, they believing that it makes a horse sure-footed and protects its rider from injury by falls; and Camillus Leonardus says: "So long as a rider hath the Turquoise with him his horse will never tire him and will preserve him from any accident, and defend him that carries it from untoward and evil casualties."

In the Middle Ages the Turquoise was believed to appease hatred, relieve and prevent headaches, and to change colour when its owner was in peril or ill-health. The change of colour must not be permanent, and the stone should recover its real hue when the illness or danger is passed.

A gentleman who is a practical business man, holding an important position in the City, to

[p. 160]

whom I supplied a Turquoise, assured me that on two occasions when he was in personal danger the stone paled, but afterwards recovered its natural colour. It is not, however, sensitive to the changes in his states of health.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

CHAPTER III

  

GEMINI--THE HOUSE OF THE TWINS

Period--The Twins, Castor and Pollux--The Argonauts--King Solomon's Pillars--Maia--Ovid and Wedding of Mary Queen of Scots--Gemini Number--Characteristics--Agates and their Virtues--Orpheus--Chrysoprase--Alexander the Great--Virtues of the Stone.

Gemini, the Zodiacal House of the Twins, is occupied by the Sun from the 22nd of May until the 21st of June approximately, and is ruled by the planet Mercury. In the earliest Zodiacs this House was symbolised by two kids, for which the Greeks substituted twin children, the sons of Jupiter, represented by two bright stars, Castor and Pollux.

Gemini is also symbolised by two Pillars joined at the top and base (gemini), which is a diagrammatic representation of the Twins seated side by side with embracing arms. Castor was killed in battle, and Pollux, overwhelmed at his loss, entreated Jupiter to restore his brother to life, or make them both immortal. As a reward for this great affection, and in recognition of their noble deeds when

[p. 162]

on earth, Jupiter translated the two brothers, thus forming the Constellation Gemini in the heavens. It was believed that among other achievements they cleared the neighbouring seas of pirates, and when the Argonauts were in distress from a violent tempest, two lambent flames descended from the clouds and settled upon the heads of Castor and Pollux, a calm immediately ensuing.

From these circumstances they were regarded as protectors of navigation, it being inferred that whenever both stars were visible it was a harbinger of fine weather, the appearance of one star only signifying storms and tempests.

It may be noted that as a rule the seas are calm when the Sun is in Gemini, and it was at this period of the year that the forty days' rain of the Deluge ceased.

The symbol of the two Pillars joined at the top and base, already referred to, were also believed to typify the two pillars set up by King Solomon in the porch of the Temple, which were quite distinct and apart from the building itself and were not for any structural purpose, their use being entirely symbolical.

One was named "Jachin," meaning "He will establish," and the other "Boaz," signifying "In Him is strength"; also they denoted the union of Intellect and Intuition.

[p. 163]

The symbols of the Twins and Pillars are shown in No. 3 of the coloured Frontispiece.

Amongst the Romans the month of May was sacred to Maia the goddess of Sterility, and this month was, therefore, considered by them a most unfavourable time for marriages. Ovid in his Fasti tells us that--

"Neither are the times suitable for the marriage of the widow nor the virgin. She who was married was not so for long. Also for this cause (if proverbs affect you) they commonly say evil things for marrying in the month of Mai."

This last sentence (in its original Latin) was affixed to the gates of Holyrood Palace after the wedding of Mary Queen of Scots to Bothwell on the 15th of May, 1567. Another old writer says that the day of the week on which the 14th of May falls is not only unlucky for marriage in this unfortunate month, but that throughout the remainder of the year that particular day will bring ill-luck to those who marry on it; and another old proverb runs: "May never was ye month of love." Even now it is stated fewer marriages take place in this month than in any other.

The fortunate number of the Gemini type is 5, which was considered to have peculiar virtues as a Talisman by the Ancient Egyptians and Greeks

[p. 164]

because it unites the first even and odd numbers 2 and 3. It was often inscribed over doors to keep out evil spirits. In connection with this, it is interesting to note that in Roman ceremonies of marriage it was usual to light five tapers and to admit the guests by five; Jewish history records a frequent use of this number, five gifts to the priests, five things only to be eaten in camp. Joseph gave five suits of raiment to Benjamin, and presented only five of his brothers to Pharaoh. David took five pebbles when he went to fight Goliath, and Joshua hanged five kings on five trees; further, every important measurement of the Tabernacle was five or a multiple of five; also there were five wise and five foolish virgins. In the Mohammedan religion there are five articles of belief, namely in Allah, in the Prophets, in Angels, the Day of Judgment, and Predestination.

In Astrology there are five principal aspects of the planets which rule the good, or bad fortunes of the subject; also in Masonry the grand scheme is five points of fellowship, also five brethren can hold a fellow-craft's lodge. The fifth son of Jacob, Issachar, represents Gemini, and, in naming him, Leah expresses the leading qualities of the symbol--that is, reward and recompense which its mental qualities bring.

[p. 165]

The subjects born during this period are invariably of an intellectual disposition, and when well-educated their ideals and aspirations are high, with an intense desire to do useful work. When inclined to religion they favour the intellectual and idealistic. In family life they are very loyal and faithful, helping their relations however undeserving. Though generous to their families or when prompted by personal influence, these subjects are not lavish in their expenditure. Being fond of money and ingenious in their schemes and methods of making it, they like to secure a good return for money spent and their natural shrewdness enables them to get the better of their fellows. They have a quick comprehension of human nature which assists them in their schemes, enabling them to weigh up any one they may be dealing with, and consequently to get the best of a bargain. Their success, or otherwise, will depend to a great extent on the positions occupied and the aspects in relation to each other of the Moon and planets at the time of their birth.

Under harmonious circumstances they possess keen judgment, quick wit, ability in artistic directions, and the faculty of acquiring knowledge without much apparent effort, their capabilities carrying them to the highest mental attainments

[p. 166]

but, when ill-balanced, they sink to the extreme of clever trickery and fraud.

Their characteristics are often contradictory. Being peculiarly undecided in their dispositions and invariably of two minds, the constant influx of new ideas causes much innate restlessness, the realisation of their plans seldom coming up to anticipations. Owing to the antagonism between their feelings and their reason, they are seldom able to concentrate on any one thing for any length of time, thus they start many schemes and enterprises which they abandon before completion. In consequence, Intuition and its forces, (as opposed to Impulse and individual inclination,) strain and perplex the versatile mind of this type, making them capricious and irritable, although their anger is easily appeased. They are highly strung, vivacious, restless, and fond of change and variety in their friends and associates, having great dislike to monotonous work and ever seeking fresh outlets for their effervescence.

In argument, from their facility of expression and dual nature, they are the most difficult of opponents to overcome. Many of our most clever advocates and solicitors have been born during this period, and as illustrative of the duality of this House, it produces, when favourably aspected,

[p. 167]

the best physicians, authors, orators, actors, schoolmasters, journalists, merchants, accountants, secretaries, and linguists; also our smartest detectives; but when the worst side of their character is developed, the subjects of this House become the craftiest of law-breakers. The cleverest of criminals come from this type, ranging from fraudulent company promoters to thieves and pickpockets.

Gemini rules the arms, shoulders, and hands; and ailments such as sprains and displacements attack Gemini subjects in their limbs. The lungs, too, are sometimes afflicted, generally through defections in breathing; also a tendency to rheumatic and gouty pains in those portions of the body ruled by this sign, and when Mercury, the ruling planet, is badly aspected, digestive trouble, nervous ailments, and imperfect action of the liver are indicated.

In marriage and business relations those born during the Gemini period will agree best with Aries, Leo, Libra, and Aquarius characters, and it is a curious fact that in the lives of those born whilst the Sun occupies the House of the Twins, nearly all important events, fortunate or unfortunate, happen twice, and incidents in the career are repeated in a similar way.

[p. 168]

The fortunate stones of this House are all varieties of Agates and the Chrysoprase.

The Agate.--The Agate is a variety of quartz found in different colours, often with alternate layers of red and white known as "ribbon" Agate, also of a milky white. The latter can be artificially coloured and, in consequence, is obtainable in bright greens and blues as well as in various tones of greyish purple.

The Moss or Tree Agate is a variety ornamented by Nature in a most remarkable manner with lines, spots, and frequently with natural objects taking the distinct forms of ferns, trees, clouds, and moss, giving a very mysterious effect to the stone. In the days of the Romans this variety was held in high repute as possessing both medicinal and talismanic virtues, it being claimed that the wonderful markings formed in this stone indicated that it had been specially singled out by the Creator to receive wondrous occult power. According to Orpheus, "If thou wear a piece of Tree Agate upon thine hand the Immortal Gods shall be well pleased with thee; if the same be tied to the harness of thy oxen when ploughing, or about the ploughman's sturdy arm, wheat-crowned Ceres shall descend from heaven with full lap upon thy furrows."

The Moss Agate was also considered good for

[p. 169]

the sight and was used by physicians for palettes on which they ground down the ingredients used in making up lotions and ointments.

The vegetable representations in the Tree Agates are supposed to have been produced by particles of metallic substances, such as iron and magnesium; the name Mocha Stone, sometimes used to indicate this variety, is derived from Mocha in Arabia, where it was found.

In the British Museum there is a striking specimen of Moss Agate representing a likeness of the poet Chaucer; and the Strawberry Hill Collection has another with a portrait of Voltaire, and a third showing the profile of a woman. There are also numerous varieties of Agate dependent upon the arrangement of the layers; sometimes the stone shows parallel lines of light and dark tints, when it is called banded or ribbon Agate. When the colours are very sharp and defined it becomes Onyx Agate, and when the stripes converge towards the centre of the stone it is known as Eye Agate; whilst another variety showing many colours becomes Rainbow or Iris Agate.

According to Mr. Streeter, Agates in their natural state are formed in the cavities of rocks, and it is conjectured that when the rocks were in a fluid state the Agates were formed by the escape

[p. 170]

of gas or steam. These cavities were afterwards filled with some mineral substance, such as silica, held in solution and deposited on the interior walls of these receptacles, forming a kind of geode.

In addition to the Moss or Tree Agate, the Greeks and Romans had great faith in the talismanic and medicinal virtues of all other Agates, wearing them to avert sickness, regarding them particularly as an antidote to the bite of an Asp, if taken powdered in wine, or as an infallible cure for the sting of a Scorpion if tied over the wound. They also brought success in love and friendship, great gain, and the favours of the great, if strung on a hair taken from a lion's mane.

Pliny was a great believer in the virtues of the Agate, and writes that storms may be averted by burning these stones; whilst Camillo Leonardo, in addition to their power to avert lightning and tempest, says they bring strength, vigour, and great success to their wearers. Marbodus, Bishop of Rennes, ascribes the escape of Aeneas from all his perils to the virtue of an Agate Talisman which he always carried with him.

Although these stones eventually ceased to be in much demand for signets amongst the Romans, they never lost their popularity as Talismans, and were in great request, not only amongst the

[p. 171]

[paragraph continues] Latin races, but also among the Persians and peoples of the Orient, amongst whom it was universally believed to confer eloquence, to enlighten the mind, to allay fevers, also to bring luck in connection with wills and legacies, to sharpen the sight, aid in the discovery of treasure, and make its wearer amiable and agreeable.

Amongst Mohammedans it was believed to cure insanity if taken powdered in apple juice. In Elizabethan days our forefathers had great faith in its talismanic virtues, the Queen having amongst her jewels a large oval Agate engraved with scenes representing Vulcan at his forge with Venus looking on. This jewel was presented to her by Archbishop Parker, and was accompanied by a parchment giving in Latin a long list of its properties, concluding to the effect that as long as Her Majesty possessed this jewel she would ever have a trusty friend.

Agates of all kinds were much esteemed by the Greeks, particularly those specimens in which could be traced resemblances to natural objects. The following verse poetically describes its many qualities:

"Who comes with summer to this earth
  And owes to June her day of birth,
  With ring of Agate on her hand
  Can Health, Wealth and long life command."

[p. 172]

The Chrysoprase.--The Chrysoprase, like the Agate, is a variety of quartz and takes its name from two Greek words meaning "golden leek," in reference to its colour, which varies from an opaque yellowish green to a very light dirty white-green. The colour has a tendency to fade from long exposure to the light and sun, but can be restored if the stone is dipped in a solution of nitrate of nickel.

The finest specimens come from Silesia, and when the stone was in demand it used to be customary to close the mines for every two years out of three.

According to Albertus Magnus, a Chrysoprase formed the Amulet of Alexander the Great, and Chrysoprase was much used by the ancient Greeks and Romans for signet rings and cameos; and also by the Egyptians, who set it with lapis lazuli.

The virtues attributed to the Chrysoprase were that it imparted cheerfulness, making the heart glad by removing uneasiness, protecting its wearers from evil dreams and the assaults of demons.

It also bestowed all kinds of blessings on its owner, giving assiduity in good works, and taking away all greedy and covetous desires, bringing success in new enterprises, and true and faithful

[p. 173]

friends: and it was also worn as an Amulet against rheumatism and gout.

The Agates and Chrysoprase stones will not, however, be fortunate for those born during the time that the Sun occupies the Houses of Virgo and Pisces.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 174]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

CANCER--THE HOUSE OF THE CRAB

The Dark Sign--Its Duration--Origins--Summer Solstice--Hercules and the Crab--Characteristics--Goddess Esmeralda and the Ancient Peruvians--The Emerald Isle--Moonstones--Blue Moon--Pearls--Cat's Eyes--Rock Crystals--Crystal-gazing--Virtues of the Crystal.

Cancer, the fourth sign of the Zodiac, is situated in the northern celestial hemisphere; being composed of small stars, the brightest of which are only of the third magnitude, and very few visible to the naked eye, it was known in olden times as the dark sign, and is shown with its symbols in No. 4 of the coloured Frontispiece.

The Sun enters this sign on June 22nd, remaining in occupation up to and including July 23rd, being in that part of the Ecliptic highest above the Equator, marking midsummer.

Its name Cancer, meaning a Crab, is popularly supposed to have originated in the resemblance of its constellation to this crustacean, but the likeness is not at all obvious, even if it may once have existed, so that the name probably had its origin from some other cause.

[p. 175]

The earliest known illustration of this symbol is very like the Egyptian Scarab, many antiquarians favouring this as the real symbol, it having been used as an emblem of resurrection for over 3000 years B.C., and as this sign marked the resurrection of the earth from the Flood which ended in the preceding Zodiacal sign Gemini, the Beetle or Scarab is sometimes shown placed in the centre of the Crab's back. The significance of this, the new world bearing its symbol of eternity, is not so very surprising when we remember that the Zodiac characterised highly developed religious ideas.

The beginning of the sign cancer is called the Tropic of Cancer, and when the Sun arrives within this sign it has reached its utmost limit of north declination and seems to remain stationary a few days before it begins to decline again to the south. This stationary altitude is called the Summer Solstice, or "Sun standing still"; and the Hindus, having derived their knowledge of the stars principally from the Chaldeans, used the Crab as symbolic of this House, as in order to move forward it is compelled, as it were, to walk backwards, which illustrates the apparent motion of the Sun when it commences to move backwards towards the Equator.

In Ancient Mythology we are told that this constellation

[p. 176]

was formed by a Crab placed in the heavens by the goddess Juno as a reward for the sacrifice of its life which it lost in an attack on Hercules in her service, and so earned its translation to the celestial domains.

Cancer, being the Zodiacal House of the Moon, is much under her influence. It is the first of the watery signs and presides over the Ocean; subjects born during this period, because of their receptive and plastic natures, may be said to reflect the influences of their surroundings like the sea. Impressionable, yet tenacious, they are well symbolised by the Crab, as their tenacity when roused is remarkable, requiring little prompting to move them to determined action; but owing to the changeability of their moods, alternately hopeful and depressed, they often surprise their friends by suddenly letting opportunities slip just when success is within their grasp. They appreciate congenial society, but can be quite happy alone, and most intensely do they object to having their plans or arrangements made for them.

They are keenly interested in the domestic side of life, this sign representing the principles of home life; family ties and duties are in consequence more keenly felt by this type than by any other, and old friendships or associations are held sacred.

[p. 177]

Children born during this period are very sensitive to the physical and mental conditions of others, and if forced to live with natures that are inharmonious and not in sympathy with them, their vitality is readily depleted and they become nervous, listless, and morbid. For this reason children should never sleep with the elderly or ailing.

Strongly imaginative and reserved, they are at times mistrustful, over-anxious, and exacting; and so great is their tendency to experience every kind of sensation, that when badly aspected by the planets of their horoscope their feelings amount to an obsession, and from the overdevelopment of their intuitional faculties they become the subjects of presentiments and delusions. When their characters are well developed and their erratic tenacity made consistent, they become firm-willed and reliant, with clear keen intellects and strong intuitions capable of high accomplishments. Although generally quiet and reserved, brilliant conversationalists are sometimes found among them. Where clans and sects meet they will be found, and they form no small portion of the intellectual members of secret societies and mystic and occult communities. They greatly appreciate old customs, curios, books, and relics of the past, their faculty of imagination placing

[p. 178]

them pre-eminently above all other types in the realms of poesy and fancy. They are keen observers of Nature in all her changing moods, and in the solitude of woods, or by shady lane, stream, and hedgerow they can best recover their balance when out of conceit with a practical and unsympathetic world.

This sign has given us some of our greatest composers and writers of romance. As a rule their work is spasmodic, but energetic whilst the fit lasts or when spurred by approbation, but slackens when the mood has passed or the incentive is removed.

They succeed best in professions or employments affecting the public, as authors, artists, musicians, politicians, and clairvoyants. They also make good naval officers and sailors, and do well in professions connected with the sea and liquids.

They will be most in harmony with people born during the periods of Taurus, Virgo, Scorpio, and Pisces.

The fortunate gems for this House are the Emerald, Moonstone, Pearl, Cat's Eye, and Crystal.

The Emerald held a very high place in the esteem of the Ancients, and no other precious stone has probably been the subject of so much regard and admiration, one of its principal charms

[p. 179]

being its brilliant green colour. Very curious are some of the traditions connected with it.

In the first place, it is interesting to note that this gem being the Zodiacal stone of Cancer, the Crab was thought to have the same healing powers as the Oculi Cancrorum, or Crab's Eye ointment, prescribed in olden days as a cure for ulcerous sores.

Emeralds are found in Siberia, India, the United States, and Mexico, and the belief that demons and griffins guarded the mines is said to be as strong amongst the Peruvians of the present time as in the days of the Romans.

The origin of the word Emerald is from a Sanskrit word meaning green, it being thought that there was nothing in Nature to equal its colour and brilliancy, and it was an old Hebrew belief that if a serpent fixed its eye upon the lustre of this stone it would become blind.

The cause of its beautiful green tint has been attributed by some scientists to the presence of oxide of chromium, by others to copper, whilst in 1848 an experimenter believed it to be derived from an organic matter called chlorophyl, similar to the colouring substance of the leaves of plants.

Pizarro, in his conquest of Mexico, found numerous Emeralds of surpassing beauty; but d'Acosta, a contemporary writer, states that

[p. 180]

many of the finest stones were ruined by the Spanish soldiers, who, being informed by a priest that to test their genuineness they should be placed upon an anvil and struck with a hammer, followed these instructions with most disastrous results.

The Incas possessed some wonderful Emeralds; one (described by de la Viga) as large as the egg of an ostrich, was believed to be inhabited by Esmeralda, the chief goddess of Peru. When sacking her temples the Spaniards discovered immense quantities of Emeralds, it being customary for her priests to obtain them by representing to the worshippers that these gems were esteemed by the goddess above all else, Emeralds being her own daughters.

Emeralds were known and esteemed in most remote times of the world's history, and are to be met with amongst even Egyptian and Etruscan remains. Faith in its virtues and qualities exist amongst the Orientals to the present time, representing to them hope in immortality, courage and exalted faith, and protection from pestilence, as well as a preserver of eyesight, its efficacy being increased by a verse from the Koran engraved upon it.

In India it is believed to confer the gift of memory and a knowledge of secrets and future

[p. 181]

events. Frequently used in the decorations of sacred images, and is endowed by the Indians with very high attributes.

The Romans believed that nothing evil could remain in the presence of this gem which discovered falsehood and treachery by changing colour and turning pale, and when powerless to avert misfortune would fall from its setting, giving rise to the belief that the falling of this gem is a bad omen.

This stone was also considered very beneficial to the eyes, on which account it was worn as a seal ring; in connection with this Pliny states: "If the sight hath been dimmed and wearied by intense poring upon anything, the beholding of this stone doth refresh and restore it again." It is also recorded that Nero, who was very shortsighted, used an emerald eye-glass to watch the gladiatorial contests. Probably from its connection with the Moon, which rules the House of Cancer (and was the goddess of midwives), it was considered particularly fortunate for women at childbirth, and was held to promote constancy and domestic felicity.

Worn in a ring it strengthens the memory and protects from giddiness; it was also said to guard sailors and fishermen from perils and mishaps at sea if suspended round the neck so as to lie upon the

[p. 182]

breast (the part of the body ruled by Cancer). It taught unknown secrets, and bestowed eloquence and renown, and, in the words of Miss Landon, an English poetess:

"It is a gem which hath the power to show
  If plighted lovers keep their faith or no.
  If faithful, it is like the leaves of Spring.
  If faithless, like those leaves when withering."

It should, however (being a very sensitive gem), be only worn by those whose birthdays fall between the 22nd of June and July 23rd, or by those with the Moon in good aspect.

The Moonstone.--The Moonstone is a variety of Feldspar and, as its name suggests, is considered to be in close affinity with the Moon, because its pale lustrous blue colour resembles moonlight, which is believed by the natives of India to give the stone its colour. Indians believe that the best variety of the blue Moonstones are washed up by the tides when the Sun and Moon are in very harmonious relation, at intervals of twenty-one years (three periods of the Moon whose number is seven), and from this has arisen the saying of "Once in a blue moon"--to express a lengthy period.

It was known to the Ancients as Selenite, and Camillus Leonardus says it is powerful in reconciling

[p. 183]

lovers, and helpful to consumptives when the Moon is increasing in light, but when the Moon is waning, its stone will only enable its wearer to foretell future happenings; he also tells us that if the Moonstone be held in the mouth it will decide which affair should be taken in hand and which left alone; if to be undertaken, the matter is

r firmly fixed on the mind; if not, it passes out and is soon forgotten.

Pliny asserted that this stone contained an image of the Moon which waxed or waned according to the state of that luminary.

The virtues attributed to this stone were to protect from harm and danger in travelling by sea and land; to give mental inspiration, and to bring success and good fortune in love; also to preserve its wearer against dropsy and other watery diseases to which the Cancer type is liable.

Pearls.--Amongst all nations Pearls have ever been considered the most beautiful products of Nature, but having their origin in a living organism cannot be called a precious stone. Most scientists are agreed that Pearls are formed in the endeavour of certain bivalves to obtain relief from the irritation caused by some foreign substance which has penetrated the shell and which the Oyster, by covering with a pearly secretion, forms into a beautiful gem.

[p. 184]

The idea that Pearls are symbolic of tears arose from this fact, and illustrates the old adage that the most noble achievements have their origin in painful and enduring effort. Nowadays in the Pearl Fisheries, particularly in the Bay of Ago, (Japan,) foreign matter is intentionally introduced into the shell, but the results do not equal the Pearls found as the outcome of natural influences, a considerable time being required to bring them to perfection.

Pearls are extremely hard, and the well-known story of Cleopatra's Pearl cannot be believed, unless the Pearl was first ground to powder, as any acid sufficiently strong to dissolve a Pearl would be fatal to human life.

Among Eastern nations this gem is credited with the power of preserving the purity of their wearers, and as an emblem of maidenly purity. The Romans also set a high value on Pearls, consecrating them to Isis, and wearing them for her favours. Pearls were also made into a decoction with distilled water and given to lunatics to restore their reason. In China Pearls are powdered and taken as medicine for syncope and stomachic ailments.

The occult properties of the Pearl in olden times caused them to be worn as Amulets by divers as a protection against sharks.

[p. 185]

This gem is, however, considered unfortunate for those in love, and if worn by the married signified "torrents of tears," and for this reason is seldom used in engagement rings, even at the present day.

The Cat's Eye.--The Cat's Eye, a semi-transparent stone of the Chrysoberyl family, has a distinct ray of light running across it, which ray has been compared to a drop of water enclosing a beam of light. It is most commonly translucent, of a milky-white colour, but is also found in shades of yellow, red, and brown. It has always been greatly valued in India, where it is regarded not only as a bringer of wealth, but a Talisman to prevent its owner's gain diminishing. The Cat's Eye is also considered powerful against the terrors of the night; it will relieve asthma if hung round the neck, also helps babies suffering from croup, and it is also worn for mental balance, foresight, and general attractiveness. As a popular charm for success in speculation, gambling, and games of chance, it is said to have no equal.

The Crystal.--Rock Crystal is a form of quartz, clear and transparent, the name Crystal coming from a Greek word signifying "frozen water" or "clear ice." The magical powers of revealing the hidden secrets of the future supposed to exist in the ball of Crystal is of very ancient

[p. 186]

origin; and it is said that Saint Augustine believed that Crystal-gazing, as it is called, originated in Persia.

The Moon, the ruler of the House of Cancer, has direct influence upon the intuitive faculties of the brain, through which seers visualise events foreshadowed in the Crystal; making it peculiarly appropriate and sympathetic to subjects of this type, so that it is not surprising that this sign produces some of the best seers. Pliny states that Roman physicians also used the ball of Crystal for cauterising purposes, holding it against the rays of the Sun; they also used them applied externally as a remedy for diseases of the kidneys.

Those whose birthdays fall within the periods of Aries or Libra, however, should not wear the Emerald, Moonstones, Pearls, Cat's Eyes, or Crystal, as they would not be in harmony with these gems.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 187]

  

CHAPTER V

  

LEO--THE HOUSE OF THE LION

Period--Constellation--The Fiery Sign--Hercules and the Lion--Characteristics--Personal Magnetism of the Type--Disposition--Money-makers--Entertainers--Health Defects--Marriage and Love Affairs--Artistic Tendencies--Gems of the House--The Sardonyx--Qualities of the Stone--The Chrysolite and the Romans--The Tourmaline--Peculiarities of the Stone--Amber--Virtues and Medicinal Uses--The Topaz.

The Sun enters the Zodiacal House of Leo on the 23rd of July and remains in occupation until the 23rd of August. Leo is the fifth sign in the order of the Zodiac, and is marked by the constellation of stars bearing this name, situated in the Northern Celestial Hemisphere, just below the Great Bear or Plough, and contains over seventy stars visible to the naked eye, the principal star of which being designated Cor Leonis, or the Lion's Heart. This star is also known as Regulus, and is useful to navigators for ascertaining their longitude at sea. The constellation is easily identified by a group of stars forming a well-shaped sickle on the west side of the cluster. Leo and Cancer, being the most northerly of the twelve signs, are the nearest to

[p. 188]

the zenith of the earth, causing the greatest warmth and heat, and are consequently assigned to the Houses of the two luminaries, Cancer, as being feminine, to the Moon, and Leo, as masculine, to the Sun. Leo, coming in the centre of the fiery signs, is specially suited for the Sun's manifestations, and it is said that the symbol of this house, the Lion, was given because, when the Sun, the Ruler of this House, is in occupation, his heat resembles that of a raging lion; and it is a well-known fact that the Sun was worshipped as a Lion by the Ancients, the Egyptians keeping the month of July sacred to him and holding the Ludi Apollinares in his honour.

In Greek Mythology the Lion is said to represent the monster who was the terror of travellers in the forests of Nemaea; it was slain by Hercules in battle, and to commemorate the great combat Jupiter gave it a place amongst the stars.

As a symbol of this sign it is, however, much older than the Greeks, being represented in both the Egyptian and Indian Zodiacs.

(The symbols of the House of Leo are illustrated in No. 5 of the coloured Frontispiece.)

Astrologically, Leo is known as a fixed sign, and fixity of aims and ideas is a marked characteristic of this type, for when they believe themselves right in their views or opinions on any subject in

[p. 189]

which they are interested, they are immovable although never aggressive, deeming it not worth while to argue or explain unless their hearers are sympathetic or reasonable.

In religious matters they have unbounded zeal and enthusiasm, often believing they have a special mission in life which they are persistent in fulfilling, no matter at what cost, personal sacrifice, or inconvenience. They formulate ideas quickly, possessing a marvellous faculty of presenting well-known facts in a new light and also of adapting a thought or suggestion from a sermon or lecture and enlarging and developing its meaning and purpose without reference to the literal words of the speaker, astonishing their listeners by their apparent mastery of the subject under discussion. Possessing a clear brain, they invariably consider matters from a practical point of view, scorning petty actions, and, for this reason, those with whom they come in contact are more often ready to forward their interests than to oppose them, so that they succeed from force of circumstances, and are often helped by these means into advantageous positions. It is not, therefore, surprising that in the majority of cases where phenomenal good fortune has elevated the ordinary tradesman into the wealthy magnate they have belonged to the Leo type. Under ordinary circumstances these

[p. 190]

subjects are of bright sunny disposition, high-spirited and large-hearted, with a pleasant, affable temperament free from envy or malice. Although liable to quick flashes of temper they harbour no grudge, having the ability to win even their worst enemy into seeming friendliness. They are frequently great money-makers, although not being economical by nature they do not save, yet, luxurious and inclined to be extravagant in their tastes, their proverbial good luck seems to carry them ever on the crest of the wave, no matter how profuse their expenditure, In social entertainments they come to the fore, and are good raconteurs, able to tell a story well, the point (although always in good taste) losing nothing in their hands, making them often the objects of envy among their less-favoured fellows.

The constitution is usually healthy and vigorous, but they are subject to affections of the heart which is apt from overstrain to become irregular in its action, and the cause of palpitation and fainting fits; they are also liable to sunstroke and diseases of the eye, and in every case that has come under the writer's notice, where the Sun in Leo was in opposition to the Moon at the time of birth, the subject has been afflicted with a squint.

In marriage and love affairs they are often unfortunate, their high standard of excellence

[p. 191]

with their idealistic emotional natures causing them to endow the objects of their affections with attributes of their own imagining. In consequence they are frequently disappointed and mistaken in their judgments; but fortunately great sympathy, tolerance, and forbearance to the feelings of others is so natural to this type that, in many cases of inharmonious marriage they have adapted themselves to circumstances and conditions almost impossible of endurance. When undeveloped, or badly aspected by other planets, however, Leo subjects will degenerate greatly, becoming empty-headed boasters and reckless investors, stopping at no folly in their efforts to become popular and conspicuous; taking risky chances, and through careless speculation losing heavily, yet even so they are often successful in escaping the consequences of their imprudence. Being versatile and brilliant, subjects of the Leo type succeed best as Artists, Actors, Authors, Commanders, Officers, Stockbrokers, Inventors, Goldsmiths, Jewellers, Fancy Dealers, etc. It is usual to attribute artistic talent to this type, but this is not always correct, for although they invariably possess a keen appreciation of Art and are fond of beautiful and harmonious surroundings, the executive ability is not frequently noticeable, although when present the artist excels in producing

[p. 192]

pictures of golden sunlight effects of late afternoon and sunset colourings.

In matters of friendship, partnership, or marriage they will be most in harmony with those born during the Aries, Sagittarius, Libra, and Gemini periods.

The gems of the House are the Sardonyx, Chrysolite, Tourmaline, and Amber.

The Sardonyx.--The Sardonyx is a rich red-brown stone, the top part of which is formed of a layer of white Chalcedony, or Sard, through which the lower part of the stone shows as a pale flesh colour; when found without the Sard the stone becomes the Cornelian.

The Sard derives its name from a Greek word meaning flesh, and is the Sardius of the Ancients.

The finest Sardonyx come from India and Arabia, but it is also found in Germany and the Tyrol. It is especially good for engraving upon, having a hard smooth surface capable of taking a high polish, and in ancient cameos the under-stone is generally used to form the ground, the lighter top layer being carved into figures, the different depths of the carving affording variety to the effect. These qualities made it a favourite with the Romans, who believed that the virtue of stones could be increased if suitably engraved, so that the Sardonyx was frequently carved with a

[p. 193]

figure representing Mars or Hercules to render its wearer fearless and courageous.

It was also believed that in common with Agates this stone had the property of preserving its wearers from infectious complaints and the bites of venomous creatures, particularly from the sting of the scorpion; and that if hung round the neck it would allay pain, give self-control, attract friends, ensure conjugal happiness, and success in legal matters. Also, Camillus Leonardus says, it puts restraint upon those inclined to dissipation and makes a man agreeable as a companion.

The Chrysolite.--The Chrysolite is a very beautiful yellow-green gem which derives its name from two Greek words meaning "golden stone," by which name it is referred to by Pliny. It varies in colour, and although exactly the same stone it bears different names; when of a deep bright green, it is known as Peridot, and when of an olive-green it is called the Olivine. It is one of the softest of the hard stones, being easily scratched by quartz.

The stones are found in Egypt, Ceylon, and Brazil, and specimens have been found in meteorites and the lava of Vesuvius.

The Peridot was much valued by the Ancients, the name signifying in Arabic precious stone, and it was at one time considered of more value than the

[p. 194]

diamond. These were the only gems set in transparent form by the Romans who wore them for protection from enchantment and against melancholy and illusion. Marbodus says they should be set in gold (gold being the metal of the Sun) to dispel the vague terrors of the night.

During the Middle Ages these stones were worn for foresight with regard to future events, and for Divine inspiration and eloquence.

The Tourmaline.--The Tourmaline is of comparatively modern origin in Europe as far as its use as a precious stone is concerned. It is very remarkable because of its electrical qualities, for when heated one end will become positive and attract straws or ashes, whilst the other end will be negative and non-attractive.

It is transparent in one direction, but if looked at from another it may be found quite opaque.

It is found in India, Siberia, Brazil, and America, and of all colours and shadings of red, pink, yellow, green, and white; two colours may also exist on the same crystal, which may be green at one end and red at the other. This is probably the stone Pliny describes as the Lychnis, which, being very susceptible to solar influences, attracted small particles of chaff when heated by the sun, and had the power of "dispersing fears and melancholic passions." It was also worn to procure

[p. 195]

inspiration, to attract favours, and to secure friends.

Amber.--Amber has from the most remote ages been familiar to humanity, ornaments in this material having come down to us, shaped by men of the Stone Age, thus proving its antiquity. Many fanciful theories were given in bygone days with regard to its origin, amongst others the historian Nicias stating that the heat of the Sun was so great in some regions as to set up intense perspiration in the earth, from which Amber resulted; whilst among the Greeks a legend existed that it originated in the tears of the sisters of Phaethon, who, in their sorrow at his death, were turned into poplar trees, and whose perpetual tears congealed into Amber. Pliny asserted it to be the overflowing sap of certain trees, hence the name Succinum, from a word signifying "juice"; and modern research confirms this idea of a vegetable origin, for Amber is now known to be the fossil resin of an extinct species of pine of the Tertiary Period.

Amber is found in large quantities on the coast of the Baltic, washed up after storms, and the German Government exercises a strict monopoly over the trade. It is also found round the coasts of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and parts of Asia and the United States; and in Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk. It is very light and soft, possessing

[p. 196]

remarkable electric properties when heated. That it was once in a liquid state is shown by the insects and plants sometimes found in it, a good many of the insects belonging to species that no longer exist. These specimens specially attracted the attention of the Romans and doubtless gave Pliny his idea of its origin.

Great quantities were introduced into Rome during the reign of the Emperor Nero, who in verse described the hair of his wife as amber-coloured, causing much emulation amongst the ladies of his court in their endeavours to secure the fashionable colour. The name Amuletum was given to Amber as well as to the flower Cyclamen (see Chapter I, Part I), both having the power to protect from poisonous drugs, necklaces being worn specially by children for this purpose, and also as a counter-charm against witchcraft and sorcery.

Its range of medicinal virtues is very extensive, Callistratus asserting it to be of great service at any period of life against insanity, either taken as a powder, or worn round the neck; the golden-yellow variety known as the Chryselutum being specially used to ward off ague. The Rev. C. W. King says that "the wearing of an Amber necklace has been known to prevent the attacks of erysipelas in a person subject to them, which has

[p. 197]

been proved by repeated experiments beyond all possibility of doubt. Its action here cannot be explained, but its efficacy as a defender of the throat against chills is evidently due to its extreme warmth when in contact with the skin, and the circle of electricity so maintained, which latter may account for its remedial agency in the instance quoted above." He also says: "In Pliny's time Amber was universally worn as necklaces by the Transpadane females of Lombardy and Piedmont, partly as an ornament and partly as a prophylactic against goitres, to which they were subject in consequence of the hard quality of the water they drank."

Amber was also worn to protect from deafness, digestive troubles, catarrh, jaundice, loss of teeth from looseness, and as a child's Amulet against convulsions when teething.

Its popularity as mouth-pieces to pipes, cigar-and cigarette-holders arose from a belief in the East that Amber will not transmit infection. It has ever been in vogue throughout China, Japan, India, and the East, and retains its favour to the present day.

The Chinese use it extensively in incense, and it is also used in the manufacture of various perfumes and medical compounds.

Topaz.--The Yellow Topaz is also a stone of this

[p. 198]

[paragraph continues] House, but being more particularly a stone of Sagittarius it will be found dealt with under that sign.

All yellow stones are, more or less, under the influence of the Sun, who, as already mentioned, rules the House of the Lion.

Those whose birthdays fall in the Taurus or Scorpio periods should not, however, wear the Sardonyx, Chrysolite, Tourmaline, Amber, or Yellow Topaz.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 199]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

VIRGO--THE HOUSE OF THE VIRGIN

Period--Constellation--Mythology--Symbols--Paris under Virgo--Reflecting Qualities of the Sign--Characteristics--Marriage--Professions--Ailments--Harmonious Types--Gems of the House--Cornelian--Virtues of the Cornelian--Napoleon's Seal Talisman--Clairvoyant Properties of the Stone--Jade--New Zealanders' Faith--The Tiki--Jade as Racing Talisman.

The Sun enters the Zodiacal House of Virgo, which is ruled by the planet Mercury, on the 24th August, remaining there until the 22nd of September approximately. The Constellation of stars marking the position of Virgo was known to the Babylonians as the Ear of Corn, and has been symbolised by three ears of corn and also by the figure of a Virgin holding some wheat in her hand, representing a gleaner, the principal star of this group, Spica, being very near the place of the Sun at gleaning time in the warmer parts of the Temperate Zone.

In Ancient Mythology Virgo is represented by Ceres or Isis, typified as a tall majestic lady with golden hair crowned with corn, holding wheat and poppies in her right hand, and in her left a

[p. 200]

sickle, a torch, or a caduceus. In modern representations, Virgo being also the symbol of the Virgin Mary, the Lily takes the place of the corn and poppies.

Ceres was the goddess of the harvest and fruits, deriving her name from the care she exercised in producing and preserving them. She is said to have invented the arts of husbandry (previous to which humanity existed on a diet of acorns,) and for her services was crowned with wheat. The poppies were given her by Jupiter to cause sleep and forgetfulness, when through the loss of her daughter, Proserpine, she was unable to rest, the torch being kindled from the flames of Aetna, by the aid of which she sought the lost one throughout the world.

In very Ancient Zodiacs, ten Houses only are shown, the House of the Scorpion including the positions now occupied by Virgo and Libra; it was first divided into two, Scorpio and Virgo, and finally, more adequately to express its influence, it was again divided, Libra being inserted between, making the Zodiac of twelve Houses as we now know it.

It is believed by some authorities that the symbol of Virgo (see Plate No. 6 of the coloured Frontispiece) was adapted from the symbol of Scorpio (shown in No. 8 of same Plate) and their

[p. 201]

resemblance is noticeable by comparison of the two. It is believed that when the Hebrew language was formed, the Virgo symbol was taken to form the name Jehovah. yhwh Yod-he-vau-he, reading from right to left.

Virgo is also typified by the Virgin Mary as already referred to, and it is worthy of note that the founder of the ancient city of Paris believed in the power and influence of the heavenly bodies, it being named by an old astrologer, Para-Isis, meaning in Phoenician, the Star of Being, or Existence. Corroboration of this can be seen at the present day in Notre Dame Cathedral, where, amongst the twelve signs of the Zodiac engraved on the outside when entering from the North, the sixth sign has been represented by a figure of the Virgin elevated above all the rest. The birth of the Virgin Mary is said to have taken place when the Sun was in the sixth sign, and characteristics attributed to her correspond in many instances to those of the Virgo type.

This House has been found to be well suited to be the significator of virgins, because as a rule those born under the influence of this sign are cool, patient, and self-respecting, and do not usually fall into error through unrestrained affections; whilst Mercury is the ruling planet of this House as well as that of Gemini, both signs being

[p. 202]

typical of youth and purity as represented by the Twin Children and the Maiden.

One of the most interesting features of the Virgo sign is that it gives to those born under its influence the qualities of any planet which is in the strongest position of the horoscope at birth, without in any way detracting from its own: for instance, if the Sun is strongest in its aspects than its natural ruler Mercury, it will brighten the financial and social standing, as well as energise and give added power to the Virgo qualities. In the same way, if there is a detrimental aspect from a malefic planet, it will accentuate the misfortune and disappointments indicated. The effect of these complex blends of influence is very far-reaching, so that it is impossible to judge accurately of this type without seeing the individual horoscope, although many of their general characteristics can be recognised in the following brief outline of the Sun's influence on those born during the time of his passing through Virgo.

When the planet Mercury is strong in the horoscope it will give great versatility and natural aptitude for figures and business generally, increasing the critical and observant faculties and qualifying them for serious study, making them capable and efficient in professional as well as financial transactions. They will also be very

[p. 203]

curious and interested in new ideas and inventions, also in hobbies of all kinds, and many collectors of coins, etc., are under the influence of Virgo. Mars present in this House gives a restless activity to these impressionable subjects, and there will be many changes of friends and occupations; it will also bring resource in emergencies, ready repartee, and an inclination to biting wit, sarcasm, and promptness and ingenuity in plans and methods.

The influence of Saturn will render the mind more tenacious and less impressionable; there will be less inclination for social life, but the seclusion of monastic life or a studious career will be preferred, many priests being born under the Saturnian influence.

Those born during the Virgo period will have a marked individuality, being ingenious, orderly, and methodical; also capable of great proficiency in whatever they undertake, Having the power of combining the practical with the ideal, possessing a keen perception, they have the faculty of at once grasping the salient points of an object or action, making them admirable mimics; but they are at the same time very sensitive to the opinions of others, and very disappointed if their efforts to please or entertain are unrecognised. In contrast to the Gemini type who begin much and finish little, they hate to leave their work uncompleted,

[p. 204]

or for others to finish what they have commenced; and one of their most noticeable characteristics is their disapproval and condemnation of the methods or suggestions of others, finding many reasons for doing things their own way, which is always different to that of other people. Because of this trait in their character they often lose their friends, for, although critical themselves, they are super-sensitive to a remarkable degree, interpreting any remark or comment to its extremest significance.

In whatever direction the activities of this type may be carried on they will ever seek mental freedom, so that although they may pursue one idea or habit for some time, they are always liable to make sudden changes and completely alter their former views, often with undesirable results, but always with apparent reason to themselves.

There is also a lack of responsiveness to enthusiasm or plans formed by their family and friends which is very damping in its effect on those born under fiery signs.

In temper they are difficult to understand, being annoyed and irritated at trifles, yet slow to anger and slow to forgive, remaining apart chilly and repellent until an advance is made from the other side.

[p. 205]

In marriage, as a rule, they are constant and true, and although undemonstrative, their affection is deep, for they will do, endure, and spend much for the sake of those they love, but will be least in harmony with the Sagittarian and Gemini types.

The subjects of Virgo like to be on good terms with those who are prosperous and in good position, and they are suited both by temperament and ability to succeed as Government Officials, Secretaries, Lawyers, Cashiers, Doctors, Authors, Philosophers, Proof-readers, Actors, Chemists, Agents, Schoolmasters, also as Hospital Nurses, Watch- and Clock-makers, etc., and often do their best work when alone.

As may be expected from the mental activity of this House, the ailments are chiefly those of the nervous system, worry or anxiety developing indigestion, general debility, and neuralgia; they are also liable to stomachic complaints and weakness of the bladder, feeling atmospheric changes very acutely. Their recuperative powers, however, are very marked and they soon recover, without recourse to doctors, drugs, or patent medicines, although the latter possess a great attraction for them. Fortunately they are usually most fastidious as to the purity and wholesomeness of their diet, many vegetarians coming under

[p. 206]

this sign. Children of this type should be encouraged and never repressed, particular care being given to their feet which are naturally tender and easily deformed by ill-fitting boots and shoes, often causing lameness. Virgo being in opposition to Pisces which rules the feet, these subjects are peculiarly sensitive in this respect.

This type has a great sympathy with and a liking for Nature, and is fond of watching the habits of birds and insects, particularly bees, (which seem to be closely associated with this sign). They are also intensely interested in anything that travels or moves quickly.

In partnerships, business or marriage, they will harmonise best with Capricorn, Cancer, and Scorpio subjects, and their fortunate gems will be the Cornelian and Jade.

The Cornelian.--Cornelians are a variety of Chalcedony, and are found of a bright red, yellow, and white colour, in varying tones, and frequently with two or all the colours combined in one stone. On exposure to the Sun the colour becomes brighter and deeper, although artificial light and heat fail to produce the same effect. This stone is capable of taking a very high polish, and for this reason and for its hardness Pliny extols it above all other stones when used as a seal. The best specimens come from India; but Cornelians are also

[p. 207]

found in New Zealand, and in various parts of Europe. The range of its popularity extended throughout the Old and the New Worlds, and it was extensively used by the Egyptians who devote a chapter of their Book of the Dead to the Cornelian Buckle of Isis, which is described in the chapters on Egyptian Talismans; and is also frequently found in necklaces and hair ornaments.

In Arabia and throughout Turkey Cornelians are considered to be the best of all stones for talismanic purposes, and it is a curious fact that in certain districts of Europe under Turkish rule, it was common for Moslems to take their stones to the Christian priest whose blessing was considered to add greatly to their efficacy. The deep red stones were the ones most prized, and they were frequently to be seen engraved with verses from the Koran; of these, there are several examples in the British Museum in the galleries devoted to comparative religions.

The Rev. C. W. King, in his work on Antique Gems, describes a Cornelian picked up by Napoleon Buonaparte during the campaign in Egypt, and which he wore on his watch-chain as a seal, always carrying it about with him. It is octagonal in shape, and has an inscription in Arabic, as follows:

"The slave Abraham relying upon the merciful (God)."

[p. 208]

engraved upon it. Amongst Oriental nations the Cornelian was believed to protect from witchcraft, and, by warding off the glance of the envious, to avert the Evil Eye; it also preserved its wearers from ill-health, and particularly from the plague, a belief also shared by the Hebrews.

Marbodus, writing in the eleventh century, declares that if worn on the neck or finger it has a soothing effect, cooling the blood and "stilling angry passions," preserving concord and driving away evil thoughts; whilst Camillus Leonardus adds to its virtues the powers of preservation from lightning and tempest, from vice and enchantment, blood-posioning and fever, and that it was good for the staunching of bleeding. Marcellus Empiricus calls it the "Scythian Jaspis" in his prescription for the making of an Amulet against Pleurisy.

In Spain it was specially worn to give courage and fluency of speech, and to strengthen the voice; and in China it was highly prized as being beneficial to the stomach, which is frequently weak in the Virgo type.

White Cornelians were very popular with the ladies of Ancient Greece, who wore them as hair ornaments, frequently elaborately carved, and as Talismans against Rheumatism and Neuralgia.

In Volume II of Isis Unveiled, Madame

[p. 209]

[paragraph continues] Blavatsky mentions a Cornelian possessed by a Shaman, a native of Tartary, who was acting as her guide whilst travelling. By the aid of this stone the Shaman's astral body was not only able to travel wherever Madame Blavatsky's thought directed, but was able to bring the astral form of a Roumanian lady to her presence; also to bring to their rescue in the desert a party from the Khutchi of Lhassa.

Jade.--Jade, or Nephrite, is a very hard stone which varies from white to a rich green, some specimens being translucent and some (particularly the New Zealand variety) being opaque. It is very highly esteemed by the Chinese, who wear it carved in the form of the Bat, Pear, Stork, etc., as Talismans for longevity. (Its qualities and attributes being fully described in Chapter V, Part I.)

The finest Jade comes from China, and Jade is also found in New Zealand, Mexico, and Turkestan.

It has always been popular among Asiatics, who wear it for protection from accidents and injuries and against witchcraft.

Among the Greeks and Romans it was worn to avert Ophthalmia and Epilepsy, besides being universally regarded as peculiarly efficacious against stomach and kidney trouble, its name

[p. 210]

[paragraph continues] Nephrite being derived from a Greek word meaning kidney. Galen records that a necklace which he wore relieved him of stomach trouble, and its efficacy in this direction extended to South America, for when Pizzaro conquered Mexico he found the natives believed Jade beneficial for diseases of the kidneys; and Sir Walter Raleigh, in his discovery of Guiana, describes the inhabitants as using it both for stomach trouble and stone in the bladder. Humboldt also mentions it as being used for the same purpose by natives on both sides of the Orinoco.

It was also known to the Egyptians, and a Talisman of Jade in the form of an axe-head may be seen in the Egyptian Galleries at the British Museum, both sides being engraved with Gnostic symbols.

Jade is essentially the stone of New Zealand, the Maoris regarding it as sacred, their famous Talisman, the Tiki, being invariably carved in Jade. The Tiki is worn round the neck as a protection from witchcraft, and consists of a grotesque representation of the human figure with the head bent either to the left or right, in a listening attitude, resting on the shoulder; it was regarded as a precious heirloom to be religiously handed down from father to son, elaborate precautions being taken to prevent the Tiki from

[p. 211]

falling into the hands of strangers, as it was believed to embody all the qualities and virtues of their ancestors, its burial with the last male member of a family being always insisted upon.

Several very fine specimens may be seen in the Ethnographical Gallery at the British Museum.

Jade is also very popular amongst modern sportsmen as a Talisman for success in racing; but neither Jade nor Cornelian stones should be worn by those born during the Sagittarius or Gemini periods.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

LIBRA--THE HOUSE OF THE BALANCE

Period--Constellation--Origin of, the Sign--The Yoke--The Altar--Characteristics of the Type--Influence of Saturn--Inclination for Companionship--Marriage--Moods--Partnership--Professions--Health Defects of the Type--Gems of the House--The Opal--Coral--Lapis Lazuli--The Modern Ill-luck of the Opal--Its Ancient Virtues--Sensitiveness of the Opal--Its Virtues as a Libra Gem--Coral--Virtues--As Infant's Talisman--Lapis Lazuli--Egyptian Talisman--Qualities of the Stone.

The Sun enters Libra, the Seventh House of the Zodiac, about September 23rd, marking the commencement of the autumnal equinox, and completes its stay on October 24th approximately.

This House is ruled by the planet Venus and is symbolised by a pair of Scales, as illustrated in No. 7 of the coloured Frontispiece. As a Constellation it is very difficult to distinguish, appearing on the meridian about midnight in June, and is situated between the constellation of Virgo on the West and Scorpio on the East.

It is the first of the Autumnal signs, and, as with the Sun's entry into Libra the balance is

[p. 213]

reached, the days and nights then being of equal length, this would afford a practical reason for its name, although there exists no authority for this assumption.

As mentioned in the previous chapter, Libra the Balance was not included in the earliest Zodiacs, and how its predecessor was named and when it was lost does not seem ascertainable, although in some Archaic records a seventh month is indicated as occupying that part of the heavens marked by the claws of the Scorpion.

It is believed to have been known to the Egyptians as Zugon, or the Yoke, the beam only of the scales being represented, typifying the Nileometer, the instrument by which the inundations of the Nile were measured. According to some Akkadian writings the name of the seventh month was Tul-ku, meaning Holy Altar, and it is interesting to note that both the Altars of the first and second temples were dedicated in the seventh month, which has afforded ground for the assumption that the symbol for this period originally took the form of an Altar. It is also remarkable that this is the only Zodiacal House the symbol of which is not based on some living prototype.

Those born under the influence of Libra are remarkable for their powers of comparison, being

[p. 214]

able to mentally weigh and balance all things in a way that none of the other types seem capable of doing; and owing to extraordinary intuitive and perceptive qualities, Libra subjects are very susceptible to the thoughts of others, often unconsciously sensing their feelings and intentions before a word is spoken.

In matters appertaining to religion they claim an individual liberty of thought and are the least exclusive and most tolerant of all classes and creeds, seeming to act as connecting links between the various sects and faiths which without their mediation would be constantly at variance, drawing men together in the bond of brotherhood, although never forcing their convictions or opinions upon others unasked.

Although apt in all intellectual pursuits and having many interests, subjects of this type seldom make a success of their lives until after middle age, seeming constantly retarded by indecision, a failing to which they are inclined, living on from day to day, contemplating changes but submitting to the yoke of circumstances and environment for years, until some event occurs to break up the groove and force them into new conditions.

The planet Saturn, which has its exaltation in this House, and curiously enough is often afflicted

[p. 215]

in the horoscope of this type, diminishes the influence of its natural ruler Venus, giving a tinge of moodiness and dissatisfaction detrimental to advancement. When unhampered by adverse Saturnian influences, and armed with an education adapted to the development of the profession or calling they are best suited for, they attain to the front rank and, having once made up their minds, do not change easily.

They are impartial and painstaking, but, although they can and do labour strenuously for others, they rarely distinguish themselves when their efforts are merely on their own behalf or to their own personal advantage; and there is an inclination to accept fate as it comes.

Having a strong inclination for companionship and congenial sympathy, the Librans above all the Zodiacal Houses are best suited to run in double harness, the selflessness of these subjects taking the form of being happiest when confirmed in their habits and tastes by those of whom they are fond. They are the least suited of any to live alone, although they enjoy themselves best in quiet surroundings far from the noise and conflict of towns, being partial to hillsides and sunny heaths, with ample leisure at command for study and reading when inclined. They are also interested

[p. 216]

in Botany and the growing of old-world flowers and plants. Even in old age they never lose their interests although disliking social conventionalities and emotional excitement at all times.

In love and marriage relations they are attached and devoted, those born during this period being able to live amicably with any other sign, although most in harmony with those born in Gemini, Leo, and Sagittarius periods, Cancer and Capricorn being the least harmonious. As a rule this type is courteous and affable in disposition, always granting a favour gracefully although keenly resenting any attempt to impose upon their good nature, and in connection with this trait we may mention that China and Japan, the two countries so typical of courtesy, come under the sign of Libra.

The temper of this type is as a rule even, and they are usually lenient to the faults of others, but when aggravated they are cutting and sharp in speech, leaving nothing they feel unexpressed, although never malicious.

Inclined to be fastidious over small things, yet they have a tendency to lose and mislay their belongings; but having much adaptability and' resource in emergency, they seldom feel any inconvenience from this failing.

[p. 217]

To be successful they should be in partnership, or engaged in a profession or business that is neither monotonous nor arduous, as they work best in accordance with their moods; and when in harmony with their associates and surroundings, make good Musicians, Artists, Singers, Poets, Lawyers, Composers, Designers, Botanists, Librarians, Landscape Gardeners and Florists; they are also adapted for mechanical and commercial business, and to deal in goods that can be purchased and sold again quickly; and it is interesting to note that as a general rule this type is unfortunate in gambling and affairs of chance, although lucky in speculation, and as long as they follow their natural foresight will rarely be cheated.

The health defects of these subjects are kidney trouble, pains in the back, afflictions of the reproductive organs, varicose veins, indigestion, headaches, and depression of spirits; also loin trouble.

Quiet and plenty of fresh air are their best medicines.

The gems of this House are the Opal, Coral, and Lapis Lazuli.

The Opal.--The Opal is the most beautiful and mysterious of all gems, containing as it does all the colours of the rainbow, which flash and

[p. 218]

glow in sparks and minute flames as the light plays over the surface, causing it to be aptly described as combining in itself the beauties of all the other stones. It is a species of soft quartz, and the wonderful play of colour is believed to be caused by extremely minute particles of air enclosed in its fissures.

The finest variety is known as Harlequin Opal, in which the colourings are distributed in numerous very small flakes throughout the stone. Mexican Opals are more transparent, with the colouring less definite, and arranged in much larger patches; from Mexico we also get fire Opals which are of one colour, the deep red "fire-like" stones being the best, though they vary in colour to a warm yellow.

Opals are very soft when first taken from the mine, but harden by exposure. Great care is necessary in cutting and also in setting them, as they are very brittle and liable to chip.

In the fourteenth century the Opal was known as the Ophthalmius, or Eye Stone, because it was believed to sharpen and strengthen the eyesight; also that its flashes of coloured fire were especially efficacious in arresting the glance of envy. In India, the passing of an Opal across the brow is believed to clear the brain and strengthen the memory.

[p. 219]

The idea of its being an unlucky stone had its origin in the misfortunes that befell Anne of Geierstein in Sir Walter Scott's novel, her principal jewel consisting of a large Opal; they are not, in reality, more unlucky than other stones, though being a Libra gem and essentially a pledge of friendship, they are not fortunate for any one having Venus afflicted in their horoscope. In the East it is regarded as a sacred stone which contains the Spirit of Truth, and in Ancient Greece the Opal was supposed to possess the power of giving foresight and the light of prophecy to its owner, provided it was not used for selfish ends; its misuse bringing ill-luck in love (which probably accounts for its being unlucky when used in an engagement ring) and disappointment and misfortune in all enterprises.

Pliny tells, as an illustration of its high value, that Nonnius, a Roman Senator, endured outlawry and exile at the hands of Marcus Antonius rather than part with an Opal he possessed.

All Opals are very sensitive to atmospheric conditions, varying in brilliancy according to the temperature, their colouring being at its best when worn and kept warm and dry. This sensitiveness was believed by the ancients to make them susceptible to influences of an occult nature, so that when the colour of an Opal was bright and

[p. 220]

lively it indicated success and good fortune to enterprises or travel, and when dull and lifeless it warned of failure and disappointments. It also indicated to its wearer whether it was favourable or otherwise, being full of colour and brilliancy when in sympathy with its owner's interests and lacking in colour and lustre when adverse in its influence.

Coral.--Coral has been classed amongst gems from time immemorial by all nations, although, as is well known, it is the product of a marine insect.

It is found in various colours, the pink, red, and white, however, being the only kinds generally used as gems. It is produced in enormous quantities in the Southern Seas, where it forms huge reefs and even islands; but practically the whole of the Coral used for ornamental purposes is obtained in the Mediterranean off the African coasts, the Greeks maintaining an extensive fleet solely engaged in this trade. It is exported in very large quantities to China, Japan, India, and Persia, where it is used not only for its talismanic virtues, but also for its medicinal qualities. Amongst the Ancient Greeks and Romans it was highly valued, being used in many ways for various ailments. Orpheus recommended that it should be powdered and scattered amongst

[p. 221]

growing crops to safeguard them from locusts, blight, caterpillars, and thunderstorms. Dioscorides considered it efficacious against the delusions of the devil; and the Romans believed it specially favourable for the prevention of childish ailments, Coral in various forms being worn as charms against Whooping-cough, Colic, and Teething troubles; also for the prevention of fits. The Coral rattle of bells used in modern nurseries is a survival from this period when Coral was worn for health purposes, and the bells to drive away evil spirits. They also used powdered Coral, taking it internally in water for pains in the stomach; and, after burning the powder, used it as an important ingredient in ointments for ulcers and sore eyes because of its soothing and healing qualities. The Roman ladies wore small branches of Coral suspended from the neck as charms against sterility.

In India, China, and Japan, it is extensively used in Rosaries, and is very popular, being regarded as a sovereign remedy against cholera and all epidemics, and invaluable in indicating to its wearer the presence of poison, or the danger of illness, by changing colour. In Southern Europe necklaces of Coral beads are worn to avert the Evil Eye.

Camillus Leonardus recommends it to keep evil

[p. 222]

spirits from the house, prevent mental delusions and nightmare, give relief in intestinal trouble, and to avert diseases of the spleen. It is still extensively used in Italy for the numerous carved charms worn to avert the Evil Eye.

Lapis Lazuli.--Lapis Lazuli is a deep blue stone well known to all ancient nations, and is most probably the stone mentioned in early writings as the Sapphire, the Tables of the Law stated in the Bible as being of the latter, although there is not much doubt that Lapis Lazuli is the stone meant.

It is an opaque stone, and is frequently flecked with gold owing to the presence of iron pyrites in its composition.

The best qualities come from China, Persia, and Siberia; whilst the lighter-coloured and less valuable is found in Germany and South America. Its name is derived from Lapis, meaning "a stone," and the Arabic word Azul, meaning "blue."

It was very popular with the Egyptians, several of their Talismans being made of this gem, particularly the Eye and Heart, specimens of which may be seen in the fourth Egyptian Room at the British Museum. On account of its beautiful deep blue colour it has always been dedicated to Venus, and in Christian religions is regarded as

[p. 223]

the stone of the Virgin Mary. It was freely used by the Greeks and Romans both for ornamental purposes and for the cure of Apoplexy, Epilepsy, diseases of the Spleen, and all skin ailments and blood disorders. Also a necklace of Lapis Lazuli beads was considered beneficial to inspire courage in timid children, cure depression of spirits and melancholia, whilst it strengthened the affections, ensured fidelity in friends, and brought success in love.

The Opal, Coral, and Lapis Lazuli should not, however, be worn by those whose birthdays fall in the Cancer or Capricorn periods.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 224]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

SCORPIO--THE HOUSE OF THE SCORPION

Period--Ruling Planet--Mythology--Symbology--Characteristics of the Type--Effect of the Malefic Aspects--Health Defects--Professions--Religion--Marriage--The Gems of the House--The Beryl and Aquamarine differing only in Colour--Qualities of the Beryl--Clairvoyant Properties--The Carbuncle as Transmitter of Light--Noah's Lamp--Talisman against Infection--The Lodestone--Magnetic Qualities as an Amulet against Shipwreck and Gout.

Scorpio forms the eighth sign of the Zodiac and is situated very low down on the Southern horizon, being seen at its best late at night during the months of July and August, and it is occupied by the Sun from the 24th October until November 23rd.

The House of the Scorpion is ruled by the planet Mars, and its largest star is Antares, so named by the Greeks to signify that it was equal in brilliancy to Mars, which, however, does not coincide with modern observation, as Mars when at his nearest to the Earth far exceeds in splendour and ruddiness the star Antares.

In very ancient records this sign has been called "The Oldest"; but no reason can be found for

[p. 225]

this, although it has been suggested that the title refers to "that old serpent" originally responsible for the Fall of Mankind, which, according to ancient writers, is visible in the heavens and may be followed by taking diagrammatic representation of the constellations, where Hercules is shown trampling on the head of the Serpent, or Scorpion. As the Serpent, it typifies the temptation of Eve, who won wisdom and knowledge at the price of bitter sorrow and suffering. According to Greek Mythology the Scorpion was placed in the heavens by Juno the Queen of Gods (and wife of Jupiter), because it carried out her wishes by stinging Orion, who had offended the goddess by boasting that he could outrun and subdue the wildest and fiercest of beasts. Orion died from the effects of the sting and, with the Scorpion, was translated to the heavens, forming different constellations so placed that as one sets the other rises; and amongst mariners, when Orion is obscured it is considered to indicate storm and tempest, or when he is visible, fair weather.

The symbol and stone of the House are shown in No. 8 of the Frontispiece.

Scorpio has been described as the sign accursed, because during this period unfavourable weather is usually experienced, bringing gales and storms, the wind being stinging and bitterly cold, whilst

[p. 226]

diseases such as cholera and digestive disorders incidental to the fruit season are rife, aptly expressed by the symbol of this House.

The leading characteristics of those born under the influence of Scorpio are intensity of purpose, indomitable will, and unflinching determination, as shown by the thoroughness and persistency with which they carry out their plans and desires, whether for good or evil. Although this type includes many extremes of temperament, from the highest and best natures down to the lowest and most degraded, whatever their stage of development may be, weak natures are seldom if ever found amongst them, all possessing the same positive methodical mentality with unflagging and powerful energy, in whichever sphere they are found. Having naturally a strong magnetic personality and dominant will-power, they exercise a strange psychological influence over others, and, although most convincing and powerful speakers, can frequently make themselves felt and understood without a word being spoken. They are invaluable when in positions of authority, which enables them to exercise this force, being persistent in seeing that those working under their direction shall carry out duties with precision, and although affable to those of an inferior social status they are always ready to resent familiarity

[p. 227]

and stand upon their dignity when necessary, which enables them to insist on the observance of rules and laws even by the most refractory. These Scorpio subjects are also endowed with a strong perception of right and wrong, their sense of justice making them endeavour as far as possible to give due reward or otherwise for value received, even, to the extent of observing the ancient doctrine of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. Although apparently matter-of-fact they are more or less psychic according to the stage of their development, but often fail to realise this power, attributing their experiences in this direction to keen perception and quick and accurate deduction, for they always discredit all they cannot personally feel or understand, looking upon the limits of their understanding as the limit of nature. One of their strongest traits of character is their wonderful power of resistance, for even when the chances of success are nil they are never discouraged, rising again and again after reverses seemingly unaware of defeat, also rarely showing emotion or feeling by any change of expression. This faculty of resistance makes them very popular as champions of the weak or oppressed, for they will face any personal danger or unpleasantness to help others, although they are often annoyed at the mental

[p. 228]

deficiencies and lack of self-reliance and moral courage of the weaker types.

When badly aspected the subjects of Scorpio are, however, most destructive, domineering, malicious, and restless, developing into scolds and unreasonable characters, with a taste for a wandering and unsettled life. When unafflicted by malefic planets the nature -is expansive, and their surroundings should be such that they may work off superfluous energy in some way beneficial both to mind acid body. Outdoor life is most necessary and beneficial, and those of this type forced by circumstances to sedentary occupations should take walking, riding, or gymnastic exercises whenever possible.

Their energetic, discerning, and powerful personalities are felt in every walk of life, whether in State, professional, or business capacities; as humanitarians or leaders of democratic circles their phenomenal and retrospective memories and inexhaustible argument and suggestion act as an energy of destruction or as a motive power to uplift humanity. Other professions for which they are suited are Magistrates, Detectives, Analysts, Principals of Schools and Institutions, Disciplinarians, Organisers, Engineers generally, and Marine Engineers in particular; they also make splendid surgeons and medical practitioners, usually in

[p. 229]

favour of drastic treatment for refractory patients. As authors they analyse and bring to the surface all the darkest corners in human life; they are also interested in handicrafts and intellectual progress, whilst their business capacity in driving a bargain or in buying and selling is remarkable.

The health defects of this House are generally of an uncommon nature, such as suppressed gout and rheumatism, painful and inflammatory ailments of the lower organs (which are governed by Scorpio); haemorrhoids, malaria, typhoid, angina pectoris, insomnia, and severe sick headaches. In temper they are electric and impulsive and inclined to take offence; but although an angry type have often great self-control, but when badly aspected their strong passions predominate, and like the Scorpion they sting with the tongue, and their expressions are sarcastic, lurid, and cruel.

In religion they believe in Divine justice being meted out to wrongdoers, and find no difficulty in administering punishment to transgressors according to their deserts.

In love and friendship they are very exclusive, having strong and intense affections for those to whom they are attracted, but are subject to sudden revulsions of feeling and are for this reason frequently unfortunate in marriage relations, being inclined to be exacting, mistrustful,

[p. 230]

and difficult to please, yet they always command respect, even from those who are unable to understand them. They will harmonise best with those of the Pisces, Cancer, Capricorn, and Virgo types, while those least in sympathy will be the Aquarian and Leo types.

The gems of this House are the Beryl, Aquamarine, Carbuncle, and Lodestone.

The Beryl.--The Beryl and Aquamarine are practically the same stone, differing only in colour, the Beryl varying from a bright blue to white, and the Aquamarine, as its name implies, coinciding with Pliny's description of "the gem green as the sea"; like the sea its colour varies from a pale cool green to a deep green. In quite recent years it has become common amongst jewellers and dealers in precious stones to describe all kinds generally as Aquamarines, and therefore it is not unusual to find one merchant describing the green stone as the Beryl, whilst his neighbour gives this name to the blue.

In their compositions these stones are almost exactly the same as the Emerald, and are found in India, Siberia, and Brazil. It has always been revered in the East as the stone of purity, and was considered to be particularly sensitive to personal influence, so that it is frequently given to brides at weddings that the auras of the newly-wedded

[p. 231]

may blend in the Beryl, preserving and increasing their mutual love. This belief was held by the Romans, and confirmed by Camillus Leonardus who says, "it renders the bearer cheerful and increases and preserves married love"; also, "it cures distempers of the throat and jaws, and is good for indispositions of the liver and disorders of the stomach."

It is appropriately regarded as the Stone of the Seer and Mystic, nearly all of whom will be found to have Scorpio strong in their horoscopes. It is mentioned by Aubrey as particularly favourable for clairvoyants because "it hath a weak tincture of red wherein magicians see visions." This effect, sometimes seen under the influence of changing light, is also noted by Rossetti in his ballad "Rose Mary," where, writing on the powers of the spirits of the Beryl, he describes the stone as--

"Rainbow hued through a misty pall,
  Like the middle light of a waterfall."

All varieties of this stone were considered beneficial to married people in keeping the affections true and constant and protecting from slander; and it was also regarded as a sovereign remedy against idleness, a sharpener of the intellect, and as being specially good for mariners and adventurers, preserving them from danger and sickness

[p. 232]

on sea and land, and efficacious in the discovery of all hidden things.

The Carbuncle.--The Carbuncle belongs to the same species of stone as the Garnet, the latter being cut with facets, while the former is cut en cabochon, or with a rounded surface. It is found in India, Ceylon, Brazil, and the Cape, and has been described by mediaeval writers (including Chaucer and Mandeville) as giving forth light in darkness, whilst in old legends a large Carbuncle is said to have served Noah as a lamp.

Shakespeare also refers to the light that comes from this stone, and these descriptions may have arisen from the fact that many very sensitive or psychic people are able to see a certain luminous effect surrounding the gem. It was a very popular stone with the Ancient Hebrews, who knew it as Baraketh, or flashing stone, which is derived from Barak, meaning lightning. Camillus Leonardus recommends it as a safeguard from poison, and in infectious illnesses, for repressing extravagance, and for mightily increasing the popularity and prosperity of its wearer.

During the Middle Ages it was believed to protect its owners from the plague, also to banish sadness, dispel evil thoughts, repress sensuality, reconcile differences between friends, and attract success to all undertakings, as well as to cure

[p. 233]

indigestion and sore throat if suspended round the neck.

According to Pliny there are male and female stones, the deep red being masculine and the lighter-coloured feminine, a belief also held with regard to other gems.

Amongst the tribes of Northern India and Africa it was believed to protect from wounds in battle, an idea also common amongst the Arabs.

The Lodestone.--The Lodestone is composed of proto-oxide and peroxide of iron, and from its magnetic qualities is known as Magnetite. This quality induced Dinocrates, a celebrated architect in the employ of Ptolemy Philadelphus, to plan a temple the roof of which was to be of Lodestone, so that the statue of Arsinoe, to whom the temple was dedicated, might remain in suspension, a plan which never materialised owing to the death of the architect and his patron. Claudius, a Roman poet who lived some 600 years later, mentions a statue of Venus made of Lodestone and one of Mars in Iron, placed in the same temple that they might be attracted together at the marriage ceremonies, the Romans believing that this stone kept husband and wife faithful and their love secure.

Orpheus attributes to the Lodestone the power of attracting the love of gods and men, and it was

[p. 234]

frequently set in wedding-rings for this purpose. In India it is believed to give vitality and health to those who wear it, and it is very popular amongst Mohammedans as a Talisman against evil spirits. In Elizabethan days mariners had great faith in this stone as a preservative from shipwreck, and also as an Amulet against gout if worn next the skin.

The Beryl, Aquamarine, Carbuncle, and Lodestone should not, however, be worn by those born in the Aquarius or Leo periods.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 235]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

SAGITTARIUS--THE HOUSE OF THE ARCHER

Period--The Constellation--The Bow in the Cloud--Mythology--Characteristics of the Type--Appropriateness of the Symbol--Fresh Air a Necessity--Professions--Ailments--Marriage Relations--Gem of the House--The Topaz--Nain-Ratan--Pliny and the Topaz--Discovery of the Stone--The Emperor Hadrian and his Ring--Appropriateness of the Stone to the Type--The Stone of Strength--As a Talisman against Asthma--Marbodus and the Topaz--Chrysolite also Favourable.

The Sun enters the Zodiacal House of Sagittarius the Archer on November 23rd and remains until December 21st approximately.

This House is symbolised by a Centaur armed with a bow ready to discharge an arrow (as shown in Illustration No. 9 of the coloured Frontispiece), and is ruled by the planet Jupiter.

Sagittarius the Archer forms one of the constellations of the Southern Hemisphere, situated between Scorpio the Scorpion and Capricornus the Goat. The bow of the Archer in the constellation contains three of the largest stars in this group, so that its form can be followed without much difficulty, affording a further illustration of Biblical

[p. 236]

history depicted in the heavens, as mentioned by Mr. R. A. Proctor the Astronomer. It will be remembered that in the previous chapter we noted that Libra was at one time symbolised by an altar, and Mr. Proctor says, describing this constellation:

"Next after the Altar (built by Noah after leaving the Ark), and in fact in the smoke from the Altar, is the bow of Sagittarius, and corresponding with this we read that God, after the savour of the Altar had reached him, said: 'I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall come to pass when I bring a cloud over the earth that bow shall be seen in the cloud.' Close by the ship Argo (the Ark) again, is the raven, perched on Hydra (the great sea serpent), represented in the old sculptures immersed in the waves of ocean on which the Ark was floating."

The Greeks also adopted the Centaur as the symbol of this constellation, but according to their mythology the Centaur was Chiron the son of Saturn, who whilst living in the woods studied the medicinal virtues of herbs to such good effect that he became supreme as a physician. He was also famous for his skill in astronomy and proficiency in scientific knowledge, because of which he became in turn the instructor of Achilles, Hercules, and Aesculapius. In handling the

[p. 237]

arrows of Hercules, which had been poisoned by being dipped in the Hydra's blood, he accidentally let one fall upon his foot, inflicting a wound which in spite of his great skill in medicine he was unable to cure. Being born of immortal parents he could not die, so that to release him from his excruciating pains the gods translated him to the heavens to form this constellation.

"Midst golden stars he stands refulgent now
  And thrusts the Scorpion with his bended bow."

One of the most noticeable characteristics of those born under the influence of Sagittarius is their acuteness of perception and accuracy in sensing the weak spots in the characters of those about them, resembling the Archer, who stands ready to shoot the arrow which seldom fails in hitting the mark. Sagittarians have a decisive way of expressing their opinion, which can never be mistaken as it exactly fits the case; behind their words is the intuition which gives them the power of inspiration. They are progressive, enterprising, and prophetic. With a clear knowledge and perception of what they wish to achieve, and their thoughts concentrated upon the goal which they are destined to reach, circumstances do not overcome them. They solve the many problems of life and get through the worst troubles with the least difficulty of any type.

[p. 238]

Being lovers of freedom they will generally be found their own masters, or if in employment, in such position as gives them a maximum of liberty and independence, and they are seldom without money or the means of getting it. Their sense of justice and the fitness of things is very keen, and possessing great pride of family, any ill-treatment or harshness to those they are fond of amounts with them to almost personal affront, and in spite of the fact that as a rule they mind their own business, as regards outsiders, their sympathetic and loyal nature makes them quick to notice and resent any slight or interference on behalf of their families or the few they are attached to. The brain is clear and quick at assimilating new ideas and new modes of life, and the disposition naturally frank and honest, yet curiously enough there is at the same time a certain watchfulness and distrust of strangers which leads to deception, whilst disliking and trying to avoid it, for they are haters of secrecy and dissimulation. Their aspirations are lofty, exalted, and refined, and being hopeful, joyous, and youthful even in advanced years, they are generally popular and successful, although they seldom excel as students or in literary professions.

The manners of this type are usually affable and courteous, and the temper generally even,

[p. 239]

although apt to fly off unexpectedly at the smallest provocation when acting on the spur of the moment. Having an advantage over the slower-minded types, they aim in their anger at some vulnerable point, getting home every time, for when personal they are very personal, although never willingly malicious, often in this way saying more than they really mean or intended, and although quickly recovering from their petulant moods, the effects of their temper when roused are long-lasting.

When their environment and occupation is such as to enable them to lead healthy lives they make splendid characters, open air being most necessary to enable them to draw into themselves the vitality and energy they need. Otherwise they are apt to become restless, faultfinding, rebellious, exacting, domineering, and difficult to get on with, and should always be allowed to make changes in their professions without hindrance or objections, restraint of any kind being disastrous to their development, causing them to degenerate into uninteresting, weak, and undecided characters. Generally speaking, they have a clear conception of what they wish to achieve, and being naturally fond of sport and out-of-door exercise of all kinds, they are the less liable to weakness. Having ability and foresight above the average, forewarned is forearmed,

[p. 240]

and as children this type is frequently clairaudient as well as clairvoyant. They are lovers of hygiene, and having the greatest antipathy to cramped surroundings they naturally choose professions in which they can enjoy freedom of speech and action, with plenty of space, light, and air. They excel as Judges, Presidents, Generals, Commanders, Directors, Inspectors of Schools, Factories, and Workshops, also as Sanitary Inspectors, Managers, and Superintendents, etc., hating all subordinate positions.

These subjects are also fond of animals, so that it is not surprising that horses and dogs are their constant companions, and seem to respond readily to their wishes and desires with very little training; many keen sportsmen are found under this sign, who delight in tramping over long stretches of country, or find their most congenial recreations on breezy downs and hilltops. They are also frequently found as dog-fanciers, veterinary surgeons, horse-dealers, pigeon-fanciers, and other callings bringing them into touch with animals and an out-of-door life, and in consequence of this seem more liable than the other types to accidents in connection with horses.

The chief ailments to which these subjects are liable are bronchial and lung trouble, rheumatism, accidents to the thighs and hips (which are

[p. 241]

ruled by this sign), bruises, sprains, fractures, and diseases affecting the arterial system, apoplexy, and complaints which originate through a plethoric habit and corrupt the blood.

In married life they are not always fortunate, their demand for individuality and freedom of thought and action with an intense family pride frequently causing misunderstandings, and even jealousy. Being morbidly sensitive to coldness or indifference, slights fancied or real are keenly felt. Giving of their best they demand the best in return, and if once deceived seldom entirely forgive, although when unhappily mated they make the best of it as a rule to the outside world, shrinking from any publicity of their domestic differences, faults, or failings. They will be found to harmonise best with those of the Aries, Leo, Aquarius, and Libran types, and will find the Pisces and Virgo subjects the least sympathetic.

The gem best suited and universally accepted as most favourable for this type is the Topaz; and the Chrysolite is also fortunate for them.

The Topaz.--The Topaz is found in various colours--white, yellow, pink, green, and black; but it is in the first three colours that they are familiar in general use as gems.

The best stones come from Brazil and Mexico, but they are also found in Siberia, India, and many

[p. 242]

parts of Europe and Great Britain. The most valuable is the pink variety, which is found naturally in South America; but it has been discovered that some of the yellow species can be artificially changed to this colour under a special treatment of heat.

The white topaz of Brazil is found in pebble form, free from flaws, and is a very hard bright stone capable of receiving a very high polish. It is sometimes taken for a diamond, and is known in its native country as the Slave's Diamond, although it is not equal to the diamond in brilliancy and iridescence.

A saffron-yellow variety found in Ceylon, known as the Indian Topaz, has always been popular throughout India as a Talisman, being worn for health, caution, sagacity, and the prevention of sudden death. Because of these same qualities its favour is equally strong throughout Burmah, and it is always included in the Nan-Ratan, the sacred nine-stone jewel, which forms the most important ornament in the Burmese regalia, as may be seen in the jewels which are now on exhibition at the Indian Museum, South Kensington.

According to Pliny, the Topaz derives its name from the Island of Topazos in the Red Sea, where it was first found, and he says Topazein, in the

[p. 243]

[paragraph continues] Troglodyte tongue, means "to seek after," the island being so often lost amidst fogs. Some pirates who were weatherbound on this island and hard-pressed by famine, in tearing up roots for food accidentally discovered the stone. From the descriptions which have been handed down to us it is believed that the Chrysolite was frequently used in mistake for the Topaz, and as the Zodiacal Houses the two stones represent are in harmony with each other, the Chrysolite will also be a favourable stone for the subjects of Sagittarius.

Gabelschoverus mentions that the Emperor Hadrian, whose reign was one of the most prosperous and peaceful in Roman history, and who was most ardent in spreading Christianity, even writing an address to his soul on his death-bed (which inspired Pope's poem, "The Dying Christian to his Soul"), used as a Talisman an antique ring set with a Topaz which was engraved in Roman letters with the words NATURA--DEFICIT,--FORTUNA--MUTATUR,--DEUS--OMNIA--CERNIT, an expression of faith in the Almighty to overrule Nature and Fortune most appropriate to the owner of the ring.

Fresh air was as much a necessity to the ancient as to the modern subjects of Sagittarius, as is shown from the fact that the Romans wore this gem as a preservative from pestilential atmosphere, also to protect its wearer against perils and dangers

[p. 244]

in travelling, injuries from burns and scalds, and to avert all complaints of the chest and bowels.

The Topaz was called by Pliny "The Stone of Strength," and he describes as the most valuable, stones that have a predominating tint of orange in their colouring. Albertus Magnus recommends it as a cure for gout, and Camillus Leonardus as a charm against haemorrhoids; lunacy, and sudden death; also to bring riches to its wearers, and the favours of princes.

During the Middle Ages it was believed to dispel enchantments if set in gold and bound on the left arm or hung round the neck. It preserved from sensuality, calmed anger and frenzy, strengthened the intellect, brightened the wit, gave joyousness and contentment, and drove away broodings and apprehensions. It was also worn as a cure for asthma, and as a specific against insomnia, being sometimes powdered and taken in wine.

Marbodus renders its virtues in verse, translated by the Rev. C. W. King, as follows:

"The Topaz is a jewel rare
  And therefore must be bought full dear.
  Made up of hues of golden light,
  And with Celestial lustre bright,
  Here see the man on study bent,
  A life in contemplation spent."

The Topaz will not, however, be fortunate for the subjects born during the Pisces and Virgo periods.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 245]

  

CHAPTER X

  

CAPRICORN--THE HOUSE OF THE GOAT

Constellation--Period--Ruling Planet Saturn--Mythology--The Symbol of the Goat--Characteristics--Constitution and Health Defects--India under the Rule of Capricorn--Professions--Marriage--Saturn favourable for the Elderly--Gems of the House--The Ruby--Spinel--Qualities of the Gem--Sensitiveness for Good or Evil--The Malachite--Copper as a Talisman against Colic and Cholera--Black Onyx--Favourable and Unfavourable Influence of the Stone--Jet--The Afflictions of Saturn--Effects on other Types.

Capricorn, the tenth sign of the Zodiac, is situated in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere, the constellation being composed of fifty-one visible stars known to ancient Oriental nations as the southern gate of the Sun, because its entry into this sign on December 22nd marks the shortest day and the commencement of the winter solstice, when the Sun is farthest south of the Equator, after which its light slowly increases and correspondingly the days become slightly longer.

The Sun occupies this House until January 19th approximately, and as its Latin name, Capricornus, signifies, is symbolised by a Goat, as illustrated in No. 10 of the coloured Frontispiece. Saturn is the

[p. 246]

ruling planet of this House, and as he is sometimes depicted as an old man with a scythe (literally Old Father Time familiar to every one), this may explain the ancient Akkadian name for this month, Abba-uddu, meaning Old Father; and as the Greek words signifying both Time and Saturn differ only in one letter, in all probability the two may have been regarded as synonymous.

The Cornucopia, or Horn of Plenty, was also used as a symbol of this House, as in Ancient Mythology Saturn is believed to have introduced civilisation and the arts of husbandry, so that, as described by Virgil--

"With his mild empire peace and plenty came;
  And hence the golden Times derived their name,"

the increasing length of the days promising a bountiful future.

Very frequently the Goat is shown with a fish's body joined to the shoulders, which is explained in classical literature as the result of an adventure of the god Pan. This deity, who was considered by the Greeks to symbolise the House, whilst feasting with other gods on the banks of the Nile was attacked by the monster Typhon. In order to escape Pan and his friends plunged into the river, assuming different shapes, Pan taking the form of a fish for the lower half of his body,

[p. 247]

and the head, shoulders, and forelegs of a goat for the other half.

The symbol of the Goat climbing a rocky eminence (as shown in the illustration), is very appropriate to well-developed subjects born under the influence of Capricorn who seem for ever persistently and patiently climbing upwards, and who are capable of great resistance in overcoming obstacles in the way, their dauntless energy and courage in facing difficulties reminding us of the goats kept by the owners of the great cattle ranches in Mexico, on account of their superior courage and intelligence to sheep, and who, if the latter are in danger of an attack by wolves, will face the foes, showing fight and fearlessness, collecting the sheep round them, and thus preventing a stampede, making their protection easier by the herdsmen.

Capricorn is an earthy sign, and its subjects are apt to exaggerate the importance of earthly life, and in youth suffer much furtive and fearful curiosity, regarding the mysteries of birth and death, and, as children, feel deeply any snub or reproof, and should never be brought up by coarse-minded people, as they readily take on the conditions of those around them, and although appreciative of commendation lose heart when indifferently treated.

[p. 248]

This sign is typical of a remarkable continuity of purpose, and those born under its influence are deep thinkers and insatiable in their desire for knowledge, assiduous students, quick to seize and take advantage of any opportunity for self-improvement or advancement, indefatigable workers, and capable of planning out several schemes and thoughts at the same time.

The desire to make money is a marked characteristic, not so much for its own sake in the majority of cases as for the power and opportunities which wealth brings; but although thrifty and discreet in financial affairs generally it is difficult for them to economise in personal matters, and although they work harder and know better than most how to make both ends meet, yet the proverbial rainy day occasionally finds them unprepared.

They are generous by fits and starts, giving ungrudgingly of time as well as money where others bestow little, and nothing where others give much, and, in contrast to the Sagittarian type who give mostly to large institutions, the subjects of Capricorn prefer helping the individual.

The typical Capricornian takes life earnestly, and is much interested in the occult side of nature, as well as a great upholder of old customs and observances that bind the present with the past old-world traditions and antiquities generally

[p. 249]

having a great fascination for these subjects. When adversely aspected, however, this type degenerates sadly, showing great despondency and dread of failure in all they undertake, and without some outside stimulus becoming more and more apprehensive and mistrustful, avaricious and covetous until it is almost impossible to live with them. When the ruling planet Saturn is badly aspected by Mars, revolutionary tendencies and a cruel enjoyment of the sufferings of others is indicated; but so great is the love of work even amongst the most primitive of these subjects of Capricorn, that they are too much engaged to have time to be vicious, and when the malefic side of the Saturnian's qualities are very noticeable, it is often the result of too much solitude wherein the subject has brooded over troubles and anxieties.

The temper is strong and forceful, but generally well under control, although lasting when roused and bitterly resentful.

The constitution is remarkably strong, and these subjects frequently live to a good old age, the ailments to which they are liable being colds, deafness, affections of or accidents to the joints, especially the knees, which are ruled by this sign (and are often weak), colic, from flatulence, toothache, spleen, and liver trouble, also severe ear and headaches caused by nervous prostration,

[p. 250]

from mental and physical labour in excess. Endurance, Penetration, Caution, and Prudence being very noticeable in this type, they excel in all professions requiring shrewdness and acute discernment rising through personal merit to be recognised authorities in the various callings to which they are suited.

India, which comes under the rule of Capricorn, aptly illustrates the qualities and failings, for amongst the Indians we find profound learning, great power, rank, and a painstaking care of minute particulars; whilst the lower caste fittingly illustrate the debasement of the type. Subjects of this House are adapted for most professions and employments of a public or a governmental character. Being natural organisers, their concise methods are sought after by the weaker types they so often serve. Priests, Monks, Occultists, Organists, Statesmen, Editors, Authors, Designers, Architects, Builders, Mining Speculators, Land Surveyors, Agriculturists, Gardeners, are all professions and callings to which this type are attracted; also as Labourers, Miners, Carpenters, and woodcutters, it being interesting to note that Mr. Gladstone, who was born during this period, and who was an extremely good example of the highly intellectual subjects of this House, had also a fondness for tree-felling.

[p. 251]

In marriage and friendship they are slow to form attachments, and are frequently unmarried; but when once attracted the influence is deep and lasting, although their love affairs are liable to great and fateful changes, for living, as a rule, solitary and self-centred lives, they create ideals beyond human attainment, and failing to realise their anticipations are often disappointed. Saturn, their ruling planet, being favourable to old rather than young people, they are advised not to marry early, the most happy and prosperous times in their lives being often between middle life and seventy, and they will harmonise best with those born during the Taurus, Virgo, Pisces, and Scorpio periods.

The gems of this House are the Ruby, Spinel, Malachite, Black Onyx, and Jet.

The Ruby.--The Ruby is one of the most precious of gems, when of a good size, free from flaws, and of the true pigeons'-blood colour, being more valuable than a diamond of the same size.

The finest rubies come from Burmah, and they are also found in Ceylon and Siam; their colour varies from light pink to the richest carmine. Until modern times the Spinel or Balas Ruby was included with the true Ruby, but they are quite different in their composition, Spinels being softer and not so brilliant, though more varied in colour,

[p. 252]

ranging from red, orange, green, and blue to violet. Amongst Oriental nations this stone has ever and still continues to be a great favourite as a Talisman; and throughout India, Burmah, and Ceylon it is considered to guard its wearers from the attacks of enemies, reveal the presence of poison by changing colour, and to attract friends and good fortune.

In China and Japan it is also worn to confer long life, health, and happiness. Pliny describes it as the Lychnis, and says the Star Rubies were considered by the Chaldeans to be most powerful in protecting from evil and attracting the favour of those in authority. Throughout the whole of the Orient the Ruby was believed to possess the power of foretelling danger by a loss of brilliancy and colour, a belief also common throughout Europe as confirmed by Wolfgangus Gabelschoverus, who writing in the year 1600, says, whilst travelling with his wife: "I observed by the way that a very fine Ruby (which she had given me) lost repeatedly and each time almost completely its splendid colour and assumed a blackish hue." He goes on to tell that the threatened evil was fulfilled by the loss of his wife, and that after her death the stone regained its colour and brilliancy.

Catherine of Aragon is reported to have also possessed a ring set with a ruby that indicated

[p. 253]

in the same manner the approach of misfortune.

Camillus Leonardus says that the Ruby gave control of the passions, drove out evil thoughts, secured possessions to their rightful owner, reconciled quarrels, brought peace and concord, also preserved bodily strength and health, and that the Balas Ruby (Spinel) possesses the power of averting danger of hail and tempest.

It was worn by the subjects of this House whose horoscopes were free from Saturn's afflictions to protect the body from plague, poison, and fevers, and to secure love and friendship, preserve health, vitality, and cheerfulness, against disorders of the liver and spleen, and to drive away evil dreams and spirits. It was also believed to be a very active and sensitive stone, and if the horoscope had Saturn badly afflicted would afford a ready channel for disappointment, bereavement, and other misfortunes incidental to the influence of this planet when malefic.

The Malachite.--Malachite is an opaque stone, its principal composition being carbonate of copper, which gives it a beautiful green colour.

The name is derived from the Greek Malaku, signifying the Mallow plant, as its colouring was thought to resemble that of Mallow leaves. The finest quality comes from Siberia, and it is also

[p. 254]

found in Australia, Africa, and Germany, and it is believed to be the Molochites of Pliny; it was also used extensively by the Egyptians, both for talismanic and ornamental purposes.

It is very popular in the East and throughout Russia, where it is regarded as a safeguard against colic and rheumatism, its benefits acting through the copper in its composition; and in connection with this, Dr. Alfred J. Pearce in his text-book of Astrology mentions "that workers in copper mines have escaped cholera when their neighbours died of it, also that copper is worn by the Hindus as a Charm against cholera."

Marbodus recommends the Malachite as a Talisman for young people because of its protective qualities and power in attracting sound sleep; it was also worn for protection from lightning and contagious diseases and for health, success, and constancy in the affections. During the Middle Ages it was customary to wear it engraved with a figure or symbol of the Sun as a preservative to the health and to avert despondency and depression of spirits to which the Capricorn type are liable.

Black Onyx.--The Onyx generally has been treated in the chapter on Leo when writing of the Sardonyx; but the stone peculiar to Capricorn is the black, or dark brown, which is generally

[p. 255]

marked with a decided white stripe across it, or the white stripe may appear in the form of a circle round the centre, in which case it is known as the Lynx-eye Onyx by the natives of India where the finest stones are found.

From very remote ages, particularly in India, the Black Onyx has been considered essentially the stone for rosaries, its attributes being to restrain passion, to give spiritual strength and inspiration, and to be beneficial in the cure of fits. It should not, however, be worn by any one born with Saturn unfavourable in their horoscope, which fact was known to mediaeval astrologers who, in such cases, as mentioned by Marbodus, assert that its wearer would be exposed to the assaults of demons and bad visions by night, and plagued with quarrels, law-suits, and melancholy by day; that it would nullify their labours, and even cause its owners to feel the pinch of poverty (all recognised Saturnian troubles and afflictions), only to be counteracted by the introduction of the Sun's brightening influence in the form of the Sard.

Jet.--Jet is of vegetable origin, being fossil wood, a variety of, but very much harder than ordinary coal, and capable of taking a very high polish. The finest is the well-known Whitby jet which was first discovered by the monks of the historical Abbey before the Reformation brought its

[p. 256]

ruin. Jet is also found on the coasts of the Baltic, and in the Middle Ages was known as Black Amber, being worn as a prophylactic against epilepsy and fits, and to prevent strangulation of the womb; taken internally, powdered in wine, it was considered good for the toothache, and mixed with beeswax was used for tumours. It was also well known and used by all ancient nations, the Greeks dedicating it to Cybele, the goddess of all things necessary to life produced by the earth, wearing it for her favours and especially for protection to travellers by sea and land. Boetius de Boot recommends it as a specific against nightmare, witchcraft, and melancholy apprehension.

Neither the Ruby, Malachite, Black Onyx, nor Jet should be worn by the Libra or Aries type, or indeed by any who have Saturn afflicted in their birth map.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 257]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

AQUARIUS--THE HOUSE OF THE WATER-BEARER

Constellation--Period--Symbol--Early Religious Teachings--The Glyph--Rulers of the House--Saturn and Uranus--Characteristics of the Type--Temper--Professions--Health Defects--Marriage and Friendships--Gems of the House--Garnets and Zircons--The Garnet and Ruby--Qualities of the Stone--Virtue, as a Keepsake--The Zircon--The Hyacinth--The Jargoon--The Jacinth as a Talisman for Sleep--Set in Gold for Restlessness--The Lyncurion of the Ancients: its Virtues.

Aquarius, the Water-bearer, is the eleventh sign of the Zodiac, and is situated in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere between the constellations of Capricornus the Goat and Pisces the Fishes. This constellation has only a few bright stars and is not easy to find, but with the aid of a good glass its shape as a pitcher or vase may be traced showing two star streams which How from its mouth, one towards the Goat and the other falling downwards. It can be seen best during the months of September and October, between the hours of 9 and II p.m., and is occupied by the Sun from January 10th until February 19th approximately each year.

[p. 258]

The Pitcher or Vase, as the symbol of the House, was universally used by ancient nations, the Chinese describing it as the Vase full, the Chaldeans as the Watering-pot, the Arabians as the Pitcher or Urn, and the Greeks and Romans as the Water-pourer; it is illustrated in No. 11 of the Frontispiece.

In many old star maps the figure of a man is shown carrying the Pitcher; but at the present time, at any rate, the figure cannot be traced in the stars of the constellation and was doubtless entirely imaginary, being probably added to illustrate the early religious teachings of the Zodiac, the Arabic name for "a aquari," the principal star of this group, being "sadal melik," meaning "fortunate star of the King," the figure typifying the King, or Priest, who by his outpourings made his country fortunate or blessed. An interpretation which, at least, is in harmony with its qualities, is that Aquarius, being one of the airy triplicities and the period of its occupation by the Sun being a moist one (familiarly known to us as February Fill-dyke), the vapours and clouds borne on its air are appropriately symbolised by the figure of a water-bearer, and the two waved lines  the most ancient pictorial illustration of water which form the Glyph of this House equally well expressed its qualities.

[p. 259]

Ancient writers assign Saturn to be the ruler of this House as well as of Capricorn, and he is doubtless very strong when in occupation, but the consensus of opinion amongst modern astrologers is to replace Saturn by the planet Uranus as the ruler of this sign, appearing as he does to affect this House more than any other during his periodic stay of seven years. Being akin to Saturn in its nature, but unknown to the ancient authorities, they not unnaturally thought its qualities were of a Saturnian character.

Those born under the influence of Aquarius possess extremely complex minds and dispositions often unconsciously as well as consciously absorbing impressions and information on all kinds of topics and out-of-the-way subjects, their interests being widely spread and far-reaching; and, as their symbol the Water-bearer suggests, their diffusive natures give them an extraordinary facility in the passing on of knowledge to others in a manner easy to understand, their well-stocked minds full of reminiscence and anecdote making them most interesting companions when they choose.

Unlike those born under the influence of Capricorn, they do not run in any well-worn groove of thought nor use any established reason or method, preferring ways and ideas of their own to those of others. Despite their ability to succeed

[p. 260]

in almost any direction, their fluctuating moods incline them often to scatter their talents and energies, thus losing them many opportunities of advancement in a definite profession or occupation. Although acting from what seems to themselves well-defined motives, they frequently annoy their friends and relations by what appears to be a capricious restlessness. The perceptive faculty being stronger in the Aquarian type than in others, they are remarkably good judges of human nature and character, and, their analytical and reasoning powers being very pronounced, they see through the motives and actions of others very quickly and easily, often having a reply ready before the other has finished speaking. Although careful to examine the facts or truths of any matter before finally accepting it, they speak their minds freely or express their opinions forcibly when necessary. They are intelligent, independent, and progressive in their ideas, with a strong sense of justice and forethought in all they undertake. Contrary to the expectations of those about them, they often succeed where nothing but failure seems possible; their will-power, being firm even to obstinacy, continues to exert itself to the end of any achievement in spite of obstacles and difficulties which others consider insurmountable. They usually have more than one source of

[p. 261]

income, but do not show to the best advantage when born rich, for in their endeavour to get the best value for outlay and the best interest on investments, and being subject to sudden gains and losses, their dread of poverty makes money always more or less an anxiety, whether inherited or earned, which makes them very careful in financial affairs, giving outsiders the impression of meanness, although when wealthy they frequently leave large sums for the benefit of the community.

Extremes frequently meet in this type, which includes some of the strongest as well as some of the most erratic and indecisive characters who, when adversely aspected, become cantankerous, abrupt in manners, selfish, and obstinate, and through their eccentricity and peculiarity of temperament are often the creators of their own enemies and misfortunes.

The temper is quick and irritable, and they do not recover easily from its effect, surrounding themselves as it were with a barrier of reserve impossible to break through or approach.

The professions and occupations in which they are most successful are frequently of an uncommon nature, or of an advanced kind, noteworthy examples of subjects born during this period being Darwin, Dickens, Edison, Ruskin, and Sir Henry

[p. 262]

[paragraph continues] Irving. Many investors, metaphysicians, scientists, artists, authors, hypnotists, electricians, elocutionists, actors, art and literary critics, analysts, telegraphists are Aquarians, and having much resourceful and inventive genius are often successful where others fail.

The health defects of those born under this sign are usually complicated and sometimes incurable, including accidents from lightning and electricity, giddiness, neuritis, rheumatism, derangements of the digestive system, bad circulation, catarrh, eczema, bad chills, and sprains and injuries to the ankles which are ruled by this sign and are often weak in childhood.

In matters relating to marriage and friendship they arc difficult to please, being apt to demand a reason even for their ideals which makes them scrutinise the faults and failings of those with whom they come in contact, thoughtlessness and its resultant mistakes being to them incomprehensible. Although fond of living in towns and cities and mixing with others are often the most lonely of all the types; but if once deeply attracted are staunch and true, and will be most in sympathy with the Gemini, Libra, Aries, and Sagittarian types, and least in harmony with those of the Taurus and Scorpio signs.

The gems of this House are the Garnet and all

[p. 263]

the Zircons, which include the Jargoon, Hyacinth, and Jacinth.

The Garnet.--Garnets are found in many varieties, each being described by a special name; the Bohemian Garnet is a deep red, whilst the Cinnamon stone usually has its colour varied by a tinge of orange; Almandines have a violet hue and take their name from Alabanda, a town in Asia Minor, where, according to Pliny, this stone (which he describes as the Alabandicus) was in his time cut and polished. They are found in Brazil, Mexico, Bohemia, Australia, and North America, an uncommon bright green variety being also found in the Ural Mountains. The colour of the best stones approximates to that of the Ruby, fur which it was sometimes mistaken by the Ancients, and amongst modern jewellers it is frequently described as the Cape Ruby, although the Ruby is a much harder stone, richer in colour, and possesses much more fire.

Garnets have always been extensively used throughout the East and amongst the Greeks and Romans, the latter frequently using them for engraving, several fine specimens of Imperial portraits having come down to us in this way.

In India and throughout Persia it was known as an Amulet against poison and the plague, worn to attract health and cheerfulness, and as a protection

[p. 264]

against lightning. During the Middle Ages it was used as a remedy for inflammatory diseases, and to confer constancy, fidelity, and cheerfulness to its rightful wearers, but was said to cause discord amongst those having no right to it by birth. Like the Ruby, it warned its owner of approaching danger and trouble by changing its colour, and was much in vogue at one time as a keepsake between friends at parting.

The Zircon.--The Zircon includes Jacinth, or Hyacinth, and Jargoons, which, though differing in colour, are actually the same material species. As a rule amongst modern dealers in Precious Stones the White Zircon is known as the Jargoon, which is often found flawless and so bright as to closely resemble the diamond, being in fact often offered for sale as the diamond in Indian Bazaars.

Jacinths, or Hyacinths, are Zircons of deep orange or rich bright red colour, the Jacinth name being of Arabic origin, and the Hyacinth Greek, because it resembled the Hyacinth flowers which Apollo caused to spring from the blood of his favourite Hyacinthus whom he accidentally killed with a quoit. The remaining varieties of this stone, which are found in varying shades of yellow, grey, brown, and green, ranging from bright lively colours to dull cloudy shades, are described generally as Zircons, although

[p. 265]

very bright, clear, slightly coloured stones are described as pink or yellow Jargoons, according to the tint their colour may take. The best specimens come from India, Ceylon, Bohemia, France, and from Australia. Boetius de Boot recommends the Oriental Jacinth, "that comes from Calicut and Cambray," as a specific for promoting sleep; Marbodus says it makes its wearer attractive and agreeable, which Barrett in his "Natural Magic" confirms, adding that if set in gold and worn on the finger it is a desirable jewel as a solace for a restless brain. Camillus Leonardus, writing in 1750, says the Jacinth will strengthen weak hearts, dispel imaginary suspicions, allay jealousy, secure travellers from injuries and thieves, and protect them from pestilence, plague, and contagious epidemics.

It was well known to the Ancients, and is considered to be the Lyncurion of Theophrastus. The popularity of this stone in India is as great as ever, and at the present time it is worn as an antidote against poison, to attract riches, honour, and wisdom, and to drive away evil spirits.

The virtues attributed to it during the Middle Ages were that it attracted success, brought welcome to its wearer wherever he went, stimulated the appetite, and aided digestion, protected from fever, dropsy, jaundice, and noxious fancies, and

[p. 266]

restrained from excesses, its efficacy being greatly increased if set in gold. But neither the Garnet nor Zircon should be worn by those whose birthdays fall in the Taurus or Scorpio periods.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 267]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

PISCES--THE HOUSE OF THE FISHES

Period--Constellation--Precession of the Equinoxes--Icthyes, the Fishes--Mythology--Symbol--The Rulers of the House--Characteristics--Ailments of the Type--Professions--Friendship and Marriage--Harmonious and Inharmonious Types--The Gem of the House--The Amethyst--Virtues of the Stone--Talisman against Inebriety--Its Calming Influence--The Stone of St. Valentine--As a Lovers' Talisman--The Effect of Purple Rays--The Amethyst Beneficent to all Types--Real and Artificial Gems and how to select them.

The Sun enters the Zodiacal House of Pisces, the Fishes, on February 19th, remaining in occupation until March 10th.

The constellation of Pisces is situated in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere between Aquarius and Aries, occupying a large space near the Equator which the Sun crosses at the Vernal Equinox when entering the Zodiacal House of Aries.

At one time the constellations marked the actual Zodiacal Houses of the same name, but owing to the precession of the Equinoxes the constellations have moved forward, and Pisces occupies the space originally allotted to Aries; and this forward movement applies to all the Zodiacal

[p. 268]

[paragraph continues] Houses previously dealt with. The constellation can be seen best during the latter part of October and through November between 8 and 10 p.m., but owing to the absence of any important stars it is not easily traced.

It was known to the Greeks as Ichthyes, the Fishes, and as illustrating the connection of the Zodiac with religious teachings, it is interesting to note that the early Christians chose the Fish as the symbol of their faith because the Greek word IKhThYS, Fish, formed the initials of five words meaning Jesus Christ, Son of God, Saviour. In Ancient Grecian Mythology it is recorded that the two fishes were placed in the heavens by the goddess Minerva to commemorate the escape of Venus and her son Cupid who, whilst walking on the banks of the Euphrates, were attacked by the demon Typhon, described by Homer and Virgil as having a hundred dragon heads upon his shoulders, with devouring flames belching from the mouths and eyes, and with snakes issuing from his fingers. To escape this monster, Venus and Cupid transformed themselves into fishes and plunged into the river which afforded them safety.

This House is generally symbolised by two fishes connected with a band, as illustrated in No. 12 of the Frontispiece. Jupiter is usually considered to be the ruling planet of this House, or in the case

[p. 269]

of highly developed subjects the planet Neptune takes the rule.

The symbol of the two fishes attached yet turning in contrary directions seems an apt symbol of the characteristics of this type who are the most dual-natured of all signs, being liable to act on the impressions of their surroundings, showing at one moment extreme persistence and at another a want of determination. Like the two fishes represented back to back, their thoughts and actions are frequently at variance, and, although outwardly placid and docile, this sensitive, changeable disposition is soon ruffled by sudden impulse, resembling the shimmering water which is the native element of the fishes. Being receptive to the conditions around them Pisces subjects adapt themselves readily to any change of environment or circumstances fate may bring, but have a great dislike to anything that tends to ruffle their calm and placid temperaments. Hating suspense, uncertainty, or anxiety, and many-sided in their failings and weaknesses, they often appear to be a mass of contradictions.

The general characteristic of those born under the influence of Pisces is a strongly emotional, contemplative, facile nature with much artistic appreciation for beautiful scenery and surroundings. The pleasures of life have a great attraction

[p. 270]

for them, but from an inherent consideration of the possible demands of the future their expenditure in this direction is coupled with much prudence. Being susceptible to outside influences they are apt to rely too much on the advice and experiences of those with whom they come into contact, and are by turns too apprehensive and too venturesome. The mind is imaginative, philosophical, and acquisitive, and as a rule mechanical and accurate, although liable to become indolent and self-centred unless spurred on by those they are fond of, when they will persevere in their efforts towards a desired end with astonishing persistency. In spite of this spasmodic determination they are often lacking in self-confidence and fail to make the best of opportunities for their own interests and benefit. Very much appreciating any confidence in their ability to carry out work entrusted to them by others, which they perform with the utmost punctuality and precision; and having a liking for positions of responsibility and management, they frequently run two occupations at the same time. As children they are of a very observant and enquiring nature, continually asking questions, so that every advantage as regards education should be given them, a wrong start in life being more serious in its results to this type than to any other. They seldom change the profession

[p. 271]

or occupation on their own initiative, and although easily persuaded become obstinate when driven. Hating discord and strife, the temper is slow to anger but rebellious when roused, and although naturally of a peace-loving disposition they do not easily recover from its effects.

When adversely aspected they become selfish, secretive, discontented, and extravagant, and in business tricky and dishonest, and with a general want of balance and a tendency to intemperance.

This House ruling the feet, those born during the Pisces period are subject to ailments and injuries affecting these members, and are also liable to contract colds and serious illnesses from damp feet; they are also inclined to weakness of the back, abscesses and disorders of the blood, and irregularities of the general system, torpidity of the liver, and nervous breakdown, but they should never be encouraged to make much of any illness; being so susceptible, that suggestion alone will frequently cause its development.

In professions and occupations they are successful as actors, novelists, artists, teachers, travellers, musicians, examiners, and make good disciplinarians, also, being very resourceful in emergencies, they are extremely successful in the care and management of young people, interesting them and gaining their confidence and enthusiasm by

[p. 272]

original methods, yet exacting obedience without harshness or fault-finding. Illustrating the possibilities of this type when well developed, we may cite General Baden-Powell.

Being naturally fond of the water, they are successful as Captains, Sailors, and Fishermen; also in all businesses connected with liquids, such as hotel-keepers and caterers.

In friendship and marriage they are overcautious in some respects whilst imprudent in others, and being apprehensive of consequences they frequently weigh and consider before making any voluntary change in their lives and habits; so that although impressionable and affectionate, they are apt to drift aimlessly into circumstances, and, in many instances, marry late, although naturally inclined and fitted for home and family life. They will be found most in harmony with those born during the Cancer, Scorpio, Taurus, and Capricorn periods, and least in sympathy with those of the Gemini and Sagittarius periods.

The gem of this House is the Amethyst, a semiprecious stone in varying shades of purple which belongs to the quartz family and owes its colour to oxide of manganese and iron which forms part of its composition. The best variety comes from Siberia, Ceylon, Brazil, and Persia, and the

[p. 273]

[paragraph continues] Amethyst was originally regarded as a very precious stone, until the immense quantities received from Brazil reduced its value generally.

From the earliest dawn of history the occult properties of this stone as an antidote to inebriety have been recognised, by all writers, the name originating from a Greek word meaning "without intoxication," and according to Aristotle it was also the name of a beautiful nymph who invoked the aid of Diana to protect her from the attentions of Bacchus, which the goddess did by converting her into a precious gem, upon which Bacchus, in remembrance of his love, gave the stone its colour and the quality of preserving its wearers from the noxious influence of wine.

The Egyptians used these stones freely for Talismans, their soldiers wearing them as Amulets for success in their exploits and calmness in danger. Pliny says the Magi believed that if the symbols of the Sun and Moon were engraved upon the Amethyst it made a powerful charm against witchcraft, and procured for its wearers success to their petitions, good luck, and the favour of those in authority. Camillus Leonardus, confirming its efficacy in restraining intoxication, says:

"It also represses evil thoughts and all excesses, prevents contagion, and gives good understanding

[p. 274]

of hidden things, making a man vigilant and expert in business."

The Amethyst has always been associated with ecclesiastical decorations, its frequent use in episcopal rings giving rise to its description as "the Bishop's Stone," and rosaries of Amethyst beads were much in request in olden times to attract soothing influences in times of stress and to confer a pious calm on their wearers.

In religious art it was regarded as emblematic of resignation under earthly sufferings, patience in sorrow, and trust unto death, which Marbodus (translated by the Rev. C. W. King) expresses in verse:

"On high the Amethyst is set
  In colour like the violet,
  With flames as if of gold it glows
  And far its purple radiance throws;
  The humble heart it signifies
  Of him who in the Saviour dies."

During the Middle Ages the qualities attributed to it were many: it indicated the presence of poison by becoming dim, also personal danger and ill-health by changing colour; it was, moreover, considered to give vigilance to business men, and to sportsmen and soldiers calmness in danger.

The Amethyst is the stone of St. Valentine, who is said to have always worn it; and in the days

[p. 275]

of romance and chivalry, if presented by a lady to her knight, or a bride to her husband in the shape of a heart set in silver, it was said to confer the greatest possible earthly happiness on the pair who would be blessed with good fortune for the remainder of their lives.

In connection with the soothing influence of this gem, it is interesting to note that according to modern research purple light rays have been found to exercise a calming effect upon nervous and hysterical patients and a consequent improvement in the vitality. Cases of neuralgia and sleeplessness have been relieved by an Amethyst rubbed gently over the temples. It is one of the very few gems that may universally be worn without adverse results.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 276]

  

REAL AND ARTIFICIAL GEMS AND HOW TO TEST AND SELECT THEM

The following notes are written in the hope that they may put readers upon their guard against some common deceptions and prevent disappointment which with a little knowledge can be avoided.

The qualities which make gems valuable are beauty of colour, brilliancy or fire, and hardness, in which they excel all other substances known.

A large variety of coloured stones come from Ceylon, and many tourists and travellers buy stones there in the hope of securing bargains, a hope that in the majority of cases does not materialise. Dealers in gems are amongst the shrewdest of mankind, and from continually handling and examining stones become wonderfully keen in judging them from their appearance and feel, and are very seldom mistaken in distinguishing the real from the imitation, and no novice will get the better of them in a deal, so that intending purchasers who have no practical experience of gems are advised to buy from established firms with a

[p. 277]

reputation to lose, or on the advice of an expert, rather than rely upon their own judgment.

Before the full beauty of a stone can be appreciated it has to be cut and polished, either with facets, or in the form known as cabochon. Practically all transparent stones are cut with facets, the best and most popular form being the "brilliant" cut (as shown in Illustration No. 1 of the Frontispiece) which has been. found so effective with diamonds that the term "brilliant" has become the recognised name for a diamond cut in this manner.

With oblong stones "trap" cutting is followed, Emeralds being the principal stones cut in this fashion (as shown in No. 4 of Frontispiece). "Rose" cutting is the form generally adopted with very small diamonds nowadays, although it is a much older form than the brilliant, and large antique stones are to be found cut in this fashion, culminating in a point formed by six triangular facets in place of the table of the brilliant. Semi-transparent and opaque stones, such as Moonstones, Opals, Agates, Turquoises, and Cornelians are usually cut en cabochon (as shown in the stones illustrated in Nos. 3, 6, and 7 of the Frontispiece), and Amethysts, Rubies, Emeralds, and Sapphires are also frequently cut in this fashion.

[p. 278]

For years past scientists have been experimenting in the manufacture of precious stones, and with so much success that reconstructed stones have been put on the market and are now fairly universally used. These stones are made up from fragments of small genuine stones which are fused together by a continuous and very powerful flame directed on the mass whilst it is kept in motion, resulting in a solid lump that can be cut and polished in the same way as the natural mineral. This has been very successfully done with Rubies, some having been produced which passed every test save that of the microscope, which revealed numerous minute bubbles of a rounded shape invisible to the naked eye, and in greater quantities than would be found in the natural stones wherein the bubbles are more rectangular in shape. These Rubies, and also reconstructed Sapphires and Emeralds, are on sale everywhere at the present time, so that intending buyers of precious stones should ask their jewellers to guarantee that they are buying natural and not reconstructed stones.

All transparent gems may be roughly divided into two classes, singly and doubly refracting, a ray of light passing through being refracted or thrown back according to the nature of the stone. If, therefore, a lighted candle is placed in a darkened

[p. 279]

corner of a room and is looked at through a stone focussed between the eye and the candle, if the stone is a doubly refracting one two images of the flame will appear, and if it is singly refracting, one only will be seen. Stones that are doubly refractive are Ruby, Beryl, Topaz, Sapphire, Emerald, Tourmaline, Peridot, Chrysolite, Aquamarine, Amethyst, Jargoon, Zircon, and Crystal. Singly refracting stones are Diamonds, Spinels, and Garnets; glass also is singly refracting.

One of the simplest and most effective methods of testing the genuineness of a gem is to try if it is affected by filing with a small jeweller's file; care must be taken, however, in its use, as the facets of even some of the hardest stones are easily chipped. If the file scratches the stone it may be taken to be glass, or composition.

Combination stones, known as "Doublets," are frequently sold as genuine stones; in these the top part is made of the real stone and the lower part of crystal, glass, or composition, so that for their detection the bottom part as well as the top must be tried with the file. "Triplets" are another form of deception. In this case the tops and bottoms of the stones are genuine and the centre part is imitation: To detect this the gem should be held in a small pair of forceps, or corn tongs, in

[p. 280]

a cup of clear water, when the different parts of the stone will be plainly seen.

White Sapphires, Jargoons, and Aquamarines are sometimes mistaken for diamonds; but the White Sapphire will frequently have a suggestion of cloudiness, and the Jargoon or Zircon, though very hard, is brittle and chips easily, soon showing signs of wear. White Aquamarines usually have a slight bluish or greenish tint. White Topazes and Rock Crystal are not so brilliant and full of life as the other white stones, and all these are doubly refracting, whilst the Diamond is single.

Imitation Sapphires are as a rule harsher in colour than the real stone, which is soft and rich in the quality of its colour.

Pearls are imitated with great skill, and are difficult to detect. They are usually lighter than the real Pearls, and if drilled the holes are seldom as small, and show marks of chipping and breaking round the edges. Pearls lose their lustre and deteriorate with age and the effect of gas and acids, and should be carefully wiped with a clean cloth after being worn, and in order to retain their brilliancy should be kept in dry magnesia.

Amber is imitated with glass and various compositions, glass being colder and harder to the touch and heavier than real Amber; whilst celluloid, which is frequently used, if rubbed

[p. 281]

briskly on a piece of cloth, will give off a noticeable odour of camphor which is largely used in its composition.

Opals and Turquoises, being porous, are affected by potash which is commonly used in the manufacture of soap, and also by oily or greasy substances; they should also be kept from contact with scent, as the spirit used in its. manufacture will very soon spoil the colour of Turquoises.

In conclusion, to ascertain if a transparent stone has any flaws it should be breathed upon until its lustre is temporarily dimmed, when any flaws or imperfections that exist can readily be seen.

      
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 282] [p. 283]

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aston, Wm. Geo., Shinto. The Ways of the Gods.

Aynsley, H. Murray, Symbolism of the East and West.

Barerra, Madame de, Gems and Jewels.

Barrett, Francis, The Magus.

Black, G. F., Scottish Charms and Amulets.

Boyle, Honble. Robert, An Essay about the Origins and Virtues of Gems.

Brand, John, Popular Antiquities.

Brinkley, Frank, Japan and China.

Budge, E. A. Wallis, M.A., LITT.D., The Papyrus of Ani, the Book of the Dead.

Carus, Paul, Chinese Philosophy.

Churchward, Albert, Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man.

Coleman, Charles, The Mythology of the Hindoos.

Deane, John Bathurst, The Worship of the Serpent.

Dennys, Nicholas Belfield, Folklore of China.

Elworthy, Fredk. Thomas, The Evil Eye. Horns of Honour.

Emanuel, H., Diamonds and Precious Stones.

Fraser, The Golden Bough.

Hazlitt, William Carew, Popular Antiquities of Great Britain.

Heath, Sidney, Romance of Symbolism.

Jones, Wm., Precious Stones.

King, The Rev. Chas. William, The Gnostics and their Remains. Antique Gems and Rings. The Natural History of Precious Stones and Gems.

[p. 284]

Lang, Andrew, Custom and Myth.

Leo, Alan, Practical Astrology. Astrology for All.

Leonardus, Camillus, The Mirror of Stones.

Massey, Gerald, Ancient Egypt, the Light of the World.

Mawe, John, A Treatise on Diamonds and other Precious Stones.

Moor, Edward, The Hindoo Pantheon.

Pearce, Alfred J., The Textbook of Astrology.

Pinkerton, John, Voyages and Travels.

Smith, E. M., The Zodia.

Smith, Richard Gordon, Ancient Tales and Folklore of Japan.

Smith, Sir William, A Dictionary of Christian Antiquities.

Sykes, P. M., A Thousand Miles in Persia.

Waddell, Laurence Austine, The Buddhism of Tibet.

Waring, John B., Ceramic Art in Remote Ages.

Williams, Samuel Wells, A History of China. The Middle Kingdom.

     
The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems, by William Thomas and Kate Pavitt, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 285]

  

INDEX

A

Abracadabra, <page 111>

Abraxas, <page 77>, <page 120>

Adamas, <page 141>

Aeneas, <page 170>

Aesculapius, <page 85>, <page 92>

Agates, <page 98>, <page 167>, <page 168>, <page 277>

-- Eye, <page 169>

-- Moss, or Tree, <page 168>

-- Onyx, <page 169>

-- Rainbow or Iris, <page 169>

-- Ribbon, <page 148>

-- White, <page 168>

Agla, <page 117>

Agnus Dei, <page 107>

Alabanda, <page 263>

Albertus Magnus, <page 172>, <page 244>

Alexander the Great, <page 172>

Ali, <page 99>

Almandine, <page 263>

Amalthaea's Horn of Plenty, <page 83>

Amber, <page 194>, <page 197>

-- Black, <page 256>, <page 280>

Amen-Ra, <page 57>

Amethyst, <page 272>-<page 275>, <page 277>, <page 279>

Amuletum, <page 196>

Ananizapta, <page 108>

Ananta, <page 20>

Anchor, <page 52>

Andromeda, <page 85>

Angles, <page 63>

Ankh, <page 60>-<page 61>, <page 74>

Anne of Geierstein, <page 219>

Anubis, <page 84>

Aper, <page 64>

Aphrodite, <page 42>, <page 88>, <page 150>

Apis. Bull, <page 83>

Apollo, <page 264>

Argonauts, <page 162>

Aquamarine, <page 230>-<page 232>, <page 279>, <page 280>

Aquarius, <page 257>-<page 262>

Aries, <page 73>, <page 133>-<page 137>

Aristotle, <page 273>

Arrow-head, <page 14>

Artemisia (or Sweet Flag), <page 45> Asp, <page 94>, <page 170>

Ass's Skull, <page 88>

Astrological Talisman, <page 110>

Axe, <page 13>, <page 14>, <page 210>

B

Bacchus, <page 273>

Baden-Powell, <page 272>

Badger's Tooth, <page 130>

Barrett, Francis, <page 115>, <page 119>

Basilides, <page 77>

Bat Talisman, <page 37>

Beads of Kerbela, <page 98>

-- Blue, <page 98>

Beetle, <page 67>, <page 68>, <page 175>

Bellerophon, <page 84>, <page 85>

Bells, <page 42>, <page 121>

Benton, <page 49>

Benzaiben, <page 49>

Beryl, <page 230>-<page 232>, <page 279>

Bes, <page 63>

Betrothal rings, <page 125>

Billikin, <page 63>

Bishamon, <page 49>

Bishop's Ring, <page 154>, <page 155>

-- Stone, <page 274> Black Cat, <page 43>

Blavatsky, Madame, <page 209>

Bloodstone, <page 137>-<page 140>

Boaz, <page 162>

Boetius de Boot, <page 159>, <page 256>

Book of the Dead, <page 58>, <page 59>

Bothwell, <page 163>

Brahma, <page 21>, <page 29>, <page 34>

Brahmins, <page 30>

Buckle of the Girdle of Isis, <page 66> <page 207>

Buddha's birth-marks, <page 31>

[p. 286]

Buddha's Emblems, <page 31>

-- Footprints, <page 34>

-- Wheel, <page 17>, <page 31> Buddhism, <page 29>, <page 30>, <page 47>

Buddhist Law, <page 33> Bulla, <page 86>, <page 87>

Bull's-head, <page 84> Burmah, <page 35>

Byzantine Ring, <page 110>

C

Cabochon stones, <page 277>

Caduceus, <page 91>, <page 92>, <page 94>

Callistratus, <page 196>

Camillus Leonardus, <page 159>, <page 170>, <page 182>, <page 193>, <page 208>, <page 222>, <page 231>, <page 232>, <page 244>, <page 253>, <page 265>

Cancer, <page 174>-<page 178>

Capricorn, <page 245>-<page 251>

Carbuncle, <page 232>, <page 233>

Card-players' Talismans, <page 130>

Carnelian, <page 103>

Carp, <page 50>

Cartouche, <page 62>

Castor, <page 161>, <page 162>

Catherine of Aragon, <page 252>

Cat's-eye, <page 185>

Ceres, <page 19>, <page 199>, <page 200>

Chalcedony, <page 138>, <page 206>

Charlemagne, <page 156>-<page 157>

Charmed rings, <page 93>

Charms for eloquence, <page 194>

-- -- General good luck, <page 130>

-- -- Increase of money, <page 128>

-- -- Luck in gambling, <page 185>

-- -- Luck in games of chance, <page 185>

Charms against Ague, <page 112>, <page 140>, <page 196>

-- -- All diseases, <page 121>

-- -- Apoplexy, <page 223>

-- -- Asthma, <page 185>

-- -- Bites of venomous creatures, <page 193>

-- -- Childish complaints, <page 221>

-- -- Cholera, <page 221>

-- -- Convulsions, <page 196>

-- --Croup, <page 185>

-- -- Diseases amongst horned cattle, <page 127>

-- -- Diseases of the kidneys, <page 127>, <page 193>, <page 210>

Charms against Diseases of the spleen, <page 222>

-- -- Disorders of stomach and liver, <page 231>

-- -- Dropsy, <page 140>

-- -- Epidemics, <page 127>

-- -- Epilepsy, <page 25>, <page 108>, <page 122>, <page 209>

-- -- Erysipelas, <page 25>, <page 196>

-- -- Fever and skin diseases, <page 156>

-- -- Goitre, <page 196>

-- -- Gout, <page 234>

-- -- Hydrophobia, <page 127>

-- -- Hysteria and palpitation, <page 128>

-- -- Idleness, <page 231>

-- -- Infection, <page 193>, <page 196>, <page 232>

-- -- Insanity, <page 141>, <page 184>, <page 196>

-- -- Intestinal trouble, <page 222>

-- -- Intoxication, <page 109>

-- -- Neuralgia, <page 208>

-- -- Robbers, <page 108>

-- -- Sea-sickness, <page 231>

-- -- Small-pox, <page 156>

-- -- Sore eyes, <page 221>

-- -- Sterility, <page 231>

-- -- Stomachic complaints, <page 184>

-- -- Stone in the bladder, <page 140>

-- -- Syncope, <page 184>

-- -- Toothache, <page 112>

-- -- Ulcers, <page 221>

-- -- Warts, <page 128>

Chimerae, <page 89>-<page 90>

Chinese Talismans, <page 36>-<page 47>

Chryselutum, <page 196>

Chrysoberyl, <page 185>

Chrysolite, <page 193>-<page 194>, <page 241>, <page 243>, <page 279>

Cinnamon stone, <page 263>

Clairvoyance, <page 231>

Clement of Alexandria, <page 102>

Club, <page 30>

Collar Amulet, <page 71>

Colourings of stones, <page 5>

Conch Shell, <page 26>, <page 31>-<page 32>

Confucianism, <page 38>

Constantine the Great, <page 104>

Coral, <page 220>-<page 222>

Cornelian, <page 208>, <page 277>

Cornucopia, <page 83>, <page 246>

Cramp rings, <page 121>

Crane, <page 51>

Crescent symbol, <page 80>

Cross, <page 104>, <page 105>, <page 106>

[p. 287]

Cross, Greek, <page 105>

-- Irish, <page 106>

-- St. Benedict, <page 109>

-- Tau, <page 23>, <page 25>, <page 104>

-- Wheel, <page 105>

Crux Ansata, <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 74>

Crystal balls, <page 52>

-- Gazing, <page 127>, <page 185>, <page 186>, <page 279> <page 280>

Cupid, <page 268>

Cybele, <page 87>, <page 256>

D

D'Acosta, <page 179>

Daikoku, <page 49>

-- Hammer of, <page 52>

Darwin, <page 261>

Dee, Dr., <page 117>

De la Viga, <page 180>

Deluge, <page 162>

Diamond, <page 140>-<page 148>, <page 279>

-- Cutting, <page 277>

-- Hope, <page 146>-<page 148>

-- Koh-i-Noor, <page 144>-<page 145>

-- Pitt, <page 143>-<page 144>

-- Regent, <page 143>-<page 144>

-- Rose, <page 277>

-- Slave's, <page 242>

Diana, <page 273>

Dickens, <page 261>

Discus, or wheel, <page 30>

Diver's Talisman, <page 184>

Dorje, <page 35>

Doublets, <page 279>

Dragon, <page 39>-<page 40>

Dropsy Talisman, <page 183>

Dumpling, <page 50>

E

Eagle, <page 49>-<page 50>, <page 95>

Early Christian and Mediaeval Talismans, <page 102>-<page 109>

Ebisu, <page 49>

Echo, <page 48>

Edison, <page 261>

Egyptian Talismans, <page 55>-<page 75>

--  Beliefs, <page 55>-<page 60>

Emeralds, <page 95>, <page 101>, <page 178>-<page 182>, <page 277>, <page 279>

Emperor Hadrian's ring, <page 243>

Esmeralda, <page 180>

Etruscan, Greek, and Roman Talismans, <page 99>-<page 96>

Evil Eye, <page 33>, <page 94>, <page 97>. <page 99>, <page 110>, <page 208>, <page 221>

Eye Amulet, <page 68>

-- of a Cock, <page 120>

-- of Osiris, <page 69>

Eyes, two, <page 70>

F

Fan of power, <page 49>-<page 52>

Father Time, <page 246>

Fatima's Hand, <page 99>

Fire, <page 48>, <page 129>-<page 130>

Fish, <page 32>, <page 74>, <page 96>, <page 102>

Five Bats, <page 38>

--  as Talisman, <page 164>

--  Pointed Star, <page 112>-<page 114>

-- Wounds, <page 108>

Flood, <page 32>

Four-leaved clover, <page 130>

Fox, <page 48>

Frog, <page 33>, <page 87>, <page 88>, <page 94>

-- Talisman, <page 73>

Fu-ku-roku-jiu, <page 48>

G

Gabelschoverus, <page 243>, <page 252>

Gadin the Powerful, <page 100>

Gambler's Talisman, <page 130>

Ganesa, <page 30>

Gargoyles, <page 121>

Garnet, Bohemian, <page 263>

Garnets, <page 262>, <page 263>, <page 264>

Gavel, <page 23>

Gemmel rings, <page 124>

Gemini, <page 161>-<page 168>

Gems, real and artificial, <page 276>-<page 281>

General Talismans, <page 126>

Gladstone, <page 250>

Glass, <page 279>

Gnostic, magic symbols, <page 78>

Gnosticism, <page 76>-<page 79>

Goad, <page 30>

Gold Nuggets, <page 130>

Golden Fish, <page 31>

Gotama Buddha, <page 29>

Greek Cross, <page 105>

Grylli, <page 89>-<page 90>

H

Hadrian's ring, <page 243>

[p. 288]

Hallowed rings, <page 122>

Hammer of Daikoku, <page 52>

-- -- Thor, <page 17>

Hand, <page 94>, <page 95>, <page 99>, <page 100>

Hand Cross, <page 105>

Hanuman, <page 30>-<page 31>

Harpokrates, <page 84>

Hassan and Hussein, <page 98>, <page 99>

Hathor, <page 61>, <page 74>

Hawk, <page 71>

Headache Talisman, <page 159>

Heart Talisman, <page 65>

Heart-Soul, <page 58>

Heliotrope, <page 137>

Hercules, <page 35>, <page 176>, <page 178>

Herodotus, <page 35>, <page 55>

Hindu Triad, <page 26>

Horn of Plenty, <page 246>

Horn or Tusk, <page 81>-<page 82>

Horse-hoof, <page 40>

Horseman's Talisman, <page 159>

Horseshoe, <page 80>-<page 81>

Horus, <page 21>, <page 63>, <page 66>, <page 70>, <page 71>, <page 72>, <page 74>, <page 75>, <page 79>

Hotei, <page 49>

Ho-Wo bird, <page 39>

Hyacinth, <page 264>

Hyacinthus, <page 264>

I

Iaw, <page 78>

Ichthyes, <page 268>

Impression of child's hand, <page 51>

Incas, <page 180>

Indian Talismans, <page 29>-<page 35>

Indra, <page 35>

Indra's Thunderbolt, <page 35>

Irving, Sir Henry, <page 261>-<page 262>

Ise, temple of, <page 53>-<page 54>

Isis, <page 21>, <page 55>, <page 57>, <page 66>, <page 74>, <page 75>, <page 79>, <page 80>, <page 94>, <page 184>

J

Jachin, <page 162>

Jacinth, <page 264>-<page 265>

Jade, <page 45>, <page 46>, <page 209>-<page 211>

Jana (or Diana), <page 88>, <page 89>

Janus (or Apollo), <page 88>, <page 89>

Jargoon, <page 264>, <page 265>, <page 279>, <page 280>

Jasper, <page 103>, <page 137>, <page 138>

Jasper ring, <page 138>

Jet, <page 255>

Jochebed (Mother of Moses), <page 98>

Juno, <page 129>, <page 176>

Jurojin, <page 51>, <page 88>, <page 89>

K

Ka, <page 58>

Kabala, <page 76>, <page 77>, <page 114>

Kami, <page 48>

Key Talisman, <page 88>

Keys, <page 52>

Khepera, <page 67>

King, Rev. C. W., <page 111>, <page 125>, <page 140>, <page 196>, <page 207>, <page 244>, <page 274>

Knots, <page 36>

Koran, <page 97>

Krishna, <page 32>

Kwan Chung, <page 46>

L

Ladder, <page 60>, <page 70>, <page 71>, <page 72>

Lakshmi, <page 32>

Lamaist Sceptre, <page 35>

Lapis lazuli, <page 155>, <page 222>, <page 223>

Leap-year pennies, <page 130>

Lee Penny, <page 126>

Leo, <page 187>-<page 192>

Leonardus (Camillus), <page 159>, <page 170>, <page 182>, <page 193>, <page 208>, <page 222>, <page 231>, <page 232>, <page 244>, <page 253>, <page 265>

Libra, <page 212>-<page 217>

Lizard, <page 94>-<page 95>

Lodestone, <page 233>-<page 234>

Logos, <page 95>

Longevity Talisman, <page 139>, <page 209>

-- Robe, <page 46>-<page 47>

Lotus, <page 26>, <page 30>, <page 31>, <page 32>, <page 74>

Love charms, <page 156>

Lucky diagram, <page 31>-<page 32>

Ludi Appollinares, <page 188>

Lychnis, <page 194>, <page 252>

Lyncurion, <page 265>

M

Maia, <page 163>

Malachite, <page 253>

Malaku, <page 253>

Mallet, <page 23>

Manentius, <page 104>

Mano Pantea, <page 94>

Marbodus, <page 170>, <page 194>, <page 208>, <page 244>, <page 254>, <page 255>, <page 274>

[p. 289]

Marshallah, <page 98>

Martian Talisman, <page 193>

Mary Queen of Scots, <page 163>

-- -- and marriage, <page 163>

Maternity Talisman, <page 181>

Menat, <page 61>

Mercury, <page 92>, <page 93>, <page 202>

Merzoum, <page 100>

Minerva, <page 95>, <page 268>

Miner's Talisman, <page 130>

Mitsu-Domoe, <page 51>

Mitsumine, sacred dog of, <page 51>

Mocha Stone, <page 169>

Mohammed, <page 35>, <page 98>, <page 100>

Molochites, <page 254>

Money Sword, <page 41>

Moon, Blue, <page 183>

-- Talismans, <page 127>-<page 128>

Moonstone, <page 182>, <page 183>, <page 277>

Moonstone, Blue, <page 183>

Moses, <page 23>-<page 24>

Moss Agate, <page 168>

Musseltaub, <page 123>

Mussulman Talisman, <page 100>

N

Name Amulet, <page 62>

Names of power, <page 117>

Nan-Ratan, <page 242>

Napoleon, <page 143>, <page 207>

Narita, <page 51>

Nasiree, the preserver, <page 100>

Nechepsos, <page 139>

Nefer, <page 62>

Nero, <page 181>, <page 196>

Nicias, <page 195>

Noah's lamp, <page 232>

Notre-dame, <page 201>

O

Occuli Cancrorum, <page 179>

Olivine, <page 194>

Onyx, Black, <page 254>-<page 255>

-- Lynx-eye, <page 255>

Opals, <page 218>-<page 220>, <page 277>-<page 281>

Ophthalmius, <page 2>,<page 8>

Origin of Amulets, <page 10>

-- -- Gems, <page 4>-<page 6>

-- -- Talismans, <page 10>

Orient, <page 97>

Orion, <page 225>

Orpheus, <page 168>, <page 220>

Osiris, <page 21>, <page 56>, <page 57>, <page 64>, <page 69>

-- -- Apis, <page 83>

Ota-fu-ku, <page 53>

Ovid, <page 163>

P

Pa kwa, <page 37>

Palm branch, <page 103>

Pan, <page 246>

Paris, <page 201>

Peach, <page 38>

Peacock, the, <page 128>

-- Feathers, <page 129>

Pear Charm, <page 44>-<page 45>

Pearce, Dr. Alfred J., <page 254>

Pearl, <page 183>-<page 185>, <page 280>

Pearl of Cleopatra, <page 184>

Pegasus, <page 85>

Pentalpha, Pentagram, or Pentacle, <page 112>-<page 114>

Peridot, <page 193>, <page 194>, <page 279>

Perseus, <page 85>

Phoenix, <page 38>-<page 39>

Phylactery, <page 118>

Pigs, <page 43>

Pillow, <page 74>

Pine Cone, <page 87>, <page 94>

Pine Tree, <page 38>

Pisces, <page 267>-<page 272>

Pizarro, <page 179>-<page 210>

Planetary Angels, <page 117>

Pleurisy Talisman, <page 208>

Pliny, <page 83>, <page 173>, <page 181>, <page 183>, <page 186>, <page 194>, <page 195>, <page 197>, <page 206>, <page 219>, <page 233>, <page 244>, <page 252>, <page 254>, <page 263>, <page 273>

Ploughman's Talisman, <page 168>

Plummet, <page 63>

Poesie Rings, <page 123>-<page 124>

Pole Star, <page 68>

Prayer Wheel, <page 27>

Priapus, <page 88>

Primitive Talismans, <page 13>

Psychometry of Gems, <page 7>-<page 8>

Ptah, <page 69>-<page 70>

Q

Queen Donna Isabel II of Spain, <page 142>

-- Elizabeth's Agate Talisman, <page 171>

-- -- Diamond, <page 142>

[p. 290]

R

Ra, <page 57>, <page 74>

Rama, <page 31>

Ravana, <page 31>

Reconstructed stones, <page 278>

Red in Talismans, <page 41>

Refraction, <page 278>-<page 279>

Regulus, <page 187>

Rerek, or Apep, <page 72>

Rogatus Ring, <page 103>

Rose-cutting, <page 277>

Ruby, <page 101>, <page 251>-<page 253>, <page 277>, <page 279>

--  Balas, <page 253>

--  Cape, <page 203>

--  Spinel, <page 253>

--  Star, <page 252>

Ruskin, <page 261>

S

Sa, <page 66>

Sacred Crutch, <page 100>

-- Monogram, <page 104>

Sagittarius, <page 235>-<page 241>

Sailor's Talisman, <page 181>

Saint Anthony's Cross, <page 25>

-- -- Fire, <page 25>

Saint Valentine, <page 274>

Salus, <page 85>

--  Ring, <page 85>

Sapphire, <page 154>, <page 157>, <page 277>, <page 279>

--  Star, <page 156>

--  White, <page 279>

Sardius, <page 192>

Sardonyx, <page 103>, <page 104>, <page 192>

Scales, <page 94>

Scarab, <page 67>, <page 68>, <page 79>, <page 175>

Scorpio, <page 224>-<page 230>

Scorpion, <page 170>

--  Charming, <page 101>

Scotch Talisman, <page 126>, <page 127>

Scottish Cross, <page 105>

Selenite, <page 182>

Serapis, <page 83>, <page 94>

Serpent, <page 18>-<page 20>, <page 34>, <page 92>, <page 94>, <page 179>

Set, <page 56>-<page 57>

Seven gifts of the Spirit, <page 110>

--  Greek vowels, <page 78>

Shah of Persia's Talismans, <page 100>

Shakespeare, <page 232>

Shell, <page 30>

Shen, <page 104>

Shinenaka, <page 53>

Shintoism, <page 47>-<page 48>

Ship, <page 103>, <page 104>

Show-Fu, <page 45>

Signs of the Zodiac in rhyme, <page 126>

Silver lock, <page 41>-<page 42>

Simsum Ring, <page 110>

Single Plume, <page 62>

Siva, <page 21>, <page 29>, <page 30>, <page 34>, <page 92>, <page 94>

Slave's Diamond, <page 242>

Sma, <page 71>

Snails, <page 96>

Snake's head, <page 72>

Solomon's Seal, <page 20>-<page 22>

Speculator's Talisman, <page 130>

Spider (money talisman), <page 95>

Star Rubies, <page 252>

-- Sapphire, <page 156>

Steps, <page 72>

Stone of strength, <page 244>

Stork, <page 38>, <page 51>

Streeter, <page 169>

Sun's disc, <page 73>

Sun-worship, <page 188>

Swastika, <page 15>-<page 18>, <page 130>

T

Table of Jupiter, <page 115>

Talismans against Accidents, <page 110>, <page 142>

-- Blight, <page 221>

-- -- Devil, <page 121>

-- -- Dropsy, <page 183>

-- -- Fire, <page 129>, <page 130>

-- -- Headache, <page 159>

-- -- Hemorrhage, <page 138>

-- -- Perils by Flood, <page 120>

-- -- Pleurisy, <page 208>

-- -- The Spirits of Darkness, <page 113>

-- -- Witchcraft, <page 120>

-- -- Wounds in Battle, <page 233>

Talisman Combination, <page 90>

--  Egyptian, <page 55>-<page 75>

--  Etruscan, Greek, and Roman, <page 79>-<page 96>

--  Fish, <page 32>, <page 74>, <page 96>, <page 102>

--  Frog, <page 73>

--  Indian, <page 29>-<page 35>

--  Key, <page 88>

--  Martian, <page 193>

--  Moon, <page 127>-<page 128>

[p. 291]

Talisman, Ploughman's, <page 168>

-- Primitive, <page 13>

-- Shah's, <page 100>

-- Siva's, <page 40>, <page 41>

-- Spider, <page 95>

-- Venus, <page 119>

-- for Athletes, <page 159>

-- -- Children, <page 121>

-- -- Clairvoyance, <page 231>

-- -- Concentration, <page 156>

-- -- Consumptives, <page 183>

-- -- Divers, <page 184>

-- -- Eloquence, <page 125>

-- -- Fidelity in Friendship, <page 223>

-- -- -- -- Marriage, <page 233>

-- -- Friendship, <page 219>

-- -- Gamblers, <page 130>

-- -- Good Fortune and Love, <page 119>

-- -- Health and Safety, <page 113>

-- -- Horsemen, <page 159>

-- -- Hospitality, <page 120>

-- -- Longevity, <page 139>, <page 209>

-- -- Mariners, <page 31>, <page 234>

-- -- Married Love, <page 231>

-- -- Maternity, <page 181>

-- -- Memory, <page 218>

-- -- Miners, <page 130>

-- -- Mussulmen, <page 100>

-- -- New Enterprises, <page 110>

-- -- Oratory, <page 208>

-- -- Popularity, <page 232>

-- -- Purity, <page 230>

-- -- Racing, <page 211>

-- -- Reconciliation, <page 142>

-- -- Riches, Favours, and Peace, <page 115>

-- -- Sailors, <page 181>

-- -- Speculation, <page 130>

-- -- The Favours of the Great, <page 139>

-- -- Travellers, <page 183>

-- -- Victory, <page 141>

-- -- Vigilance, <page 121>

-- -- Vitality, <page 234>

-- -- Windfalls, <page 130>

-- -- Wisdom, <page 34>

Talisman to Restrain Elementals, <page 113>

Talismanic Ring, <page 123>

Tau Cross, <page 23>-<page 25>, <page 104>

Taurus, <page 149>-<page 153>

Tat, <page 64>, <page 66>

Teg-a-shiwa, <page 52>

Tern, <page 73>

Temple, <page 162>

Temple pillars, <page 162>

Ten principal names of God, <page 114>-<page 116>

Theophrastus, <page 265>

Thibetan Talismans, <page 29>-<page 36>

Tho, <page 37>

Thor, Hammer of, <page 17>

Thoth, <page 59>, <page 63>, <page 75>, <page 104>

Three Gems, <page 33>

-- Ravens, <page 93>

Tie, <page 66>

Tiger, <page 42>, <page 48>

Tiger's claws and whiskers, <page 43>

-- Tooth, <page 42>, <page 82>

Tiki, <page 210>

Titanic, <page 148>

Topaz, <page 198>, <page 241>-<page 244>

Torii, <page 39>

Tortoise, <page 42>, <page 51>, <page 95>

Totaphoth, <page 119>-<page 120>

Totem, <page 12>

Tourmaline, <page 194>, <page 195>, <page 279>

Trigram, <page 37>-<page 38>

Triplets, <page 279>

Trumpet of Victory, <page 31>

Turquoise, <page 157>-<page 160>, <page 281>

Two Bats, <page 38>

-- Fingers, <page 70>

-- Plumes, <page 62>

Typhon, <page 56>-<page 57>, <page 246>, <page 268>

U

Umbrella, <page 31>

Uraeus, <page 19>

Urim and Thummim, <page 9>

Utchats, <page 70>

V

Vase, <page 31>

Venus, <page 42>, <page 268>

Virgin Mary's stone, <page 223>

Virgo, <page 199>-<page 205>

Vishnu, <page 21>, <page 29>, <page 31>, <page 32>, <page 34>

Vulture, <page 74>

W

Wealth Talisman, <page 185>

Wedding Ring, <page 125>

[p. 292]

Wee-fuh, <page 38>

Wheel Cross, <page 105>-<page 106>

-- of the Law, <page 31>

Whitby Jet, <page 255>

Wolf, <page 48>

Wolf's tooth, <page 83>

Y

Yang-Yin, <page 37>

Z

Zircon, <page 264>-<page 266>, <page 280>

Zodiacal King, <page 125>

 

 

 

 

 

Printed in Great Britain at
 The Mayflower Press, Plymouth. William Brendon & Son, Ltd.

 

    


===== BOOK: bow.txt =====


    
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE BOOK OF WERE-WOLVES

 

by SABINE BARING-GOULD

 

Smith, Elder & Co., London

 

[1865]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January, 2002, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY <page 1>

CHAPTER II

LYCANTHROPY AMONG THE ANCIENTS

Definition of Lycanthropy--Marcellus Sidetes--Virgil--Herodotus--Ovid--Pliny--Agriopas--Story from Petronius--Arcadian Legends--Explanation offered <page 8>

CHAPTER III

THE WERE-WOLF IN THE NORTH

Norse Traditions--Manner in which the Change was effected--Voelundar Kvoeda--Instances from the Volsung Saga--Hrolf's Saga--Kraka--Faroese Poem--Helga Kvida--Vatnsdaela Saga--Eyrbyggja Saga <page 15>

CHAPTER IV

THE ORIGIN OF THE SCANDINAVIAN WERE-WOLF

Advantage of the Study of Norse Literature--Bear and Wolf-skin Dresses--The Berserkir--Their Rage--The Story of Thorir--Passages from the Aigla--The Evening Wolf--Skallagrim and his Son-Derivation of the Word "Hamr:" of "Vargr"--Laws affecting Outlaws--"To become a Boar"--Recapitulation <page 34>

CHAPTER V

THE WERE-WOLF IN THE MIDDLE AGES

Stories from Olaus Magnus of Livonian Were-wolves--Story from Bishop Majolus--Story of Albertus Pericofcius--Similar occurrence at Prague--Saint Patrick--Strange incident related by John of Nuremberg--Bisclaveret--Courland Were-wolves--Pierre Vidal--Pavian Lycanthropist--Bodin's Stories--Forestus' Account of a Lycanthropist--Neapolitan Were-wolf <page 53>

CHAPTER VI

A CHAPTER OF HORRORS

Pierre Bourgot and Michel Verdung--'Me Hermit of S. Bonnot--The Gandillon Family--Thievenne Paget--The Tailor of Chalons--Roulet <page 69>

Chapter VII

JEAN GRENIER

On the Sand-dunes--A Wolf attacks Marguerite Poirier--Jean Grenier brought to Trial--His Confessions--Charges of Cannibalism proved--His Sentence--Behaviour in the Monastery--Visit of Del'ancre <page 85>

CHAPTER VIII

FOLK-LORE RELATING TO WERE-WOLVES

Barrenness of English Folk-lore--Devonshire Traditions--Derivation of Were-wolf--Cannibalism in Scotland--The Angus Robber--The Carle of Perth--French Superstitions--Norwegian Traditions--Danish Tales of Were-wolves--Holstein Stories--The Werewolf in the Netherlands--Among the Greeks; the Serbs; the White Russians; the Poles; the Russians--A Russian Receipt for becoming a Were-wolf--The Bohemian Vlkodlak--Armenian Story--Indian Tales--Abyssinian Budas--American Transformation Tales--A Slovakian Household Tale--Similar Greek, Bearnais, and Icelandic Tales <page 100>

CHAPTER IX

NATURAL CAUSES OF LYCANTHROPY

Innate Cruelty--Its Three Forms--Dumollard--Andreas Bichel--A Dutch Priest--Other instances of Inherent Cruelty--Cruelty united to Refinement--A Hungarian Bather in Blood--Suddenness with which the Passion is developed--Cannibalism; in pregnant Women; in Maniacs--Hallucination; how Produced--Salves--The Story of Lucius--Self-deception <page 130>

CHAPTER X

MYTHOLOGICAL ORIGIN OF THE WERE-WOLF MYTH

Metempsychosis--Sympathy between Men and Beasts--Finnbog and the Bear--Osage and the Beaver--The Connexion of Soul and Body--Buddism--Case of Mr. Holloway--Popular ideas concerning the Body--The derivation of the German Leichnam--Feather Dresses--Transmigration of Souls--A Basque Story--Story from the Pantschatantra--Savage ideas regarding Natural Phenomena--Thunder, Lightning, and Cloud--The origin of the Dragon--John of Bromton's Dragon a Waterspout--The Legend of Typhoeus--Allegorizing of the Effects of a Hurricane--Anthropomorphosis--The Cirrus Cloud, a Heavenly Swan--Urvaci--The Storm-cloud a Daemon--Vritra and Rakschasas--Story of a Brahmin and a Rakschasas <page 153>

CHAPTER XI

THE MARECHAL DE REZT I: THE INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES

Introduction--History of Gilles de Laval--The Castle of Machecoul--Surrender of the Marshal--Examination of Witnesses--Letter of De Retz--The Duke of Brittany reluctant to move--The Bishop of Nantes <page 181>

CHAPTER XII

THE MARECHAL DE REZT II: THE TRIAL

The Appearance of the Marshal--Pierre de l'Hospital--The Requisition--The Trial adjourned--Meeting of the Marshal and his Servants--The Confession of Henriet--Pontou persuaded to confess all--The adjourned Trial not hurried on--The hesitation of the Duke of Brittany <page 207>

CHAPTER XIII

MARECHAL DE RETZ III: THE SENTENCE AND EXECUTION

The adjourned Trial--The Marshal Confesses--The Case handed over to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal--Prompt steps taken by the Bishop--The Sentence--Ratified by the Secular Court--The Execution <page 226>

CHAPTER XIV

A GALICIAN WERE-WOLF

The Inhabitants of Austrian Galicia--The Hamlet of Polomyja--Summer Evening in the Forest--The Beggar Swiatek--A Girl disappears--A School-boy vanishes--A Servant-girl lost--Another Boy carried of--The Discovery made by the Publican of Polomyja--Swiatek locked up--Brought to Dabkow--Commits suicide <page 238>

Chapter XV

ANOMALOUS CASE--THE HUMAN HYENA

Ghouls--Story from Fornari--Quotation from Apuleius--Incident mentioned by Marcassus--Cemeteries of Paris violated--Discovery of Violator--Confession of M. Bertrand <page 250>

CHAPTER XVI

A SERMON ON WERE-WOLVES

The Discourses of Dr. Johann--The Sermon--Remarks <page 261>

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

 

THE BOOK OF WERE-WOLVES.

 

CHAPTER I.

 

INTRODUCTORY.

I SHALL never forget the walk I took one night in Vienne, after having accomplished the examination of an unknown Druidical relic, the Pierre labie, at La Rondelle, near Champigni. I had learned of the existence of this cromlech only on my arrival at Champigni in the afternoon, and I had started to visit the curiosity without calculating the time it would take me to reach it and to return. Suffice it to say that I discovered the venerable pile of grey stones as the sun set, and that I expended the last lights of evening in planning and sketching. I then turned my face homeward. My

[p. 2]

walk of about ten miles had wearied me, coming at the end of a long day's posting, and I had lamed myself in scrambling over some stones to the Gaulish relic.

A small hamlet was at no great distance, and I betook myself thither, in the hopes of hiring a trap to convey me to the posthouse, but I was disappointed. Few in the place could speak French, and the priest, when I applied to him, assured me that he believed there was no better conveyance in the place than a common charrue with its solid wooden wheels; nor was a riding horse to be procured. The good man offered to house me for the night; but I was obliged to decline, as my family intended starting early on the following morning.

Out spake then the mayor--"Monsieur can never go back to-night across the flats, because of the--the--" and his voice dropped; "the loups-garoux."

"He says that he must return!" replied the priest in patois. "But who will go with him?"

"Ah, ha,! M. le Cure. It is all very well for one of us to accompany him, but think of the coming back alone!"

"Then two must go with him," said the priest, and you can take care of each other as you return."

[p. 3]

"Picou tells me that he saw the were-wolf only this day se'nnight," said a peasant; "he was down by the hedge of his buckwheat field, and the sun had set, and he was thinking of coming home, when he heard a rustle on the far side of the hedge. He looked over, and there stood the wolf as big as a calf against the horizon, its tongue out, and its eyes glaring like marsh-fires. Mon Dieu! catch me going over the marais to-night. Why, what could two men do if they were attacked by that wolf-fiend?"

"It is tempting Providence," said one of the elders of the village;" no man must expect the help of God if he throws himself wilfully in the way of danger. Is it not so, M. le Cure? I heard you say as much from the pulpit on the first Sunday in Lent, preaching from the Gospel."

"That is true," observed several, shaking their heads.

"His tongue hanging out, and his eyes glaring like marsh-fires!" said the confidant of Picou.

"Mon Dieu! if I met the monster, I should run," quoth another.

"I quite believe you, Cortrez; I can answer for it that you would," said the mayor.

[p. 4]

"As big as a calf," threw in Picou's friend.

"If the loup-garou were only a natural wolf, why then, you see"--the mayor cleared his throat--"you see we should think nothing of it; but, M. le Cure, it is a fiend, a worse than fiend, a man-fiend,--a worse than man-fiend, a man-wolf-fiend."

"But what is the young monsieur to do?" asked the priest, looking from one to another.

"Never mind," said I, who had been quietly listening to their patois, which I understood. "Never mind; I will walk back by myself, and if I meet the loup-garou I will crop his ears and tail, and send them to M. le Maire with my compliments."

A sigh of relief from the assembly, as they found themselves clear of the difficulty.

"Il est Anglais," said the mayor, shaking his head, as though he meant that an Englishman might face the devil with impunity.

A melancholy flat was the marais, looking desolate enough by day, but now, in the gloaming, tenfold as desolate. The sky was perfectly clear, and of a soft, blue-grey tinge; illumined by the new moon, a curve of light approaching its western bed. To the horizon reached a fen, blacked with pools of stagnant water,

[p. 5]

from which the frogs kept up an incessant trill through the summer night. Heath and fern covered the ground, but near the water grew dense masses of flag and bulrush, amongst which the light wind sighed wearily. Here and there stood a sandy knoll, capped with firs, looking like black splashes against the grey sky; not a sign of habitation anywhere; the only trace of men being the white, straight road extending for miles across the fen.

That this district harboured wolves is not improbable, and I confess that I armed myself with a strong stick at the first clump of trees through which the road dived.

This was my first introduction to were-wolves, and the circumstance of finding the superstition still so prevalent, first gave me the idea of investigating the history and the habits of these mythical creatures.

I must acknowledge that I have been quite unsuccessful in obtaining a specimen of the animal, but I have found its traces in all directions. And just as the palaeontologist has constructed the labyrinthodon out of its foot-prints in marl, and one splinter of bone, so may this monograph be complete and accurate, although I have no chained were-wolf before me which I may sketch and describe from the life.

[p. 6]

The traces left are indeed numerous enough, and though perhaps like the dodo or the dinormis, the werewolf may have become extinct in our age, yet he has left his stamp on classic antiquity, he has trodden deep in Northern snows. has ridden rough-shod over the mediaevals, and has howled amongst Oriental sepulchres. He belonged to a bad breed, and we are quite content to be freed from him and his kindred, the vampire and the ghoul. Yet who knows! We may be a little too hasty in concluding that he is extinct. He may still prowl in Abyssinian forests, range still over Asiatic steppes, and be found howling dismally in some padded room of a Hanwell or a Bedlam.

In the following pages I design to investigate the notices of were-wolves to be found in the ancient writers of classic antiquity, those contained in the Northern Sagas, and, lastly, the numerous details afforded by the mediaeval authors. In connection with this I shall give a sketch of modern folklore relating to Lycanthropy.

It will then be seen that under the veil of mythology lies a solid reality, that a floating superstition holds in solution a positive truth.

This I shall show to be an innate craving for blood implanted in certain natures, restrained under ordinary

[p. 7]

circumstances, but breaking forth occasionally, accompanied with hallucination, leading in most cases to cannibalism. I shall then give instances of persons thus afflicted, who were believed by others, and who believed themselves, to be transformed into beasts, and who, in the paroxysms of their madness, committed numerous murders, and devoured their victims.

I shall next give instances of persons suffering from the same passion for blood, who murdered for the mere gratification of their natural cruelty, but who were not subject to hallucinations, nor were addicted to cannibalism.

I shall also give instances of persons filled with the same propensities who murdered and ate their victims, but who were perfectly free from hallucination.

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

 

CHAPTER II.

 

LYCANTHROPY AMONG THE ANCIENTS.

Definition of Lycanthropy--Marcellus Sidetes--Virgil--Herodotus--Ovid--Pliny--Agriopas--Story from Petronius--Arcadian Legends--Explanation offered.

WHAT is Lycanthropy? The change of manor woman into the form of a wolf, either through magical means, so as to enable him or her to gratify the taste for human flesh, or through judgment of the gods in punishment for some great offence.

This is the popular definition. Truly it consists in a form of madness, such as may be found in most asylums.

Among the ancients this kind of insanity went by the names of Lycanthropy, Kuanthropy, or Boanthropy, because those afflicted with it believed themselves to be turned into wolves, dogs, or cows. But in the North of Europe, as we shall see, the shape of a bear, and in

[p. 9]

Africa that of a hyaena, were often selected in preference. A mere matter of taste! According to Marcellus Sidetes, of whose poem peri lykanthrupoy a fragment exists, men are attacked with this madness chiefly in the beginning of the year, and become most furious in February; retiring for the night to lone cemeteries, and living precisely in the manner of dogs and wolves.

Virgil writes in his eighth Eclogue:--

	 
		Has herbas, atque haec Ponto mihi lecta venena
		 Ipse dedit Moeris; nascuntur plurima Ponto.
		 His ego saepe lupum fieri et se conducere sylvis
		 Moerim, saepe animas imis excire sepulchris,
		 Atque satas alio, vidi traducere messes.
		
		 And Herodotus:--"It seems that the Neuri are sorcerers, if one is to believe the Scythians and the Greeks established in Scythia; for each Neurian changes himself, once in the year, into the form of a wolf, and he continues in that form for several days, after which he resumes his former shape."--(Lib. iv. c. 105.)

See also Pomponius Mela (lib. ii. c. 1) "There is a fixed time for each Neurian, at which they change, if they like, into wolves, and back again into their former condition."

[p. 10]

But the most remarkable story among the ancients is that related by Ovid in his "Metamorphoses," of Lycaon, king of Arcadia, who, entertaining Jupiter one day, set before him a hash of human flesh, to prove his omniscience, whereupon the god transferred him into a wolf:--[1]

	 
		In vain he attempted to speak; from that very instant
		 His jaws were bespluttered with foam, and only he thirsted
		 For blood, as he raged amongst flocks and panted for slaughter.
		 His vesture was changed into hair, his limbs became crooked;
		 A wolf,--he retains yet large trace of his ancient expression,
		 Hoary he is as afore, his countenance rabid,
		 His eyes glitter savagely still, the picture of fury.
		
		 Pliny relates from Evanthes, that on the festival of Jupiter Lycaeus, one of the family of Antaeus was selected by lot, and conducted to the brink of the Arcadian lake. He then hung his clothes on a tree and plunged into the water, whereupon he was transformed into a wolf. Nine years after, if he had not tasted human flesh, he was at liberty to swim back and resume his former shape, which had in the meantime become aged, as though he had worn it for nine years.

Agriopas relates, that Demaenetus, having assisted

 [1. OVID. Met. i. 237; PAUSANIAS, viii. 2,  section 1; TZETZE ad Lycoph. 481; ERATOSTH. Catas. i. 8.]

 [p. 11]

at an Arcadian human sacrifice to Jupiter Lycaeus, ate of the flesh, and was at once transformed into a wolf, in which shape he prowled about for ten years, after which he recovered his human form, and took part in the Olympic games.

The following story is from Petronius:--

"My master had gone to Capua to sell some old clothes. I seized the opportunity, and persuaded our guest to bear me company about five miles out of town; for he was a soldier, and as bold as death. We set out about cockcrow, and the moon shone bright as day, when, coming among some monuments. my man began to converse with the stars, whilst I jogged along singing and counting them. Presently I looked back after him, and saw him strip and lay his clothes by the side of the road. My heart was in my mouth in an instant, I stood like a corpse; when, in a crack, he was turned into a wolf. Don't think I'm joking: I would not tell you a lie for the finest fortune in the world.

"But to continue: after he was turned into a wolf, he set up a howl and made straight for the woods. At first I did not know whether I was on my head or my heels; but at last going to take up his clothes, I found them turned into stone. The sweat streamed

[p. 12]

from me, and I never expected to get over it. Melissa began to wonder why I walked so late. 'Had you come a little sooner,' she said, 'you might at least have lent us a hand; for a wolf broke into the farm and has butchered all our cattle; but though be got off, it was no laughing matter for him, for a servant of ours ran him through with a pike. Hearing this I could not close an eye; but as soon as it was daylight, I ran home like a pedlar that has been eased of his pack. Coming to the place where the clothes had been turned into stone, I saw nothing but a pool of blood; and when I got home, I found my soldier lying in bed, like an ox in a stall, and a surgeon dressing his neck. I saw at once that he was a fellow who could change his skin (versipellis), and never after could I eat bread with him, no, not if you would have killed me. Those who would have taken a different view of the case are welcome to their opinion; if I tell you a lie, may your genii confound me!"

As every one knows, Jupiter changed himself into a bull; Hecuba became a bitch; Actaeon a stag; the comrades of Ulysses were transformed into swine; and the daughters of Proetus fled through the fields believing themselves to be cows, and would not allow any

[p. 13]

one to come near them, lest they should be caught and yoked.

S. Augustine declared, in his De Civitate Dei, that he knew an old woman who was said to turn men into asses by her enchantments.

Apuleius has left us his charming romance of the Golden Ass, in which the hero, through injudicious use of a magical salve, is transformed into that long-eared animal.

It is to be observed that the chief seat of Lycanthropy was Arcadia, and it has been very plausibly suggested that the cause might he traced to the following circumstance:--The natives were a pastoral people, and would consequently suffer very severely from the attacks and depredations of wolves. They would naturally institute a sacrifice to obtain deliverance from this pest, and security for their flocks. This sacrifice consisted in the offering of a child, and it was instituted by Lycaon. From the circumstance of the sacrifice being human, and from the peculiarity of the name of its originator, rose the myth.

But, on the other hand, the story is far too widely spread for us to attribute it to an accidental origin, or to trace it to a local source.

[p. 14]

Half the world believes, or believed in, were-wolves, and they were supposed to haunt the Norwegian forests by those who had never remotely been connected with Arcadia: and the superstition had probably struck deep its roots into the Scandinavian and Teutonic minds, ages before Lycaon existed; and we have only to glance at Oriental literature, to see it as firmly engrafted in the imagination of the Easterns.

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

 

CHAPTER III.

 

THE WERE-WOLF IN THE NORTH.

Norse Traditions - Manner in which the Change was effected - Voelundar Kvoeda - Instances from the Volsung Saga - Hrolf's Saga - Kraka - Faroese Poem - Helga Kvida - Vatnsdaela Saga - Eyrbyggja Saga

IN Norway and Iceland certain men were said to be eigi einhamir, not of one skin, an idea which had its roots in paganism. The full form of this strange superstition was, that men could take upon them other bodies, and the natures of those beings whose bodies they assumed. The second adopted shape was called by the same name as the original shape, hamr, and the expression made use of to designate the transition from one body to another, was at skipta homum, or at hamaz; whilst the expedition made in the second form, was the hamfor. By this transfiguration extraordinary powers were acquired; the natural strength of the individual was doubled, or quadrupled; he acquired the strength

[p. 16]

of the beast in whose body he travelled, in addition to his own, and a man thus invigorated was called hamrammr.

The manner in which the change was effected, varied. At times, a dress of skin was cast over the body, and at once the transformation was complete; at others, the human body was deserted, and the soul entered the second form, leaving the first body in a cataleptic state, to all appearance dead. The second hamr was either borrowed or created for the purpose. There was yet a third manner of producing this effect-it was by incantation; but then the form of the individual remained unaltered, though the eyes of all beholders were charmed so that they could only perceive him under the selected form.

Having assumed some bestial shape, the man who is eigi einhammr is only to be recognized by his eyes, which by no power can be changed. He then pursues his course, follows the instincts of the beast whose body he has taken, yet without quenching his own intelligence. He is able to do what the body of the animal can do, and do what he, as man, can do as well. He may fly or swim, if be is in the shape of bird or fish; if he has taken the form of a wolf, or if he

[p. 17]

goes on a gandreith, or wolf's-ride, he is fall of the rage and malignity of the creatures whose powers and passions he has assumed.

I will give a few instances of each of the three methods of changing bodies mentioned above. Freyja and Frigg had their falcon dresses in which they visited different regions of the earth, and Loki is said to have borrowed these, and to have then appeared so precisely like a falcon, that he would have escaped detection, but for the malicious twinkle of his eyes. In the Vaelundar kvitha is the following passage:--

  I.

Meyjar flugu sunnan
 Myrkvith igognum
 Alvitr unga
 Orlog drygja;
 yaer a savarstrond
 Settusk at hvilask,
 Dro sir suthroenar
 Dyrt lin spunnu.

II.

Ein nam yeirra
 Egil at verja
 Fogr maer fira
 Fathmi ljosum;
 Onnur var Svanhvit,
 Svanfjathrar dro;
 En in yrithja
 yeirra systir
 Var i hvitan
 Hals Volundar.  I.

From the south flew the maidens
 Athwart the gloom,
 Alvit the young,
 To fix destinies;
 They on the sea-strand
 Sat them to rest,
 These damsels of the south
 Fair linen spun.

II.

One of them took
 Egil to press,
 Fair maid, in her
 Dazzling arms.
 Another was Svanhwit,
 Who wore swan feathers;
 And the third,
 Their sister,
 Pressed the white
 Neck of Voelund. 
  

 

[p. 18]

The introduction of Soemund tells us that these charming young ladies were caught when they had laid their swan-skins beside them on the shore, and were consequently not in a condition to fly.

In like manner were wolves' dresses used. The following curious passage is from the wild Saga of the Volsungs:--

"It is now to be told that Sigmund thought Sinfjotli too young to help him in his revenge, and he wished first to test his powers; so during the summer they plunged deep into the wood and slew men for their goods, and Sigmund saw that he was quite of the Volsung stock. . . . Now it fell out that as they went through the forest, collecting monies, that they lighted on a house in which were two men sleeping, with great gold rings an them; they had dealings with witchcraft, for wolf-skins hung up in the house above them; it was the tenth day on which they might come out of their second state. They were kings' sons. Sigmund and Sinfjotli got into the habits, and could not get out of them again, and the nature of the original beasts came over them, and they howled as wolves--they learned "both of them to howl. Now they went into the forest, and each took his own

[p. 19]

course; they made the agreement together that they should try their strength against as many as seven men, but not more, and. that he who was ware of strife should utter his wolf's howl.

"'Do not fail in this,' said Sigmund, 'for you are young and daring, and men would be glad to chase you.' Now each went his own course; and after that they had parted Sigmund found men, so he howled; and when Sinfjotli heard that, he ran up and slew them all-then they separated. And Sinfjotli had not been long in the wood before he met with. eleven men; he fell upon them and slew them every one. Then he was tired, so he flung himself under an oak to rest. Up came Sigmund and said, 'Why did you not call out?' Sinfjotli replied, 'What was the need of asking your help to kill eleven men?'

"Sigmund flew at him and rent him so that he fell, for he had bitten through his throat. That day they could not leave their wolf-forms. Sigmund laid him on his back and bare him home to the hall, and sat beside him, and said, 'Deuce take the wolf-forms!"'--Volsung Saga, c. 8.

There is another curious story of a were-wolf in the same Saga, which I must relate.

[p. 20]

"Now he did as she requested, and hewed down a great piece of timber, and cast it across the feet of those ten brothers seated in a row, in the forest; and there they sat all that day and on till night. And at midnight there came an old she-wolf out of the forest to them, as they sat in the stocks, and she was both huge and grimly. Now she fell upon one of them, and bit him to death, and after she had eaten him all up, she went away. And next morning Signy sent a trusty man to her brothers, to know how it had fared with them. When he returned he told her of the death of one, and that grieved her much, for she feared it might fare thus with them all, and she would be unable to assist them.

"In short, nine nights following came the same she-wolf at midnight, and devoured them one after another till all were dead, except Sigmund, and he was left alone. So when the tenth night came, Signy sent her trusty man to Sigmund, her brother, with honey in his hand, and said that he was to smear it over the face of Sigmund, and to fill his mouth with it. Now he went to Sigmund, and did as he was bid, after which he returned home. And during the night came the same she-wolf, as was her wont, and reckoned to devour him, like his brothers.

[p. 21]

"Now she snuffed at him, where the honey was smeared, and began to lick his face with her tongue, and presently thrust her tongue into his mouth. He bore it ill, and bit into the tongue of the she-wolf; she sprang up and tried to break loose, setting her feet against the stock, so as to snap it asunder: but he held firm, and ripped the tongue out by the roots, so that it was the death of the wolf. It is the opinion of some men that this beast was the mother of King Siggeir, and that she had taken this form upon her through devilry and witchcraft."--(c. 5.)

There is another story bearing on the subject in the Hrolfs Saga Kraka, which is pretty; it is as follows:--

"In the north of Norway, in upland-dales, reigned a king called Hring; and he had a son named Bjorn. Now it fell out that the queen died, much lamented by the king, and by all. The people advised him to marry again, and so be sent men south to get him a wife. A gale and fierce storm fell upon them, so that they had to turn the helm, and run before the wind, and so they came north to Finnmark, where they spent the winter. One day they went inland, and came to a house in which sat two beautiful women, who greeted them well, and

[p. 22]

inquired whence they had come. They replied by giving an account of their journey and their errand, and then asked the women who they were, and why they were alone, and far from the haunts of men, although they were so comely and engaging. The elder replied--that her name was Ingibjorg, and that her daughter was called Hvit, and that she was the Finn king's sweetheart. The messengers decided that they would return home, if Hvit would come with them and marry King Hring. She agreed, and they took her with them and met the king who was pleased with her, and had his wedding feast made, and said that he cared not though she was not rich. But the king was very old, and that the queen soon found out.

"There was a Carle who had a farm not far from the king's dwelling; he had a wife, and a daughter, who was but a child, and her name was Bera; she was very young and lovely. Bjorn the king's son, and Bera the Carle's daughter, were wont, as children, to play together, and they loved each other well. The Carle was well to do, he had been out harrying in his young days, and he was a doughty champion. Bjorn and Bera loved each other more and more, and they were often together.

[p. 23]

Time passed, and nothing worth relating occurred; but Bjorn, the king's son, waxed strong and tall; and he was well skilled in all manly exercises.

"King Hring was often absent for long, harrying foreign shores, and Hvit remained at home and governed the land. She was not liked of the people. She was always very pleasant with Bjorn, but he cared little for her. It fell out once that the King Hring went abroad, and he spake with his queen that Bjorn should remain at home with her, to assist in the government, for he thought it advisable, the queen being haughty and inflated with pride.

"The king told his son Bjorn that he was to remain at home, and rule the land with the queen; Bjorn replied that he disliked the plan, and that he had no love for the queen; but the king was inflexible, and left the land with a great following. Bjorn walked home after his conversation with the king, and went up to his place, ill-pleased and red as blood. The queen came to speak with him, and to cheer him; and spake friendly with him, but he bade her be of. She obeyed him that time. She often came to talk with him, and said how much pleasanter it was for them to be together, than to have an old fellow like Hring in the house.

[p. 24]

"Bjorn resented this speech, and struck her a box in the ear, and bade her depart, and he spurned her from him. She replied that this was ill-done to drive and thrust her away: and 'You think it better, Bjorn, to sweetheart a Carle's daughter, than to have my love and favour, a fine piece of condescension and a disgrace it is to you! But, before long, something will stand in the way of your fancy, and your folly.' Then she struck at him with a wolf-skin glove, and said, that he should become a rabid and grim wild bear; and 'You shall eat nothing but your father's sheep, which you shall slay for your food, and never shall you leave this state.'

After that, Bjorn disappeared, and none knew what had become of him; and men sought but found him not, as was to be expected. We must now relate how that the king's sheep were slaughtered, half a score at a time, and it was all the work of a grey bear, both huge and grimly.

"One evening it chanced that the Carle's daughter saw this savage bear coming towards her, looking tenderly at her, and she fancied that she recognized the eyes of Bjorn, the king's son, so she made a slight attempt to escape; then the beast retreated, but she

[p. 25]

followed it, till she came to a cave. Now when she entered the cave there stood before her a man, who greeted Bera, the Carle's daughter; and she recognized him, for he was Bjorn, Hring's son. Overjoyed were they to meet. So they were together in the cave awhile, for she would not part from him when she had the chance of being with him; but he said that this was not proper that she should be there by him, for by day he was a beast, and by night a man.

"Hring returned from his harrying, and he was told the news, of what had taken place during his absence; how that Bjorn, his son, had vanished, and also, how that a monstrous beast was up the country, and was destroying his flocks. The queen urged the king to have the beast slain, but he delayed awhile.

"One night, as Bera and Bjorn were together, he said to her:--'Methinks to-morrow will be the day of my death, for they will come out to hunt me down. But for myself I care not, for it is little pleasure to live with this charm upon me, and my only comfort is that we are together; but now our union must be broken. I will give you the ring which is under my left hand. You will see the troop of hunters to-morrow coming to

[p. 26]

seek me; and when I am dead go to the king, and ask him to give you what is under the beast's left front leg. He will consent.'

"He spoke to her of many other things, till the bear's form stole over him, and he went forth a bear. She followed him, and saw that a great body of hunters had come over the mountain ridges, and had a number of dogs with them. The bear rushed away from the cavern, but the dogs and the king's men came upon him, and there was a desperate struggle. He wearied many men before he was brought to bay, and had slain all the dogs. But now they made a ring about him, and he ranged around it., but could see no means of escape, so he turned to where the king stood, and he seized a man who stood next him, and rent him asunder; then was the bear so exhausted that he cast himself down flat, and, at once, the men rushed in upon him and slew him. The Carle's daughter saw this, and she went up to the king, and said,--'Sire! wilt thou grant me that which is under the bear's left fore-shoulder?' The king consented. By this time his men had nearly flayed the bear; Bera went up and plucked away the ring, and kept it, but none saw what she took, nor had they looked for anything. The king

[p. 27]

asked her who she was, and she gave a name, but not her true name.

"The king now went home, and Bera was in his company. The queen was very joyous, and treated her well, and asked who she was; but Bera answered as before.

"The queen now made a great feast, and had the bear's flesh cooked for the banquet. The Carle's daughter was in the bower of the queen, and could not escape, for the queen had a suspicion who she was. Then she came to Bera with a dish, quite unexpectedly, and on it was bear's flesh, and she bade Bera eat it. She would not do so. 'Here is a marvel!' said the queen; 'you reject the offer which a queen herself deigns to make to you. Take it at once, or something worse will befall you.' She bit before her, and she ate of that bite; the queen cut another piece, and looked into her mouth; she saw that one little grain of the bite had gone down, but Bera spat out all the rest from her mouth, and said she would take no more, though she were tortured or killed.

"'Maybe you have had sufficient,' said the queen, and she laughed."--(Hrolfs Saga Kraka, c. 24-27, condensed.)

[p. 28]

In the Faroese song of Finnur hin frithi, we have the following verse:--

  Hegar ith Finnur hetta saer.
 Mannspell var at meini,
 Skapti hann seg i vargliki:

Hann feldi allvael fleiri.  When this peril Finn saw,
 That witchcraft did him harm,
 Then he changed himself into a were-wolf:

He slew many thus. 
  

 

The following is from the second Kvitha of Helga Hundingsbana (stroph. 31):--

	 
		May the blade bite,
		 Which thou brandishest
		 Only on thyself,
		 when it Chimes on thy head.
		 Then avenged will be
		 The death of Helgi,
		 When thou, as a wolf,
		 Wanderest in the woods,
		 Knowing nor fortune
		 Nor any pleasure,
		 Haying no meat,
		 Save rivings of corpses.
		
		 In all these cases the change is of the form: we shall now come to instances in which the person who is changed has a double shape, and the soul animates one after the other.

The Ynglinga Saga (c. 7) says of Odin, that "he changed form; the bodies lay as though sleeping or dead, but he was a bird or a beast, a fish, or a woman, and went in a twinkling to far distant lands, doing his

[p. 29]

own or other people's business." In like manner the Danish king Harold sent a warlock to Iceland in the form of a whale, whilst his body lay stiff and stark at home. The already quoted Saga of Hrolf Krake gives us another example, where Bodvar Bjarki, in the shape of a huge bear, fights desperately with the enemy, which has surrounded the hall of his king, whilst his human body lies drunkenly beside the embers within.

In the Vatnsdaela Saga, there is a curious account of three Finns, who were shut up in a hut for three nights, and ordered by Ingimund, a Norwegian chief, to visit Iceland and inform him of the lie of the country, where he was to settle. Their bodies became rigid, and they sent their souls the errand, and, on their awaking at the end of three days, gave an accurate description of the Vatnsdal, in which Ingimund was eventually to establish himself. But the Saga does not relate whether these Finns projected their souls into the bodies of birds or beasts.

The third manner of transformation mentioned, was that in which the individual was not changed himself, but the eyes of others were bewitched, so that they could not detect him, but saw him only under a certain form. Of this there are several examples in the Sagas;

[p. 30]

as, for instance, in the Hromundar Saga Greypsonar, and in the Fostbraethra Saga. But I will translate the most curious, which is that of Odd, Katla's son, in the Eyrbyggja Saga.--(c. 20.)

"Geirrid, housewife in Mafvahlith, sent word into Bolstad, that she was ware of the fact that Odd, Katla's son, had hewn off Aud's hand.

"Now when Thorarinn and Arnkell heard that, they rode from home with twelve men. They spent the night in Mafvahlith, and rode on next morning to Holt: and Odd was the only man in the house.

"Katla sat on the high seat spinning yarn, and she bade Odd sit beside her; also, she bade her women sit each in her place, and hold their tongues. 'For,' said she, 'I shall do all the talking.' Now when Arnkell and his company arrived, they walked straight in, and when they came into the chamber, Katla greeted Arnkell, and asked the news. He replied that there was none, and he inquired after Odd. Katla said that he had gone to Breidavik. 'We shall ransack the house though,' quoth Arnkell. 'Be it so,' replied Katla, and she ordered a girl to carry a light before them, and unlock the different parts of the house. All they saw was Katla spinning yarn off her distaff. Now they

[p. 31]

search the house, but find no Odd, so they depart. But when they had gone a little way from the garth, Arnkell stood still and said: 'How know we but that Katla has hoodwinked us, and that the distaff in her hand was nothing more than Odd.' 'Not impossible!' said Thorarinn; 'let us turn back.' They did so; and when those at Holt raw that they were returning, Katla said to her maids, 'Sit still in your places, Odd and I shall go out.'

"Now as they approached the door, she went into the porch, and began to comb and clip the hair of her son Odd. Arnkell came to the door and saw where Katla was, and she seemed to be stroking her goat, and disentangling its mane and beard and smoothing its wool. So he and his men went into the house, but found not Odd. Katla's distaff lay against the bench, so they thought that it could not have been Odd, and they went away. However, when they had come near the spot where they had turned before, Arnkell said, 'Think you not that Odd may have been in the goat's form?' 'There is no saying,' replied Thorarinn; 'but if we turn back we will lay hands on Katla.' 'We can try our luck again,' quoth Arnkell; 'and see what comes of it.' So they returned.

[p. 32]

"Now when they were seen on their way back, Katla bade Odd follow her; and she lea him to the ash-heap, and told him to lie there and not to stir on any account. But when Arnkell, and his men came to the farm, they rushed into the chamber, and saw Katla seated in her place, spinning. She greeted them and said that their visits followed with rapidity. Arnkell replied that what she said was true. His comrades took the distaff and cut it in twain. 'Come now!' said Katla, 'you cannot say, when you get home, that you have done nothing, for you have chopped up my distaff.' Then Arnkell and the rest hunted high and low for Odd, but could not find him; indeed they saw nothing living about the place, beside a boar-pig which lay under the ash-heap, so they went away once more.

"Well, when they got half-way to Mafvahlith, came Geirrid to meet them, with her workmen. 'They had not gone the right way to work in seeking Odd,' she said, 'but she would help them.' So they turned back again. Geirrid had a blue cloak on her. Now when the party was seen and reported to Katla, and it was said that they were thirteen in number, and one had on a coloured dress, Katla exclaimed, 'That troll Geirrid is come! I shall not be able to throw a

[p. 33]

glamour over their eyes any more.' She started up from her place and lifted the cushion of the seat, and there was a hole and a cavity beneath: into this she thrust Odd, clapped the cushion over him, and sat down, saying she felt sick at heart.

"Now when they came into the room, there were small greetings. Geirrid cast of her the cloak and went up to Katla, and took the seal-skin bag which she had in her hand, and drew it over the head of Katla.[1] Then Geirrid bade them break up the seat. They did so, and found Odd. Him they took and carried to Buland's head, where they hanged him. . . . But Katla they stoned to death under the headland."

 [1. A precaution against the "evil eye." Compare Gisla Saga Surssonnar, p. 34. Laxdaela Saga, cc. 37, 38.]

 [p. 34]

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER IV.

 

THE ORIGIN OF THE SCANDINAVIAN WERE-WOLF.

Advantage of the Study of Norse Literature--Bear and Wolf-skin Dresses--The Berserkir--Their Rage--The Story of Thorir--Passages from the Aigla--The Evening Wolf--Skallagrim and his Son--Derivation of the Words Hamr and Vargr--Laws affecting Outlaws--"To become a Boar"--Recapitulation.

ONE Of the great advantages of the study of old Norse or Icelandic literature is the insight given by it into the origin of world-wide superstitions. Norse tradition is transparent as glacier ice, and its origin is as unmistakable.

Mediaeval mythology, rich and gorgeous, is a compound like Corinthian brass, into which many pure ores have been fused, or it is a full turbid river drawn from numerous feeders, which had their sources in remote climes. It is a blending of primaeval Keltic, Teutonic, Scandinavian, Italic, and Arab traditions, each adding

[p. 35]

a beauty, each yielding a charm, bat each accretion rendering the analysis more difficult.

Pacciuchelli says:--"The Anio flows into the Tiber; pure as crystal it meets the tawny stream, and is lost in it, so that there is no more Anio, but the united stream is all Tiber." So is it with each tributary to the tide of mediaeval mythology. The moment it has blended its waters with the great and onward rolling flood, it is impossible to detect it with certainty; it has swollen the stream, but has lost its own identity. If we would analyse a particular myth, we must not go at once to the body of mediaeval superstition, but strike at one of the tributaries before its absorption. This we shall proceed to do, and in selecting Norse mythology, we come upon abundant material, pointing naturally to the spot whence it has been derived, as glacial moraines indicate the direction which they have taken, and point to the mountains whence they have fallen. It will not be difficult for us to arrive at the origin of the Northern belief in were-wolves, and the data thus obtained will be useful in assisting us to elucidate much that would otherwise prove obscure in mediaeval tradition.

Among the old Norse, it was the custom for certain warriors to dress in the skins of the beasts they had

[p. 36]

slain, and thus to give themselves an air of ferocity, calculated to strike terror into the hearts of their foes.

Such dresses are mentioned in some Sagas, without there being any supernatural qualities attached to them. For instance, in the Njala there is mention of a man i geithethni, in goatskin dress. Much in the same way do we hear of Harold Harfagr having in his company a band of berserkir, who were all dressed in wolf-skins, ulfhethnir, and this expression, wolf-skin coated, is met with as a man's name. Thus in the Holmverja Saga, there is mention of a Bjorn, "son of Ulfhethin, wolfskin coat, son of Ulfhamr, wolf-shaped, son of Ulf, wolf, son of Ulfhamr, wolf-shaped, who could change forms."

But the most conclusive passage is in the Vatnsdaela Saga, and is as follows:--"Those berserkir who were called ulfhethnir, had got wolf-skins over their mail coats" (c. xvi.) In like manner the word berserkr, used of a man possessed of superhuman powers, and subject. to accesses of diabolical fury, was originally applied to one of those doughty champions who went about in bear-sarks, or habits made of bear-skin over their armour. I am well aware that Bjorn Halldorson's derivation of berserkr, bare of sark, or destitute of clothing, has been hitherto generally received, but Sveibjorn [p. 37] Egilsson, an indisputable authority, rejects this derivation as untenable, and substitutes for it that which I have adopted.

It may be well imagined that a wolf or a bear-skin would make a warm and comfortable great-coat to a man, whose manner of living required him to defy all weathers, and that the dress would not only give him an appearance of grimness and ferocity, likely to produce an unpleasant emotion in the breast of a foe, but also that the thick fur might prove effectual in deadening the blows rained on him in conflict.

The berserkr was an object of aversion and terror to the peaceful inhabitants of the land, his avocation being to challenge quiet country farmers to single combat. As the law of the land stood in Norway, a man who declined to accept a challenge, forfeited all his possessions, even to the wife of his bosom, as a poltroon unworthy of the protection of the law, and every item of his property passed into the hands of his challenger. The berserkr accordingly had the unhappy man at his mercy. If he slew him, the farmer's possessions became his, and if the poor fellow declined to fight, he lost all legal right to his inheritance. A berserkr would invite himself to any feast, and contribute his quota to the hilarity of

[p. 38]

the entertainment, by snapping the backbone, or cleaving the skull, of some merrymaker who incurred his displeasure, or whom he might single out to murder, for no other reason than a desire to keep his hand in practice.

It may well be imagined that popular superstition went along with the popular dread of these wolf-and-bear-skinned rovers, and that they were believed to be endued with the force, as they certainly were with the ferocity, of the beasts whose skins they wore.

Nor would superstition stop there, but the imagination of the trembling peasants would speedily invest these unscrupulous disturbers of the public peace with the attributes hitherto appropriated to trolls and jotuns.

The incident mentioned in the Volsung Saga, of the sleeping men being found with their wolf-skins hanging to the wall above their heads, is divested of its improbability, if we regard these skins as worn over their armour, and the marvellous in the whole story is reduced to a minimum, when we suppose that Sigmund and Sinfjotli stole these for the purpose of disguising themselves, whilst they lived a life of violence and robbery.

In a similar manner the story of the northern "Beauty and Beast," in Hrolf's Saga Kraka, is rendered less improbable, on the supposition that Bjorn

[p. 39]

was living as an outlaw among the mountain fastnesses in a bearskin dress, which would effectually disguise him--all but his eyes--which would gleam out of the sockets in his hideous visor, unmistakably human. His very name, Bjorn, signifies a bear; and these two circumstances may well have invested a kernel of historic fact with all the romance of fable; and if divested of these supernatural embellishments, the story would resolve itself into the very simple fact of there having been a King Hring of the Updales, who was at variance with his son, and whose son took to the woods, and lived a berserkr life, in company with his mistress, till he was captured and slain by his father.

I think that the circumstance insisted on by the Saga-writers, of the eyes of the person remaining unchanged, is very significant, and points to the fact that the skin was merely drawn over the body as a disguise.

But there was other ground for superstition to fasten on the berserkir, and invest them with supernatural attributes.

No fact in connection with the history of the Northmen is more firmly established, on reliable evidence, than that of the berserkr rage being a species of diabolical possession. The berserkir were said to work

[p. 40]

themselves up into a state of frenzy, in which a demoniacal power came over them, impelling them to acts from which in their sober senses they would have recoiled. They acquired superhuman force, and were as invulnerable and as insensible to pain as the Jansenist convulsionists of S. Medard. No sword would wound them, no fire would barn them, a club alone could destroy them, by breaking their bones, or crushing in their skulls. Their eyes glared as though a flame burned in the sockets, they ground their teeth, and frothed at the mouth; they gnawed at their shield rims, and are said to have sometimes bitten them through, and as they rushed into conflict they yelped as dogs or howled as wolves.[1]

According to the unanimous testimony of the old Norse historians, the berserkr rage was extinguished by baptism, and as Christianity advanced, the number of these berserkir decreased.

But it must not be supposed that this madness or

 [1. Hic (Syraldus) septem filios habebat, tanto veneficiorum usu callentes, ut saepe subitis furoris viribus instincti solerent ore torvum infremere, scuta morsibus attrectare, torridas fauce prunas absumere, extructa quaevis incendia penetrare, nec posset conceptis dementiae motus alio remedii genere quam aut vinculorum injuriis aut caedis humanae piaculo temperari. Tantam illis rabiem site saevitia ingenii sive furiaram ferocitas inspirabat.--Saxo Gramm. VII.]

 [p. 41]

possession came only on those persons who predisposed themselves to be attacked by it; others were afflicted with it, who vainly struggled against its influence, and who deeply lamented their own liability to be seized with these terrible accesses of frenzy. Such was Thorir Ingimund's son, of whom it is said, in the Vatnsdaela Saga, that "at times there came over Thorir berserkr fits, and it was considered a sad misfortune to such a man, as they were quite beyond control."

The manner in which he was cured is remarkable; pointing as it does to the craving in the heathen mind for a better and more merciful creed:--

"Thorgrim of Kornsa had a child by his concubine Vereydr, and, by order of his wife, the child was carried out to perish.

"The brothers (Thorsteinn and Thorir) often met, and it was now the turn of Thorsteinn to visit Thorir, and Thorir accompanied him homeward. On their way Thorsteinn asked Thorir which he thought was the first among the brethren; Thorir answered that the reply was easy, for 'you are above us all in discretion and talent; Jokull is the best in all perilous adventures, but I,' he added, 'I am the least worth of us brothers, because the berserkr fits come over me, quite against

[p. 42]

my will, and I wish that you, my brother, with your shrewdness, would devise some help for me.'

"Thorsteinn said,--'I have heard that our kinsman, Thorgrim, has just suffered his little babe to be carried out, at the instigation of his wife. That is ill done. I think also that it is a grievous matter for you to be different in nature from other men.'

"Thorir asked how he could obtain release from his affliction . . . . Then said Thorsteinn, 'Now will I make a vow to Him who created the sun, for I ween that he is most able to take the ban of you, and I will undertake for His sake, in return, to rescue the babe and to bring it up for him, till He who created man shall take it to Himself-for this I reckon He will do!' After this they left their horses and sought the child, and a thrall of Thorir had found it near the Marram river. They saw that a kerchief had been spread over its face, but it had rumpled it up over its nose; the little thing was all but dead, but they took it up and flitted it home to Thorir's house, and he brought the lad up, and called him Thorkell Rumple; as for the berserkr fits, they came on him no more." (c. 37)

But the most remarkable passages bearing on our subject will be found in the Aigla.

[p. 43]

There was a man, Ulf (the wolf) by name, son of Bjalfi and Hallbera. Ulf was a man so tall and strong that the like of him was not to be seen in the land at that time. And when he was young he was out viking expeditions and harrying . . . He was a great landed proprietor. It was his wont to rise early, and to go about the men's work, or to the smithies, and inspect all his goods and his acres; and sometimes he talked with those men who wanted his advice; for he was a good adviser, he was so clear-headed; however, every day, when it drew towards dusk, he became so savage that few dared exchange a word with him, for he was given to dozing in the afternoon.

"People said that he was much given to changing form (hamrammr), so he was called the evening-wolf, kveldulfr."--(c. 1.) In this and the following passages, I do not consider hamrammr to have its primary signification of actual transformation, but simply to mean subject to fits of diabolical possession, under the influence of which the bodily powers were greatly exaggerated. I shall translate pretty freely from this most interesting Saga, as I consider that the description given in it of Kveldulf in his fits greatly elucidates our subject.

"Kveldulf and Skallagrim got news during summer

[p. 44]

of an expedition. Skallagrim. was the keenest-sighted of men, and he caught sight of the vessel of Hallvard and his brother, and recognized it at once. He followed their course and marked the haven into which they entered at even. Then he returned to his company, and told Kveldulf of what he had seen . . . . Then they busked them and got ready both their boats; in each they put twenty men, Kveldulf steering one and Skallagrim the other, and they rowed in quest of the ship. Now when they came to the place where it was, they lay to. Hallvard and his men had spread an awning over the deck, and were asleep. Now when Kveldulf and his party came upon them, the watchers who were seated at the end of the bridge sprang up and called to the people on board to wake up, for there was danger in the wind. So Hallvard and his men sprang to arms. Then came Kveldulf over the bridge and Skallagrim with him into the ship. Kveldulf had in his hand a cleaver, and he bade his men go through the vessel and hack away the awning. But he pressed on to the quarter-deck. It is said the were-wolf fit came over him and many of his companions. They slow all the men who were before them. Skallagrim did the same as he went round the vessel. He and his father paused not till they

[p. 45]

had cleared it. Now when Kveldulf came upon the quarter-deck he raised his cleaver, and smote Hallvard through helm and head, so that the haft was buried in the flesh; but he dragged it to him so violently that he whisked Hallvard into the air., and flung him overboard. Skallagrim cleared the forecastle and slew Sigtrygg. Many men flung themselves overboard, but Skallagrim's men took to the boat and rowed about, killing all they found. Thus perished Hallvard with fifty men. Skallagrim and his party took the ship and all the goods which had belonged to Hallvard . . . and flitted it and the wares to their own vessel, and then exchanged ships, lading their capture, but quitting their own. After which they filled their old ship with stones, brake it up and sank it. A good breeze sprang up, and they stood out to sea.

It is said of these men in the engagement who were were-wolves, or those on whom came the berserkr rage, that as long as the fit was on them no one could oppose them, they were so strong; but when it had passed off they were feebler than usual. It was the same with Kveldulf when the were-wolf fit went off him--he then felt the exhaustion consequent on the fight, and he was so completely 'done up,' that he was obliged to take to his bed."

[p. 46]

In like manner Skallagrim had his fits of frenzy, taking after his amiable father.

"Thord and his companion were opposed to Skallagrim in the game, and they were too much for him, he wearied, and the game went better with them. But at dusk, after sunset, it went worse with Egill and Thord, for Skallagrim became so strong that he caught up Thord and cast him down, so that he broke his bones, and that was the death of him. Then he caught at Egill. Thorgerd Brak was the name of a servant of Skallagrim, who had been foster-mother to Egill. She was a woman of great stature, strong as a man and a bit of a witch. Brak exclaimed,--'Skallagrim! are you now falling upon your son?' (hamaz yu at syni yinum). Then Skallagrim let go his hold of Egill and clutched at her. She started aside and fled. Skallagrim. followed. They ran out upon Digraness, and she sprang off the headland into the water. Skallagrim cast after her a huge stone which struck her between the shoulders, and she never rose after it. The place is now called Brak's Sound."--(c. 40.)

Let it be observed that in these passages from the Aigla, the words ath hamaz, hamrammr, &c. are used without any intention of conveying the idea of a change

[p. 47]

of bodily shape, though the words taken literally assert it. For they are derived from hamr, a skin or habit; a word which has its representatives in other Aryan languages, and is therefore a primitive word expressive of the skin of a beast.

The Sanskrit ### carmma; the Hindustanee ### cam, hide or skin; and ### camra, leather; the Persian ### game, clothing, disguise; the Gothic ham or hams, skin; and even the Italian camicia, and the French chemise, are cognate words.[1]

It seems probable accordingly that the verb ath hamaz was first applied to those who wore the skins of savage animals, and went about the country as freebooters; but that popular superstition soon invested them with supernatural powers, and they were supposed to assume the forms of the beasts in whose skins they were disguised. The verb then acquired the significance "to become a were-wolf, to change shape." It did not stop there, but went through another change of meaning, and was finally applied to those who were afflicted with paroxysms of madness or demoniacal possession.

This was not the only word connected with were-wolves

 [1. I shall have more to say on this subject in the chapter on the Mythology of Lycanthropy.]

 [p. 48]

which helped on the superstition. The word vargr, a wolf, had a double significance, which would be the means of originating many a were-wolf story. Vargr is the same as u-argr, restless; argr being the same as the Anglo-Saxon earg. Vargr had its double signification in Norse. It signified a wolf, and also a godless man. This vargr is the English were, in the word were-wolf, and the garou or varou in French. The Danish word for were-wolf is var-ulf, the Gothic vaira-ulf. In the Romans de Garin, it is "Leu warou, sanglante beste." In the Vie de S. Hildefons by Gauthier de Coinsi,--

	 
		Cil lon desve, cil lou garol,
		 Ce sunt deable, que saul
		 Ne puent estre de nos mordre.
		
		 Here the loup-garou is a devil. The Anglo-Saxons regarded him as an evil man: wearg, a scoundrel; Gothic varys, a fiend. But very often the word meant no more than an outlaw. Pluquet in his Contes Populaires tells us that the ancient Norman laws said of the criminals condemned to outlawry for certain offences, Wargus esto: be an outlaw!

In like manner the Lex Ripuaria, tit. 87, "Wargus sit, hoe est expulsus." In the laws of Canute, he is called verevulf. (Leges Canuti, Schmid, i. 148.) And

[p. 49]

the Salic Law (tit. 57) orders: "Si quis corpus jam sepultum effoderit, aut expoliaverit, wargus sit." "If any one shall have dug up or despoiled an already buried corpse, let him be a varg."

Sidonius Apollinaris. says, "Unam feminam quam forte vargorum, hoc enim nomine indigenas latrunculos nuncupant," as though the common name by which those who lived a freebooter life were designated, was varg.

In like manner Palgrave assures us in his Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth, that among the Anglo, Saxons an utlagh, or out-law, was said to have the head of a wolf. If then the term vargr was applied at one time to a wolf, at another to an outlaw who lived the life of a wild beast, away from the haunts of men "he shall be driven away as a wolf, and chased so far as men chase wolves farthest," was the legal form of sentence--it is certainly no matter of wonder that stories of out-laws should have become surrounded with mythical accounts of their transformation into wolves.

But the very idiom of the Norse was calculated to foster this superstition. The Icelanders had curious expressions which are sufficiently likely to have produced misconceptions.

 [1. SIDONIUS APOLLINARIS: Opera, lib. vi. ep. 4.]

 [p. 50]

Snorri not only relates that Odin changed himself into another form, but he adds that by his spells he turned his enemies into boars. In precisely the same manner does a hag, Ljot, in the Vatnsdaela Saga, say that she could have turned Thorsteinn and Jokull into boars to run about with the wild beasts (c. xxvi.); and the expression vertha at gjalti, or at gjoltum, to become a boar, is frequently met with in the Sagas.

"Thereupon came Thorarinn and his men upon them, and Nagli led the way; but when he saw weapons drawn he was frightened, and ran away up the mountain, and became a boar. . . . And Thorarinn and his men took to run, so as to help Nagli, lest he should tumble off the cliffs into the sea" (Eyrbyggja Saga, c. xviii.) A similar expression occurs in the Gisla Saga Surssonar, p. 50. In the Hrolfs Saga Kraka, we meet with a troll in boar's shape, to whom divine honours are paid; and in the Kjalnessinga Saga, c. xv., men are likened to boars--"Then it began to fare with them as it fares with boars when they fight each other, for in the same manner dropped their foam." The true signification of vertha at gjalti is to be in such a state of fear as to lose the senses; but it is sufficiently peculiar to have given rise to superstitious stories.

[p. 51]

I have dwelt at some length on the Northern myths relative to were-wolves and animal transformations, because I have considered the investigation of these all-important towards the elucidation of the truth which lies at the bottom of mediaeval superstition, and which is nowhere so obtainable as through the Norse literature. As may be seen from the passages quoted above at length, and from an examination of those merely referred to, the result arrived at is pretty conclusive, and may be summed up in very few words.

The whole superstructure of fable and romance relative to transformation into wild beasts, reposes simply on this basis of truth--that among the Scandinavian nations there existed a form of madness or possession, under the influence of which men acted as though they were changed into wild and savage brutes, howling, foaming at the mouth, ravening for blood and slaughter, ready to commit any act of atrocity, and as irresponsible for their actions as the wolves and bears, in whose skins they often equipped themselves.

The manner in which this fact became invested with supernatural adjuncts I have also pointed out, to wit, the change in the significance of the word designating the madness, the double meaning of the word vargr, and

[p. 52]

above all, the habits and appearance of the maniacs. We shall see instances of berserkr rage reappearing in the middle ages, and late down into our own times, not exclusively in the North, but throughout France, Germany, and England, and instead of rejecting the accounts given by chroniclers as fabulous, because there is much connected with them which seems to be fabulous, we shall be able to refer them to their true origin.

It may be accepted as an axiom, that no superstition of general acceptance is destitute of a foundation of truth; and if we discover the myth of the were-wolf to be widely spread, not only throughout Europe, but through the whole world, we may rest assured that there is a solid core of fact, round which popular superstition has crystallized; and that fact is the existence of a species of madness, during the accesses of which the person afflicted believes himself to be a wild beast, and acts like a wild beast.

In some cases this madness amounts apparently to positive possession, and the diabolical acts into which the possessed is impelled are so horrible, that the blood curdles in reading them, and it is impossible to recall them without a shudder.

[p. 53]

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER V.

 

THE WERE-WOLF IN THE MIDDLE-AGES.

Stories from Olaus Magnus of Livonian Were-wolves--Story from Bishop Majolus--Story of Albertus Pericofcius--Similar occurrence at Prague--Saint Patrick--Strange incident related by John of Nuremberg--Bisclaveret--Courland Were-wolves--Pierre Vidal--Pavian Lycanthropist--Bodin's Stories--Forestus' Account of a Lycanthropist--Neapolitan Were-wolf

OLAUS MAGNUS relates that--"In Prussia, Livonia, and Lithuania, although the inhabitants suffer considerably from the rapacity of wolves throughout the year, in that these animals rend their cattle, which are scattered in great numbers through the woods, whenever they stray in the very least, yet this is not regarded by them as such a serious matter as what they endure from men turned into wolves.

"On the feast of the Nativity of Christ, at night, such a multitude of wolves transformed from men gather together in a certain spot, arranged among themselves,

[p. 54]

and then spread to rage with wondrous ferocity against human beings, and those animals which are not wild, that the natives of these regions suffer more detriment from these, than they do from true and natural wolves; for when a human habitation has been detected by them isolated in the woods, they besiege it with atrocity, striving to break in the doors, and in the event of their doing so, they devour all the human beings, and every animal which is found within. They burst into the beer-cellars, and there they empty the tuns of beer or mead, and pile up the empty casks one above another in the middle of the cellar, thus showing their difference from natural and genuine wolves. . . . Between Lithuania, Livonia, and Courland are the walls of a certain old ruined castle. At this spot congregate thousands, on a fixed occasion, and try their agility in jumping. Those who are unable to bound over the wall, as; is often the case with the fattest, are fallen upon with scourges by the captains and slain."[1] Olaus relates also in c. xlvii. the story of a certain nobleman who was travelling through a large forest with some peasants in his retinue who dabbled in the black art. They found no house

 [1. OLAUS MAGNUS: Historia de Vent. Septent. Basil. 15, lib. xviii. cap. 45.]

 [p. 55]

where they could lodge for the night, and were well-nigh famished. Then one of the peasants offered, if all the rest would hold their tongues as to what he should do, that he would bring them a lamb from a distant flock.

He thereupon retired into the depths of the forest and changed his form into that of a wolf, fell upon the flock, and brought a lamb to his companions in his mouth. They received it with gratitude. Then he retired once more into the thicket, and transformed himself back again into his human shape.

The wife of a nobleman in Livonia expressed her doubts to one of her slaves whether it were possible for man or woman thus to change shape. The servant at once volunteered to give her evidence of the possibility. He left the room, and in another moment a wolf was observed running over the country. The dogs followed him, and notwithstanding his resistance, tore out one of his eyes. Next day the slave appeared before his mistress blind of an eye.

Bp. Majolus[1] and Caspar Peucer[2] relate the following circumstances of the Livonians:--

 [1. MAJOLI Episc. Vulturoniensis Dier. Canicul. Helenopolis, 1612, tom. ii. colloq. 3.

2. CASPAR PEUCER: Comment. de Praecipuis Divin. Generibus, 1591, p. 169.]

 [p. 56]

At Christmas a boy lame of a leg goes round the country summoning the devil's followers, who are countless, to a general conclave. Whoever remains behind, or goes reluctantly, is scourged by another with an iron whip till the blood flows, and his traces are left in blood. The human form vanishes, and the whole multitude become wolves. Many thousands assemble. Foremost goes the leader armed with an iron whip, and the troop follow, "firmly convinced in their imaginations that they are transformed into wolves." They fall upon herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, but they have no power to slay men. When they come to a river, the leader smites the water with his scourge, and it divides, leaving a dry path through the midst, by which the pack may go. The transformation lasts during twelve days, at the expiration of which period the wolf-skin vanishes, and the human form reappears. This superstition was expressly forbidden by the church. "Credidisti, quod quidam credere solent, ut illae quae a vulgo Parcae vocantur, ipsae, vel sint vel possint hoc facere quod creduntur, id est, dum aliquis homo nascitur, et tunc valeant illum designare ad hoc quod velint, ut quandocunque homo ille voluerit, in lupum transformari possit, quod vulgaris stultitia,

[p. 57]

 werwolf vocat, aut in aliam aliquam figuram?"--Ap. Burchard. (d. 1024). In like manner did S. Boniface preach against those who believed superstitiously in it strigas et fictos lupos." (Serm. apud Mart. et Durand. ix. 217.)

In a dissertation by Muller[1] we learn, on the authority of Cluverius and Dannhaverus (Acad. Homilet. p. ii.), that a certain Albertus Pericofcius in Muscovy was wont to tyrannize over and harass his subjects in the most unscrupulous manner. One night when he was absent from home, his whole herd of cattle, acquired by extortion, perished. On his return he was informed of his loss, and the wicked man broke out into the most horrible blasphemies, exclaiming, "Let him who has slain, eat; if God chooses, let him devour me as well."

As he spoke, drops of blood fell to earth, and the nobleman, transformed into a wild dog, rushed upon his dead cattle, tore and mangled the carcasses and began to devour them; possibly he may be devouring them still (ac forsan hodie que pascitur). His wife, then near her confinement, died of fear. Of these circumstances there were not only ear but also eye witnesses. (Non ab auritis tantum, sed et ocidatis accepi, quod

 [1. De Lykanthrupia. Lipsiae, 1736.]

 [p. 58]

 narro). Similarly it is related of a nobleman in the neighbourhood of Prague, that he robbed his subjects of their goods and reduced them to penury through his exactions. He took the last cow from a poor widow with five children, but as a judgment, all his own cattle died. He then broke into fearful oaths, and God transformed him into a dog: his human head, however, remained.

S. Patrick is said to have changed Vereticus, king of Wales, into a wolf, and S. Natalis, the abbot, to have pronounced anathema upon an illustrious family in Ireland; in consequence of which, every male and female take the form of wolves for seven years and live in the forests and career over the bogs, howling mournfully, and appeasing their hunger upon the sheep of the peasants.[1] A duke of Prussia, according to Majolus, had a countryman brought for sentence before him, because he had devoured his neighbour's cattle. The fellow was an ill-favoured, deformed man, with great wounds in his face, which he had received from dogs' bites whilst he had been in his wolf's form. It was believed that he changed shape twice in the year, at Christmas and at Midsummer. He was said to exhibit much uneasiness

 [1. PHIL. HARTUNG: Conciones Tergeminae, pars ii. p. 367.]

 [p. 59]

and discomfort when the wolf-hair began to break out and his bodily shape to change.

He was kept long in prison and closely watched, lest he should become a were-wolf during his confinement and attempt to escape, but nothing remarkable took place. If this is the same individual as that mentioned by Olaus Magnus, as there seems to be a probability, the poor fellow was burned alive.

John of Nuremberg relates the following curious story.[1] A priest was once travelling in a strange country, and lost his way in a forest. Seeing a fire, he made towards it, and beheld a wolf seated over it. The wolf addressed him in human-voice, and bade him not fear, as "he was of the Ossyrian race, of which a man and a woman were doomed to spend a certain number of years in wolf's form. Only after seven years might they return home and resume their former shapes, if they were still alive." He begged the priest to visit and console his sick wife, and to give her the last sacraments. This the priest consented to do, after some hesitation, and only when convinced of the beasts being human beings, by observing that the wolf used his front paws as hands, and when he saw the

 [1. JOHN EUS. NIERENBERG de Miracul. in Europa, lib. ii. cap. 42.]

 [p. 60]

she-wolf peel off her wolf-skin from her head to her navel, exhibiting the features of an aged woman.

Marie de France says in the Lais du Bisclaveret:--[1]

	 
		Bisclaveret ad nun en Bretan
		 Garwall Papelent li Norman.
		 *    *    *    *
		 Jadis le poet-hum oir
		 Et souvent suleit avenir,
		 Humes pluseirs Garwall deviendrent
		 E es boscages meisun tindrent
		
		 There is an interesting paper by Rhanaeus, on the Courland were-wolves, in the Breslauer Sammlung.[2] The author says,--"There are too many examples derived not merely from hearsay, but received on indisputable evidence, for us to dispute the fact, that Satan--if we do not deny that such a being exists, and that he has his work in the children of darkness--holds the Lycanthropists in his net in three ways:--

"1. They execute as wolves certain acts, such as seizing a sheep, or destroying cattle, &c., not changed into wolves, which no scientific man in Courland believes, but in their human frames, and with their

 [1. An epitome of this curious were-wolf tale will be found in Ellis's Early English Metrical Romances.

2. Supplement III. Curieuser und nutzbarer Anmerkungen von Natur und Kunstgeschichten, gesammelt von Kanold. 1728.]

 [p. 61]

human limbs, yet in such a state of phantasy and hallucination, that they believe themselves transformed into wolves, and are regarded as such by others suffering under similar hallucination, and in this manner run these people in packs as wolves, though not true wolves.

"2. They imagine, in deep sleep or dream, that they injure the cattle, and this without leaving their conch; but it is their master who does, in their stead, what their fancy points out, or suggests to him.

"3. The evil one drives natural wolves to do some act, and then pictures it so well to the sleeper, immovable in his place, both in dreams and at awaking, that he believes the act to have been committed by himself."

Rhanaeus, under these heads, relates three stories, which he believes be has on good authority. The first is of a gentleman starting on a journey, who came upon a wolf engaged in the act of seizing a sheep in his own flock; he fired at it, and wounded it, so that it fled howling to the thicket. When the gentleman returned from his expedition he found the whole neighbourhood impressed with the belief that he had, on a given day and hour, shot at one of his tenants, a publican, Mickel. [p. 62] On inquiry, the man's Wife, called Lebba, related the following circumstances, which were fully corroborated by numerous witnesses:--When her husband had sown his rye he had consulted with his wife how he was to get some meat, so as to have a good feast. The woman urged him on no account to steal from his landlord's flock, because it was guarded by fierce dogs. He, however, rejected her advice, and Mickel fell upon his landlord's sheep, but he had suffered and had come limping home, and in his rage at the ill success of his attempt, had fallen upon his own horse and had bitten its throat completely through. This took place in the year 1684.

In 1684, a man was about to fire upon a pack of wolves, when he heard from among the troop a voice exclaiming--"Gossip! Gossip! don't fire. No good will come of it."

The third story is as follows:--A lycanthropist was brought before a judge and accused of witchcraft, but as nothing could be proved against him, the judge ordered one of his peasants to visit the man in his prison, and to worm the truth out of him, and to persuade the prisoner to assist him in revenging himself upon another peasant who had injured him; and this

[p. 63]

was to be effected by destroying one of the man's cows; but the peasant was to urge the prisoner to do it secretly, and, if possible, in the disguise of a wolf. The fellow undertook the task, but he had great difficulty in persuading the prisoner to fall in with his wishes: eventually, however, he succeeded. Next morning the cow was found in its stall frightfully mangled, but the prisoner had not left his cell: for the watch, who had been placed to observe him, declared that he had spent the night in profound sleep, and that he had only at one time made a slight motion with his head and hands and feet.

Wierius and Forestus quote Gulielmus Brabantinus as an authority for the fact, that a man of high position had been so possessed by the evil one, that often during the year he fell into a condition in which he believed himself to be turned into a wolf, and at that time he roved in the woods and tried to seize and devour little children, but that at last, by God's mercy, he recovered his senses.

Certainly the famous Pierre Vidal, the Don Quixote of Provencal troubadours, must have had a touch of this madness, when, after having fallen in love with a lady of Carcassone, named Loba, or the Wolfess, the excess

[p. 64]

of his passion drove him over the country, howling like a wolf, and demeaning himself more like an irrational beast than a rational man.

He commemorates his lupine madness in the poem A tal Donna:--[1]

	 
		Crowned with immortal joys I mount
		 The proudest emperors above,
		 For I am honoured with the love
		 Of the fair daughter of a count.
		 A lace from Na Raymbauda's hand
		 I value more than all the land
		 Of Richard, with his Poictou,
		 His rich Touraine and famed Anjou.
		     When loup-garou the rabble call me,
		 When vagrant shepherds hoot,
		 Pursue, and buffet me to boot,
		 It doth not for a moment gall me;
		 I seek not palaces or halls,
		 Or refuge when the winter falls;
		 Exposed to winds and frosts at night,
		 My soul is ravished with delight.
		     Me claims my she-wolf (Loba) so divine:
		 And justly she that claim prefers,
		 For, by my troth, my life is hers
		 More than another's, more than mine.
		
		 Job Fincelius[2] relates the sad story of a farmer of Pavia, who, as a wolf, fell upon many men in the open country and tore them to pieces. After much trouble

 [1. BRUCE WHYTE: Histoire des Langues Romaines, tom. ii. p. 248.

2. FINCELIUS de Mirabilibus, lib. xi.]

 [p. 65]

the maniac was caught, and he then assured his captors that the only difference which existed between himself and a natural wolf, was that in a true wolf the hair grew outward, whilst in him it struck inward. In order to put this assertion to the proof, the magistrates, themselves most certainly cruel and bloodthirsty wolves, cut off his arms and legs; the poor wretch died of the mutilation. This took place in 1541. The idea of the skin being reversed is a very ancient one: versipellis occurs as a name of reproach in Petronius, Lucilius, and Plautus, and resembles the Norse hamrammr.

Fincelius relates also that, in 1542, there was such a multitude of were-wolves about Constantinople that the Emperor, accompanied by his guard, left the city to give them a severe correction, and slew one hundred and fifty of them.

Spranger speaks of three young ladies who attacked a labourer, under the form of cats, and were wounded by him. They were found bleeding in their beds next morning.

Majolus relates that a man afflicted with lycanthropy was brought to Pomponatius. The poor fellow had been found buried in hay, and when people approached, he called to them to flee, as he was a were

[p. 66]

wolf, and would rend them. The country-folk wanted to flay him, to discover whether the hair grew inwards, but Pomponatius rescued the man and cured him.

Bodin tells some were-wolf stories on good authority; it is a pity that the good authorities of Bodin were such liars, but that, by the way. He says that the Royal Procurator-General Bourdin had assured him that he had shot a wolf, and that the arrow had stuck in the beast's thigh. A few hours after, the arrow was found in the thigh of a man in bed. In Vernon, about the year 1566, the witches and warlocks gathered in great multitudes, under the shape of cats. Four or five men were attacked in a lone place by a number of these beasts. The men stood their ground with the utmost heroism, succeeded in slaying one puss, and in wounding many others. Next day a number of wounded women were found in the town, and they gave the judge an accurate account of all the circumstances connected with their wounding.

Bodin quotes Pierre Marner, the author of a treatise on sorcerers, as having witnessed in Savoy the transformation of men into wolves. Nynauld[1] relates that in a village of Switzerland, near Lucerne, a peasant was

[1. NYNAULD, De la Lycanthropie. Paris, 1615, p. 52.]

[p. 67]

attacked by a wolf, whilst he was hewing timber; he defended himself, and smote off a fore-leg of the beast. The moment that the blood began to flow the wolf's form changed, and he recognized a woman without her arm. She was burnt alive.

An evidence that beasts are transformed witches is to be found in their having no tails. When the devil takes human form, however, he keeps his club-foot of the Satyr, as a token by which he may be recognized. So animals deficient in caudal appendages are to be avoided, as they are witches in disguise. The Thingwald should consider the case of the Manx cats in its next session.

Forestus, in his chapter on maladies of the brain, relates a circumstance which came under his own observation, in the middle of the sixteenth century, at Alcmaar in the Netherlands. A peasant there was attacked every spring with a fit of insanity; under the influence of this he rushed about the churchyard, ran into the church, jumped over the benches, danced, was filled with fury, climbed up, descended, and never remained quiet. He carried a long staff in his hand, with which he drove away the dogs, which flew at him and wounded him, so that his thighs were covered with scars. His face was pale, his eyes deep sunk in their

[p. 68]

sockets. Forestus pronounces the man to be a lycanthropist, but he does not say that the poor fellow believed himself to be transformed into a wolf. In reference to this case, however, he mentions that of a Spanish nobleman who believed himself to be changed into a bear, and who wandered filled with fury among the woods.

Donatus of Altomare[1] affirms that he saw a man in the streets of Naples, surrounded by a ring of people, who in his were-wolf frenzy had dug up a corpse and was carrying off the leg upon his shoulders. This was in the middle of the sixteenth century.

 [1. De Medend. Human. Corp. lib. i. cap. 9.]

 [p. 69]

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VI.

 

A CHAMBER OF HORRORS.

Pierre Bourgot and Michel Verdung--'Me Hermit of S. Bonnot--The Gandillon Family--Thievenne Paget--The Tailor of Chalons--Roulet.

IN December, 1521, the Inquisitor-General for the diocese of Besancon, Boin by name, heard a case of a sufficiently terrible nature to produce a profound sensation of alarm in the neighbourhood. Two men were under accusation of witchcraft and cannibalism. Their names were Pierre Bourgot, or Peter the Great, as the people had nicknamed him from his stature, and Michel Verdung. Peter had not been long under trial, before he volunteered a full confession of his crimes. It amounted to this:--

About nineteen years before, on the occasion of a New Year's market at Poligny, a terrible storm had

[p. 70]

broken over the country, and among other mischiefs done by it, was the scattering of Pierre's flock. "In vain," said the prisoner, "did I labour, in company with other peasants, to find the sheep and bring them together. I went everywhere in search of them.

"Then there rode up three black horsemen, and the last said to me: 'Whither away? you seem to be in trouble?'

"I related to him my misfortune with my flock. He bade me pluck up my spirits, and promised that his master would henceforth take charge of and protect my flock., if I would only rely upon him. He told me, as well, that I should find my strayed sheep very shortly, and he promised to provide me with money. We agreed to meet again in four or five days. My flock I soon found collected together. At my second meeting I learned of the stranger that he was a servant of the devil. I forswore God and our Lady and all saints and dwellers in Paradise. I renounced Christianity, kissed his left hand, which was black and ice-cold as that of a corpse. Then I fell on my knees and gave in my allegiance to Satan. I remained in the service of the devil for two years, and never entered a church before the end of mass, or at all events till the holy water had

[p. 71]

been sprinkled, according to the desire of my master, whose name I afterwards learned was Moyset.

"All anxiety about my flock was removed, for the devil had undertaken to protect it and to keep off the wolves.

"This freedom from care, however, made me begin to tire of the devil's service, and I recommenced my attendance at church, till I was brought back into obedience to the evil one by Michel Verdung, when I renewed my compact on the understanding that I should be supplied with money.

"In a wood near Chastel Charnon we met with many others whom I did not recognize; we danced, and each had in his or her hand a green taper with a blue flame. Still under the delusion that I should obtain money, Michel persuaded me to move with the greatest celerity, and in order to do this, after I had stripped myself, he smeared me with a salve, and I believed myself then to be transformed into a wolf. I was at first somewhat horrified at my four wolf's feet, and the fur with which I was covered all at once, but I found that I could now travel with the speed of the wind. This could not have taken place without the help of our powerful master, who was present during our excursion, though I did not

[p. 72]

perceive him till I had recovered my human form. Michel did the same as myself.

"When we had been one or two hours in this condition of metamorphosis, Michel smeared us again, and quick as thought we resumed our human forms. The salve was given us by our masters; to me it was given by Moyset, to Michel by his own master, Guillemin."

Pierre declared that he felt no exhaustion after his excursions, though the judge inquired particularly whether he felt that prostration after his unusual exertion, of which witches usually complained. Indeed the exhaustion consequent on a were-wolf raid was so great that the lycanthropist was often confined to his bed for days, and could hardly move hand or foot, much in the same way as the berserkir and ham rammir in the North were utterly prostrated after their fit had left them.

In one of his were-wolf runs, Pierre fell upon a boy of six or seven years old, with his teeth, intending to rend and devour him, but the lad screamed so loud that he was obliged to beat a retreat to his clothes, and smear himself again, in order to recover his form and escape detection. He and Michel, however, one day tore to

[p. 73]

pieces a woman as she was gathering peas; and a M. de Chusnee, who came to her rescue, was attacked by them and killed.

On another occasion they fell upon a little girl of four years old, and ate her up, with the exception of one arm. Michel thought the flesh most delicious.

Another girl was strangled by them, and her blood lapped up. Of a third they ate merely a portion of the stomach. One evening at dusk, Pierre leaped over a garden wall, and came upon a little maiden of nine years old, engaged upon the weeding of the garden beds. She fell on her knees and entreated Pierre to spare her; but he snapped the neck, and left her a corpse, lying among her flowers. On this occasion he does not seem to have been in his wolf's shape. He fell upon a goat which he found in the field of Pierre Lerugen, and bit it in the throat, but he killed it with a knife.

Michel was transformed in his clothes into a wolf, but Pierre was obliged to strip, and the metamorphosis could not take place with him unless he were stark naked.

He was unable to account for the manner in which the hair vanished when he recovered his natural condition.

[p. 74]

The statements of Pierre Bourgot were fully corroborated by Michel Verdung.

Towards the close of the autumn of 1573, the peasants of the neighbourhood of Dole, in Franche Comte, were authorized by the Court of Parliament at Dole, to hunt down the were-wolves which infested the country. The authorization was as follows:-- "According to the advertisement made to the sovereign Court of Parliament at Dole, that, in the territories of Espagny, Salvange, Courchapon, and the neighbouring villages, has often been seen and met, for some time past, a were-wolf, who, it is said, has already seized and carried off several little children, so that they have not been seen since, and since he has attacked and done injury in the country to some horsemen, who kept him of only with great difficulty and danger to their persons: the said Court, desiring to prevent any greater danger, has permitted, and does permit, those who are abiding or dwelling in the said places and others, notwithstanding all edicts concerning the chase, to assemble with pikes, halberts, arquebuses, and sticks, to chase and to pursue the said were-wolf in every place where they may find or seize him; to tie and to kill, without incurring any pains or penalties. . . . Given at the meeting of

[p. 75]

the said Court, on the thirteenth day of the month September, 1573." It was some time, however, before the loup-garou was caught.

In a retired spot near Amanges, half shrouded in trees, stood a small hovel of the rudest construction; its roof was of turf, and its walls were blotched with lichen. The garden to this cot was run to waste, and the fence round it broken through. As the hovel was far from any road, and was only reached by a path over moorland and through forest, it was seldom visited, and the couple who lived in it were not such as would make many friends. The man, Gilles Garnier, was a sombre, ill-looking fellow, who walked in a stooping attitude, and whose pale face, livid complexion, and deep-set eyes under a pair of coarse and bushy brows, which met across the forehead, were sufficient to repel any one from seeking his acquaintance. Gilles seldom spoke, and when he did it was in the broadest patois of his country. His long grey beard and retiring habits procured for him the name of the Hermit of St. Bonnot, though no one for a moment attributed to him any extraordinary amount of sanctity.

The hermit does not seem to have been suspected for some time, but one day, as some of the peasants of [p. 76] Chastenoy were returning home from their work, through the forest, the screams of a child and the deep baying of a wolf, attracted their notice, and on running in the direction whence the cries sounded, they found a little girl defending herself against a monstrous creature, which was attacking her tooth and nail, and had already wounded her severely in five places. As the peasants came up, the creature fled on all fours into the gloom of the thicket; it was so dark that it could not be identified with certainty, and whilst some affirmed that it was a wolf, others thought they had recognized the features of the hermit. This took place on the 8th November.

On the 14th a little boy of ten years old was missing, who had been last seen at a short distance from the gates of Dole.

The hermit of S. Bonnot was now seized and brought to trial at Dole, when the following evidence was extracted from him and his wife, and substantiated in many particulars by witnesses.

On the last day of Michaelmas, under the form of a wolf, at a mile from Dole, in the farm of Gorge, a vineyard belonging to Chastenoy, near the wood of La Serre, Gilles Gamier had attacked a little maiden of

[p. 77]

ten or twelve years old, and had slain her with his teeth and claws; he had then drawn her into the wood, stripped her, gnawed the flesh from her legs and arms, and had enjoyed his meal so much, that, inspired with conjugal affection, he had brought some of the flesh home for his wife Apolline.

Eight days after the feast of All Saints, again in the form of a were-wolf, he had seized another girl, near the meadow land of La Pouppe, on the territory of Athume and Chastenoy, and was on the point of slaying and devouring her, when three persons came up, and he was compelled to escape. On the fourteenth day after All Saints, also as a wolf, he had attacked a boy of ten years old, a mile from Dole, between Gredisans and Menote, and had strangled him. On that occasion he had eaten all the flesh off his legs and arms, and had also devoured a great part of the belly; one of the legs he had rent completely from the trunk with his fangs.

On the Friday before the last feast of S. Bartholomew, he had seized a boy of twelve or thirteen, under a large pear-trees near the wood of the village Perrouze, and had drawn him into the thicket and killed him, intending to eat him as he had eaten the other children, but the approach of men hindered him

[p. 78]

from fulfilling his intention. The boy was, however, quite dead, and the men who came up declared that Gilles appeared as a man and not as a wolf. The hermit of S. Bonnot was sentenced to be dragged to the place of public execution, and there to be burned alive, a sentence which was rigorously carried out.

In this instance the poor maniac fully believed that actual transformation into a wolf took place; he was apparently perfectly reasonable on other points, and quite conscious of the acts he had committed.

We come now to a more remarkable circumstance, the affliction of a whole family with the same form of insanity. Our information is derived from Boguet's Discours de Sorciers, 1603-1610.

Pernette Gandillon was a poor girl in the Jura, who in 1598 ran about the country on all fours, in the belief that she was a wolf. One day as she was ranging the country in a fit of lycanthropic madness, she came upon two children who were plucking wild strawberries. Filled with a sudden passion for blood, she flew at the little girl and would have brought her down, had not her brother, a lad of four years old, defended her lustily with a knife. Pernette, however, wrenched the weapon from his tiny hand, flung him down and gashed his

[p. 79]

throat, so that he died of the wound. Pernette was tom to pieces by the people in their rage and horror.

Directly after, Pierre, the brother of Pernette Gandillon, was accused of witchcraft. He was charged with having led children to the sabbath, having made hail, and having run about the country in the form of a wolf. The transformation was effected by means of a salve which he had received from the devil. He had on one occasion assumed the form of a hare, but usually he appeared as a wolf, and his skin became covered with shaggy grey hair. He readily acknowledged that the charges brought against him were well founded, and he allowed that he had, during the period of his transformation, fallen on, and devoured, both beasts and human beings. When he desired to recover his true form, he rolled himself in the dewy grass. His son Georges asserted that he had also been anointed with the salve, and had gone to the sabbath in the shape of a wolf. According to his own testimony, he had fallen upon two goats in one of his expeditions.

One Maundy-Thursday night he had lain for three hours in his bed in a cataleptic state, and at the end of that time had sprung out of bed. During this period he had been in the form of a wolf to the witches' sabbath.

[p. 80]

His sister Antoinnette confessed that she had made hail, and that she had sold herself to the devil, who had appeared to her in the shape of a black he-goat. She had been to the sabbath on several occasions.

Pierre and Georges in prison behaved as maniacs, running on all fours about their cells and howling dismally. Their faces, arms, and legs were frightfully scarred with the wounds they had received from dogs when they had been on their raids. Boguet accounts for the transformation not taking place, by the fact of their not having the necessary salves by them.

All three, Pierre, Georges, and Antoinnette, were hung and burned.

Thievenne Paget, who was a witch of the most unmistakable character, was also frequently changed into a she-wolf, according to her own confession, in which state she had often accompanied the devil over hill and dale, slaying cattle, and falling on and devouring children. The same thing may be said of Clauda Isan Prost, a lame woman, Clauda Isan Guillaume, and Isan Roquet, who owned to the murder of five children.

On the 14th of December, in the same year as the execution of the Gandillon family (1598), a tailor of Chalons was sentenced to the flames by the Parliament

[p. 81]

of Paris for lycanthropy. This wretched man had decoyed children into his shop, or attacked them in the gloaming when they strayed in the woods, had torn them with his teeth, and killed them, after which he seems calmly to have dressed their flesh as ordinary meat, and to have eaten it with great relish. The number of little innocents whom he destroyed is unknown. A whole cask full of bones was discovered in his house. The man was perfectly hardened, and the details of his trial were so full of horrors and abominations of all kinds, that the judges ordered the documents to be burned.

Again in 1598, a year memorable in the annals of lycanthropy, a trial took place in Angers, the details of which are very terrible.

In a wild and unfrequented spot near Caude, some countrymen came one day upon the corpse of a boy of fifteen, horribly mutilated and bespattered with blood. As the men approached, two wolves, which had been rending the body, bounded away into the thicket. The men gave chase immediately, following their bloody tracks till they lost them; when suddenly crouching among the bushes, his teeth chattering with fear, they found a man half naked, with long hair and beard, and with his hands dyed in blood. His nails

[p. 82]

were long as claws, and were clotted with fresh gore, and shreds of human flesh.

This is one of the most puzzling and peculiar cases which come under our notice.

The wretched man, whose name was Roulet, of his own accord stated that he had fallen upon the lad and had killed him by smothering him, and that he had been prevented from devouring the body completely by the arrival of men on the spot.

Roulet proved on investigation to be a beggar from house to house, in the most abject state of poverty. His companions in mendicity were his brother John and his cousin Julien. He had been given lodging out of charity in a neighbouring village, but before his apprehension he had been absent for eight days.

Before the judges, Roulet acknowledged that he was able to transform himself into a wolf by means of a salve which his parents had given him. When questioned about the two wolves which had been seen leaving the corpse, he said that he knew perfectly well who they were, for they were his companions, Jean and Julian, who possessed the same secret as himself. He was shown the clothes he had worn on the day of his seizure, and he recognized them immediately; he described the boy

[p. 83]

whom he had murdered, gave the date correctly, indicated the precise spot where the deed had been done, and recognized the father of the boy as the man who had first run up when the screams of the lad had been heard. In prison, Roulet behaved like an idiot. When seized, his belly was distended and hard; in prison he drank one evening a whole pailful of water, and from that moment refused to eat or drink.

His parents, on inquiry, proved to be respectable and pious people, and they proved that his brother John and his cousin Julien had been engaged at a distance on the day of Roulet's apprehension.

"What is your name, and what your estate?" asked the judge, Pierre Herault.

"My name is Jacques Roulet, my age thirty-five; I am poor, and a mendicant."

"What are you accused of having done?"

"Of being a thief--of having offended God. My parents gave me an ointment; I do not know its composition."

"When rubbed with this ointment do you become a wolf?"

"No; but for all that, I killed and ate the child Cornier: I was a wolf."

[p. 84]

"Were you dressed as a wolf?"

"I was dressed as I am now. I had my hands and my face bloody, because I had been eating the flesh of the said child."

"Do your hands and feet become paws of a wolf?"

"Yes, they do."

"Does your head become like that of a wolf-your mouth become larger?"

"I do not know how my head was at the time; I used my teeth; my head was as it is to-day. I have wounded and eaten many other little children; I have also been to the sabbath."

The lieutenant criminel sentenced Roulet to death. He, however, appealed to the Parliament at Paris; and this decided that as there was more folly in the poor idiot than malice and witchcraft, his sentence of death should be commuted to two years' imprisonment in a madhouse, that he might be instructed in the knowledge of God, whom he had forgotten in his utter poverty.[1]

 [1. "La cour du Parliament, par arret, mist l'appellation et la sentence dont il avoit este appel au neant, et, neanmoins, ordonna que le dit Roulet serait mis a l'hospital Saint Germain des Pres, ou on a accoustume de mettre les folz, pour y demeurer l'espace de deux ans, afin d'y estre instruit et redresse tant de son esprit, que ramene a la cognoissance de Dieu, que l'extreme pauvrete lui avoit fait mescognoistre."]

 [p. 85]

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER VII.

 

JEAN GRENIER

On the Sand-dunes--A Wolf attacks Marguerite Poirier--Jean Grenier brought to Trial--His Confessions--Charges of Cannibalism proved--His Sentence--Behaviour in the Monastery--Visit of Del'ancre.

ONE fine afternoon in the spring, some village girls were tending their sheep on the sand-dunes which intervene between the vast forests of pine covering the greater portion of the present department of Landes in the south of France, and the sea.

The brightness of the sky, the freshness of the air puffing up off the blue twinkling Bay of Biscay, the hum or song of the wind as it made rich music among the pines which stood like a green uplifted wave on the East, the beauty of the sand-hills speckled with golden cistus, or patched with gentian-blue, by the low growing Gremille couchee, the charm of the forest-skirts, tinted

[p. 86]

variously with the foliage of cork-trees, pines, and acacia, the latter in full bloom, a pile of rose-coloured or snowy flowers,--all conspired to fill the peasant maidens with joy, and to make their voices rise in song and laughter, which rung merrily over the hills, and through the dark avenues of evergreen trees.

Now a gorgeous butterfly attracted their attention, then a flight of quails skimming the surface.

"Ah!" exclaimed Jacquiline Auzun," ah, if I had my stilts and bats, I would strike the little birds down, and we should have a fine supper."

"Now, if they would fly ready cooked into one's mouth, as they do in foreign parts!" said another girl.

"Have you got any new clothes for the S. Jean?" asked a third; "my mother has laid by to purchase me a smart cap with gold lace."

"You will turn the head of Etienne altogether, Annette!" said Jeanne Gaboriant. "But what is the matter with the sheep?"

She asked because the sheep which had been quietly browsing before her, on reaching a small depression in the dune, had started away as though frightened at something. At the same time one of the dogs began to growl and show his fangs.

[p. 87]

The girls ran to the spot, and saw a little fall in the ground, in which, seated on a log of fir, was a boy of thirteen. The appearance of the lad was peculiar. His hair was of a tawny red and thickly matted, falling over his shoulders and completely covering his narrow brow. His small pale-grey eyes twinkled with an expression of horrible ferocity and cunning, from deep sunken hollows. The complexion was of a dark olive colour; the teeth were strong and white, and the canine teeth protruded over the lower lip when the mouth was closed. The boy's hands were large and powerful, the nails black and pointed like bird's talons. He was ill clothed, and seemed to be in the most abject poverty. The few garments he had on him were in tatters, and through the rents the emaciation of his limbs was plainly visible.

The girls stood round him, half frightened and much surprised, but the boy showed no symptoms of astonishment. His face relaxed into a ghastly leer, which showed the whole range of his glittering white fangs.

"Well, my maidens," said he in a harsh voice, "which of you is the prettiest, I should like to know; can you decide among you?"

"What do you want to know for?" asked Jeanne [p. 88] Gaboriant, the eldest of the girls, aged eighteen, who took upon herself to be spokesman for the rest.

"Because I shall marry the prettiest," was the answer.

"Ah!" said Jeanne jokingly; "that is if she will have you, which is not very likely, as we none of us know you, or anything about you."

"I am the son of a priest," replied the boy curtly.

"Is that why you look so dingy and black?"

"No, I am dark-coloured, because I wear a wolf-skin sometimes."

"A wolf-skin!" echoed the girl; "and pray who gave it you?"

"One called Pierre Labourant."

"There is no man of that name hereabouts. Where does he live?"

A scream of laughter mingled with howls, and breaking into strange gulping bursts of fiendlike merriment from the strange boy.

The little girls recoiled, and the youngest took refuge behind Jeanne.

"Do you want to know Pierre Labourant, lass? Hey, he is a man with an iron chain about his neck, which he is ever engaged in gnawing. Do you want to

[p. 89]

know where he lives, lass? Ha., in a place of gloom and fire, where there are many companions, some seated on iron chairs, burning, burning; others stretched on glowing beds, burning too. Some cast men upon blazing coals, others roast men before fierce flames, others again plunge them into caldrons of liquid fire."

The girls trembled and looked at each other with scared faces, and then again at the hideous being which crouched before them.

"You want to know about the wolf-skin cape?" continued he. "Pierre Labourant gave me that; he wraps it round me, and every Monday, Friday, and Sunday, and for about an hour at dusk every other day, I am a wolf, a were-wolf. I have killed dogs and drunk their blood; but little girls taste better, their flesh is tender and sweet, their blood rich and warm. I have eaten many a maiden, as I have been on my raids together with my nine companions. I am a were-wolf! Ah, ha! if the sun were to set I would soon fall on one of you and make a meal of you!" Again he burst into one of his frightful paroxysms of laughter, and the girls unable to endure it any longer, fled with precipitation.

Near the village of S. Antoine de Pizon, a little girl of the name of Marguerite Poirier, thirteen years old,

[p. 90]

was in the habit of tending her sheep, in company with a lad of the same age, whose name was Jean Grenier. The same lad whom Jeanne Gaboriant had questioned.

The little girl often complained to her parents of the conduct of the boy: she said that he frightened her with his horrible stories; but her father and mother thought little of her complaints, till one day she returned home before her usual time so thoroughly alarmed that she had deserted her flock. Her parents now took the matter up and investigated it. Her story was as follows:--

Jean had often told her that he had sold himself to the devil, and that he had acquired the power of ranging the country after dusk, and sometimes in broad day, in the form of a wolf. He had assured her that he had killed and devoured many dogs, but that he found their flesh less palatable than the flesh of little girls, which he regarded as a supreme delicacy. He had told her that this had been tasted by him not unfrequently, but he had specified only two instances: in one he had eaten as much as he could, and had thrown the rest to a wolf, which had come up during the repast. In the other instance he had bitten to death another little girl, had lapped her blood, and, being in a famished condition

[p. 91]

at the time, had devoured every portion of her, with the exception of the arms and shoulders.

The child told her parents, on the occasion of her return home in a fit of terror, that she had been guiding her sheep as usual, but Grenier had not been present. Hearing a rustle in the bushes she had looked round, and a wild beast bad leaped upon her, and torn her clothes on her left side with its sharp fangs. She added that she had defended herself lustily with her shepherd's staff, and had beaten the creature off. It had then retreated a few paces, had seated itself on its hind legs like a dog when it is begging, and had regarded her with such a look of rage, that she had fled in terror. She described the animal as resembling a wolf, but as being shorter and stouter; its hair was red, its tail stumpy, and the head smaller than that of a genuine wolf.

The statement of the child produced general consternation in the parish. It was well known that several little girls had vanished in a most mysterious way of late, and the parents of these little ones were thrown into an agony of terror lest their children had become the prey of the wretched boy accused by Marguerite Poirier. The case was now taken up by the

[p. 92]

authorities and brought before the parliament of Bordeaux.

The investigation which followed was as complete as could be desired.

Jean Grenier was the son of a poor labourer in the village of S. Antoine do Pizon, and not the son of a priest, as he had asserted. Three months before his seizure he had left home, and had been with several masters doing odd work, or wandering about the country begging. He had been engaged several times to take charge of the flocks belonging to farmers, and had as often been discharged for neglect of his duties. The lad exhibited no reluctance to communicate all he knew about himself, and his statements were tested one by one, and were often proved to be correct.

The story he related of himself before the court was as follows:--

"When I was ten or eleven years old, my neighbour, Duthillaire, introduced me, in the depths of the forest, to a M. de la Forest, a black man, who signed me with his nail, and then gave to me and Duthillaire a salve and a wolf-skin. From that time have I run about the country as a wolf.

"The charge of Marguerite Poirier is correct. My

[p. 93]

intention was to have killed and devoured her, but she kept me off with a stick. I have only killed one dog, a white one, and I did not drink its blood."

When questioned touching the children, whom he said he had killed and eaten as a wolf, he allowed that he had once entered an empty house on the way between S. Coutras and S. Anlaye, in a small village, the name of which he did not remember, and had found a child asleep in its cradle; and as no one was within to hinder him, he dragged the baby out of its cradle, carried it into the garden, leaped the hedge, and devoured as much of it as satisfied his hunger. What remained he had given to a wolf. In the parish of S. Antoine do Pizon he had attacked a little girl, as she was keeping sheep. She was dressed in a black frock; he did not know her name. He tore her with his nails and teeth, and ate her. Six weeks before his capture he had fallen upon another child, near the stone-bridge, in the same parish. In Eparon he had assaulted the hound of a certain M. Millon, and would have killed the beast, had not the owner come out with his rapier in his hand.

Jean said that he had the wolf-skin in his possession, and that he went out hunting for children, at the command of his master, the Lord of the Forest. Before

[p. 94]

transformation he smeared himself with the salve, which be preserved in a small pot, and hid his clothes in the thicket.

He usually ran his courses from one to two hours in the day, when the moon was at the wane, but very often he made his expeditions at night. On one occasion he had accompanied Duthillaire, but they had killed no one.

He accused his father of having assisted him, and of possessing a wolf-skin; he charged him also with having accompanied him on one occasion, when he attacked and ate a girl in the village of Grilland, whom he had found tending a flock of geese. He said that his stepmother was separated from his father. He believed the reason to be, because she had seen him once vomit the paws of a dog and the fingers of a child. He added that the Lord of the Forest had strictly forbidden him to bite the thumb-nail of his left hand, which nail was thicker and longer than the others, and had warned him never to lose sight of it, as long as he was in his were-wolf disguise.

Duthillaire was apprehended, and the father of Jean Grenier himself claimed to be heard by examination.

The account given by the father and stepmother of [p. 95] Jean coincided in many particulars with the statements made by their son.

The localities where Grenier declared he had fallen on children were identified, the times when he said the deeds had been done accorded with the dates given by the parents of the missing little ones, when their losses had occurred.

The wounds which Jean affirmed that he had made, and the manner in which he had dealt them, coincided with the descriptions given by the children he had assaulted.

He was confronted with Marguerite Poirier, and he singled her out from among five other girls, pointed to the still open gashes in her body, and stated that he had made them with his teeth, when he attacked her in wolf-form, and she had beaten him off with a stick. He described an attack he had made on a little boy whom he would have slain, had not a man come to the rescue, and exclaimed, "I'll have you presently."

The man who saved the child was found, and proved to be the uncle of the rescued lad, and he corroborated the statement of Grenier, that he had used the words mentioned above.

Jean was then confronted with his father. He now

[p. 96]

began to falter in his story, and to change his statements. The examination had lasted long, and it was seen that the feeble intellect of the boy was wearied out, so the case was adjourned. When next confronted with the elder Grenier, Jean told his story as at first, without changing it in any important particular.

The fact of Jean Grenier having killed and eaten several children, and of his having attacked and wounded others, with intent to take their life, were fully established; but there was no proof whatever of the father having had the least hand in any of the murders, so that he was dismissed the court without a shadow of guilt upon him.

The only witness who corroborated the assertion of Jean that he changed his shape into that of a wolf was Marguerite Poirier.

Before the court gave judgment, the first president of assize, in an eloquent speech, put on one side all questions of witchcraft and diabolical compact, and bestial transformation, and boldly stated that the court had only to consider the age and the imbecility of the child, who was so dull and idiotic--that children of seven or eight years old have usually a larger amount of reason than he. The president went on to say that Lycanthropy

[p. 97]

and Kuanthropy were mere hallucinations, and that the change of shape existed only in the disorganized brain of the insane, consequently it was not a crime which could be punished. The tender age of the boy must be taken into consideration, and the utter neglect of his education and moral development. The court sentenced Grenier to perpetual imprisonment within the walls of a monastery at Bordeaux, where he might be instructed in his Christian and moral obligations; but any attempt to escape would be punished with death.

A pleasant companion for the monks! a promising pupil for them to instruct! No sooner was he admitted into the precincts of the religious house, than he ran frantically about the cloister and gardens upon all fours, and finding a heap of bloody and raw offal, fell upon it and devoured it in an incredibly short space of time.

Delancre visited him seven years after, and found him diminutive in stature, very shy, and unwilling to look any one in the face. His eyes were deep set and restless; his teeth long and protruding; his nails black, and in places worn away; his mind was completely barren; he seemed unable to comprehend the smallest things. He related his story to Delancre, and

[p. 98]

told him how he had run about formerly in the woods as a wolf, and he said that he still felt a craving for raw flesh, especially for that of little girls, which he said was delicious, and he added that but for his confinement it would not be long before he tasted it again. He said that the Lord of the Forest had visited him twice in the prison, but that he had driven him off with the sign of the cross. The account be then gave of his murders coincided exactly with what had come out in his trial; and beside this, his story of the compact he had made with the Black One, and the manner in which his transformation was effected, also coincided with his former statements.

He died at the age of twenty, after an imprisonment of seven years, shortly after Delancre's visit.[1]

In the two cases of Roulet and Grenier the courts referred the whole matter of Lycanthropy, or animal transformation, to its true and legitimate cause, an aberration of the brain. From this time medical men seem to have regarded it as a form of mental malady to be brought under their treatment, rather than as a crime to be punished by law. But it is very fearful to contemplate

 [1. DELANCRE: Tableau de l'Iinconstance, p 305.]

 [p. 99]

that there may still exist persons in the world filled with a morbid craving for human blood, which is ready to impel them to commit the most horrible atrocities, should they escape the vigilante of their guards, or break the bars of the madhouse which restrains them.

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

 

CHAPTER VIII.

 

FOLK-LORE RELATING TO WERE-WOLVES.

Barrenness of English Folk-lore--Devonshire Traditions--Derivation of Were-wolf--Cannibalism in Scotland--The Angus Robber--The Carle of Perth--French Superstitions--Norwegian Traditions--Danish Tales of Were-wolves--Holstein Stories--The Werewolf in the Netherlands--Among the Greeks; the Serbs; the White Russians; the Poles; the Russians--A Russian Receipt for becoming a Were-wolf--The Bohemian Vlkodlak--Armenian Story--Indian Tales--Abyssinian Budas--American Transformation Tales--A Slovakian Household Tale--Similar Greek, Bearnais, and Icelandic Tales.

ENGLISH folk-lore is singularly barren of were-wolf stories, the reason being that wolves had been extirpated from England under the Anglo-Saxon kings, and therefore ceased to be objects of dread to the people. The traditional belief in were-wolfism must, however, have remained long in the popular mind, though at present it has disappeared, for the word occurs in old ballads and romances. Thus in Kempion--

	 
		O was it war-wolf in the wood?
		     Or was it mermaid in the sea?
		 Or was it man, or vile woman,
		     My ain true love, that mis-shaped thee?
		
		 [p. 101]

There is also the romance of William and the Were-wolf in Hartshorn;[1] but this professes to be a translation from the French:--

	 
		For he of Frenche this fayre tale ferst dede translate,
		 In ese of Englysch men in Englysch speche.
		
		 In the popular mind the cat or the hare have taken the place of the wolf for witches' transformation, and we hear often of the hags attending the devil's Sabbath in these forms.

In Devonshire they range the moors in the shape of black dogs, and I know a story of two such creatures appearing in an inn and nightly drinking the cider, till the publican shot a silver button over their heads, when they were instantly transformed into two ill-favoured old ladies of his acquaintance. On Heathfield, near Tavistock, the wild huntsman rides by full moon with his "wush hounds;" and a white hare which they pursued was once rescued by a goody returning from market, and discovered to be a transformed young lady.

Gervaise of Tilbury says in his Otia Imperalia--

"Vidimus frequenter in Anglia, per lunationes, homines in lupos mutari, quod hominum genus gerulfos Galli

 [1. HARTSHORN: Ancient Metrical Tales, p. 256. See also "The Witch Cake," in CRUMEK'S Remains of Nithsdale Song.]

 [p. 102]

vocant, Angli vero wer-wlf, dicunt: wer enim Anglice virum sonat, wlf, lupum." Gervaise may be right in his derivation of the name, and were-wolf may mean man-wolf, though I have elsewhere given a different derivation, and one which I suspect is truer. But Gervaise has grounds for his assertion that wer signifies man; it is so in Anglo-Saxon, vair in Gothic, vir in Latin, verr, in Icelandic, vira, Zend, wirs, old Prussian, wirs, Lettish, vira, Sanskrit, bir, Bengalee.

There have been cases of cannibalism in Scotland, but no bestial transformation is hinted at in connection with them.

Thus Boethius, in his history of Scotland, tells us of a robber and his daughter who devoured children, and Lindsay of Pitscottie gives a full account.

"About this time (1460) there was ane brigand ta'en with his haill family, who haunted a place in Angus. This mischievous man had ane execrable fashion to take all young men and children he could steal away quietly, or tak' away without knowledge, and eat them, and the younger they were, esteemed them the mair tender and delicious. For the whilk cause and damnable abuse, he with his wife and bairns were all burnt, except ane young wench of a year old who

[p. 103]

was saved and brought to Dandee, where she was brought up and fostered; and when she came to a woman's years, she was condemned and burnt quick for that crime. It is said that when she was coming to the place of execution, there gathered ane huge multitude of people, and specially of women, cursing her that she was so unhappy to commit so damnable deeds. To whom she turned about with an ireful countenance, saying:--'Wherefore chide ye with me, as if I had committed ane unworthy act? Give me credence and trow me, if ye had experience of eating men and women's flesh, ye wold think it so delicious that ye wold never forbear it again.' So, but any sign of repentance, this unhappy traitor died in the sight of the people."[1]

Wyntoun also has a passage in his metrical chronicle regarding a cannibal who lived shortly before his own time, and he may easily have heard about him from surviving contemporaries. It was about the year 1340, when a large portion of Scotland had been devastated by the arms of Edward III.

	 
		About Perth thare was the countrie
		 Sae waste, that wonder wes to see;
		
		   [1. LINDSAY'S Chronicles of Scotland, 1814, p. 163.]

 [p. 104]

	 
		For intill well-great space thereby,
		 Wes nother house left nor herb'ry.
		 Of deer thare wes then sic foison (profusion),
		 That they wold near come to the town,
		 Sae great default was near that stead,
		 That mony were in hunger dead.
		 A carle they said was near thereby,
		 That wold act settis (traps) commonly,
		 Children and women for to slay,
		 And swains that he might over-ta;
		 And ate them all that he get might;
		 Chwsten Cleek till name behight.
		 That sa'ry life continued he,
		 While waste but folk was the countrie.[1]
		
		 We have only to compare these two cases with those recorded in the last two chapters, and we see at once how the popular mind in Great Britain had lost the idea of connecting change of form with cannibalism. A man guilty of the crimes committed by the Angus brigand, or the carle of Perth, would have been regarded as a were-wolf in France or Germany, and would have been tried for Lycanthropy.

S. Jerome, by the way, brought a sweeping charge against the Scots. He visited Gaul in his youth, about 880, and he writes:--"When I was a young man in Gaul, I may have seen the Attacotti, a British people who live upon human flesh; and when they find herds

 [1. WYNTOUN'S Chronicle, ii. 236.]

 [p. 105]

of pigs, droves of cattle, or flocks of sheep in the woods, they cut off the haunches of the men and the breasts of the women, and these they regard as great dainties;" in other words they prefer the shepherd to his flock. Gibbon who quotes this passage says on it: "If in the neighbourhood of the commercial and literary town of Glasgow, a race of cannibals has really existed, we may contemplate, in the period of the Scottish history, the opposite extremes of savage and civilized life. Such reflections tend to enlarge the circle of our ideas, and to encourage the pleasing hope that New Zealand may produce in a future age, the Hume of the Southern hemisphere."

If traditions of were-wolves are scanty in England, it is quite the reverse if we cross the water.

In the south of France, it is still believed that fate has destined certain men to be lycanthropists--that they are transformed into wolves at full moon. The desire to run comes upon them at night. They leave their beds, jump out of a window, and plunge into a fountain. After the bath, they come out covered with dense fur, walking on all fours, and commence a raid over fields and meadows, through woods and villages, biting all beasts and human beings that come in their way. At

[p. 106]

the approach of dawn, they return to the spring, plunge into it, lose their furry skins, and regain their deserted beds. Sometimes the loup-garou is said to appear under the form of a white dog, or to be loaded with chains; but there is probably a confusion of ideas between the were-wolf and the church-dog, bar-ghest, pad-foit, wush-hound, or by whatever name the animal supposed to haunt a churchyard is designated.

In the Perigord, the were-wolf is called louleerou. Certain men, especially bastards, are obliged at each full moon to transform themselves into these diabolic beasts.

It is always at night that the fit comes on. The lycanthropist dashes out of a window, springs into a well, and, after having struggled in the water for a few moments, rises from it, dripping, and invested with a goatskin which the devil has given him. In this condition, the louleerous run upon four legs, pass the night in ranging over the country, and in biting and devouring all the dogs they meet. At break of day they lay aside their goatskins and return home. Often they are ill in consequence of having eaten tough old hounds, and they vomit up their undigested paws. One great nuisance to them is the fact that they may be wounded or killed in their louleerou state. With the

[p. 107]

first effusion of blood their diabolic covering vanishes, and they are recognized, to the disgrace of their families.

A were-wolf may easily be detected, even when devoid of his skin; for his hands are broad, and his fingers short, and there are always some hairs in the hollow of his hand.

In Normandy, those who are doomed to be loups-garoux, clothe themselves every evening with a skin called their here or hure, which is a loan from the devil. When they run in their transformed state, the evil one accompanies them and scourges them at the foot of every cross they pass. The only way in which a werewolf can be liberated from this cruel bondage, is by stabbing him three times in the forehead with a knife. However, some people less addicted to allopathic treatment, consider that three drops of blood drawn by a needle, will be sufficient to procure release.

According to an opinion of the vulgar in the same province, the loup-garou is sometimes a metamorphosis forced upon the body of a damned person, who, after having been tormented in his grave, has torn his way out of it. The first stage in the process consists in his devouring the cerecloth which enveloped his face; then his moans and muffled howls ring from the tomb,

[p. 108]

through the gloom of night, the earth of the grave begins to heave, and at last, with a scream, surrounded by a phosphorescent glare, and exhaling a foetid odour, he bursts away as a wolf.

In Le Bessin, they attribute to sorcerers the power of metamorphosing certain men into beasts, but the form of a dog is that principally affected by them.

In Norway it is believed that there are persons who can assume the form of a wolf or a bear (Huse-bjorn), and again resume their own; this property is either imparted to them by the Trollmen, or those possessing it are themselves Trolls.

In a hamlet in the midst of a forest, there dwelt a cottager named Lasse, and his wife. One day he went out in the forest to fell a tree, but had forgot to cross himself and say his paternoster, so that some troll or wolf-witch (varga mor) obtained power over him and transformed him into a wolf. His wife mourned him for many years, but, one Christmas-eve, there came a beggar-woman, very poor and ragged, to the door, and the good woman of the house took her in, fed her well, and entreated her kindly. At her departure the beggar-woman said that the wife would probably see her husband again, as he was not dead,

[p. 109]

but was wandering in the forest as a wolf. Towards night-fall the wife went to her pantry to place in it a piece of meat for the morrow, when, on turning to go out, she perceived a wolf standing before her, raising itself with its paws on the pantry steps, regarding her with sorrowful and hungry looks. Seeing this she exclaimed, "If I were sure that thou wert my own Lasse, I would give thee a bit of meat." At that instant the wolf-skin fell off, and her husband stood before her in the clothes he wore on the unlucky morning when she had last beheld him.

Finns, Lapps, and Russians are held in particular aversion, because the Swedes believe that they have power to change people into wild beasts. During the last year of the war with Russia, when Calmar was overrun with an unusual number of wolves, it was generally said that the Russians had transformed their Swedish prisoners into wolves, and sent them home to invest the country.

In Denmark the following stories are told:--

A man, who from his childhood had been a were-wolf, when returning one night with his wife from a merrymaking, observed that the hour was at hand when the evil usually came upon him; giving therefore the reins

[p. 110]

to his wife, he descended from the vehicle, saying to her, "If anything comes to thee, only strike at it with thine apron." He then withdrew, but immediately after, the woman, as she was sitting in the vehicle, was attached by a were-wolf. She did as the man had enjoined her, and struck it with her apron, from which it rived a portion, and then ran away. After some time the man returned, holding in his mouth the rent portion of his wife's apron, on seeing which, she cried out in terror,--"Good Lord, man, why, thou art a were-wolf!" "Thank thee, wife," said he, "now I am free." And from that time he was no more afflicted.

If a female at midnight stretches between four sticks the membrane which envelopes the foal when it is brought forth, and creeps through it, naked, she will bear children without pain; but all the boys will be were-wolves, and all the girls maras. By day the were-wolf has the human form, though he may be known by the meeting of his eyebrows above the nose. At a certain time of the night he has the form of a dog on three legs. It is only when another person tells him that he is a were-wolf, or reproaches him with being such, that a man can be freed from the ban.

According to a Danish popular song, a hero transformed

[p. 111]

by his step-mother into a bear, fights with a knight:--

	 
		For 'tis she who bath bewitched me,
		 A woman false and fell,
		 Bound an iron girdle round me,
		 If thou can'st not break this belt,
		 Knight, I'll thee destroy!
		 *    *    *    *
		 The noble made the Christian sign,
		 The girdle snapped, the bear was changed,
		 And see! he was a lusty knight,
		 His father's realm regained.
		
		
			 
				 
					 
						  Kjaempeviser, p. 147.
						
						     When an old bear in Ofodens Priestegjeld was killed, after it had caused the death of six men und sixty horses, it was found to be girded with a similar girdle.

In Schleswig and Holstein they say that if the were-wolf be thrice addressed by his baptismal name, he resumes his human form.

On a hot harvest day some reapers lay down in the field to take their noontide sleep, when one who could not sleep observed that the fellow next to him rose softly, and having girded himself with a strap, became a were-wolf.

A young man belonging to Jagerup returning late one night from Billund, was attacked, when near Jagerup, by three were-wolves, and would probably

[p. 112]

have been torn to pieces, had he not saved himself by leaping into a rye-field, for there they had no more power over him.

At Caseburg, on the isle of Usedom, a man and his wife were busy in the field making hay, when after some time the woman said to the man that she had no more peace, she could stay no longer, and went away. But she had previously desired her husband to promise, that if perchance a wild beast should come that way, he would cast his hat at it and then run away, and it would do him no injury. She had been gone but a short while, when a wolf came swimming across the Swine, and ran directly towards the haymakers. The man threw his hat at it, which the animal instantly tore to rags. But in the meantime a boy had run up with a pitchfork, and he dabbed the wolf from behind: in the same moment it became changed, and all saw that the boy had killed the man's wife.

Formerly there were individuals in the neighbourhood of Steina, who, by putting on a certain girdle, could transform themselves into were-wolves. A man of the neighbourhood, who had such a girdle, forgot one day when going out to lock it up, as was his wont. During his absence, his little son chanced to find it;

[p. 113]

he buckled it round him., and was instantaneously turned into an animal, to all outward appearance like a bundle of peat-straw, and he rolled about like an unwieldy bear. When those who were in the room perceived this, they hastened in search of the father, who was found in time to come and unbuckle the belt, before the child had done any mischief. The boy afterwards said, that when he had put on the girdle, he was seized with such a raging hunger, that he was ready to tear in pieces and devour all that came in his way.

The girdle is supposed to be made of human skin, and to be three finger-breadths wide.

In East Friesland, it is believed, when seven girls succeed each other in one family, that among them one is of necessity a were-wolf, so that youths are slow in seeking one of seven sisters in marriage.

According to a curious Lithuanian story related by Schleicher in his Litauische Marchen, a person who is a were-wolf or bear has to remain kneeling in one spot for one hundred years before he can hope to obtain release from his bestial form.

In the Netherlands they relate the following tale:--A man had once gone out with his bow to attend a shooting match at Rousse, but when about half way to

[p. 114]

the place, he saw on a sudden, a large wolf spring from a thicket, and rush towards a young girl, who was sitting in a meadow by the roadside watching cows. The man did not long hesitate, but quickly drawing forth an arrow, took aim, and luckily hit the wolf in the right side, so that the arrow remained sticking in the wound, and the animal fled howling to the wood.

On the following day he heard that a serving-man of the burgomaster's household lay at the point of death, in consequence of having been shot in the right side, on the preceding day. This so excited the archer's curiosity, that he went to the wounded man, and requested to see the arrow. He recognized it immediately as one of his own. Then, having desired all present to leave the room, he persuaded the man to confess that he was a were-wolf and that he had devoured little children. On the following day he died.

Among the Bulgarians and Sloyakians the were-wolf is called vrkolak, a name resembling that given it by the modern Greeks brukolakas?. The Greek were-wolf is closely related to the vampire. The lycanthropist falls into a cataleptic trance, during which his soul leaves his body, enters that of a wolf and ravens for blood. On the return of the soul, the body is exhausted and aches

[p. 115]

as though it had been put through violent exercise. After death lycanthropists become vampires. They are believed to frequent battlefields in wolf or hyaena shapes, and to suck the breath from dying soldiers, or to enter houses and steal the infants from their cradles. Modern Greeks call any savage-looking man, with dark complexion, and with distorted, misshapen limbs, a brukolakas, and suppose him to be invested with power of running in wolf-form.

The Serbs connect the vampire and the were-wolf together, and call them by one name vlkoslak. These rage chiefly in the depths of winter: they hold their annual gatherings, and at them divest themselves of their wolf-skins, which they hang on the trees around them. If any one succeeds in obtaining the skin and burning it, the vlkoslak is thenceforth disenchanted.

The power to become a were-wolf is obtained by drinking the water which settles in a foot-print left in clay by a wolf.

Among the White Russians the wawkalak is a man who has incurred the wrath of the devil, and the evil one punishes him by transforming him into a wolf and sending him among his relations, who recognize him and feed him well. He is a most amiably disposed

[p. 116]

were-wolf, for he does no mischief, and testifies his affection for his kindred by licking their hands. He cannot, however, remain long in any place, but is driven from house to house, and from hamlet to hamlet, by an irresistible passion for change of scene. This is an ugly superstition, for it sets a premium on standing well with the evil one.

The Sloyakians merrily term a drunkard a vlkodlak, because, forsooth, he makes a beast of himself. A Slovakian household were-wolf tale closes this chapter.

The Poles have their were-wolves, which rage twice in the year--at Christmas and at midsummer.

According to a Polish story, if a witch lays a girdle of human skin on the threshold of a house in which a marriage is being celebrated, the bride and bridegroom, and bridesmaids and groomsmen, should they step across it, are transformed into wolves. After three years, however, the witch will cover them with skins with the hair. turned outward; immediately they will recover their natural form. On one occasion, a witch cast a skin of too scanty dimensions over the bridegroom, so that his tail was left uncovered: he resumed his human form, but retained his lupine caudal appendage .

[p. 117]

The Russians call the were-wolf oborot, which signifies "one transformed." The following receipt is given by them for becoming one.

"He who desires to become an oborot, let him seek in the forest a hewn-down tree; let him stab it with a small copper knife, and walk round the tree, repeating the following incantation:--

	 
		On the sea, on the ocean, on the island, on Bujan,
		 On the empty pasture gleams the moon, on an ashstock lying
		 In a green wood, in a gloomy vale.
		 Toward the stock wandereth a shaggy wolf.
		 Horned cattle seeking for his sharp white fangs;
		 But the wolf enters not the forest,
		 But the wolf dives not into the shadowy vale,
		 Moon, moon, gold-horned moon,
		 Cheek the flight of bullets, blunt the hunters' knives,
		 Break the shepherds' cudgels,
		 Cast wild fear upon all cattle,
		 On men, on all creeping things,
		 That they may not catch the grey wolf,
		 That they may not rend his warm skin
		 My word is binding, more binding than sleep,
		 More binding than the promise of a hero!
		
		 "Then he springs thrice over the tree and runs into the forest, transformed into a wolf."[1]

In the ancient Bohemian Lexicon of Vacerad (A. D. 1202) the were-wolf is called vilkodlak, and is explained as faunus. Safarik says under that head,-

 [1. SACHAROW: Inland, 1838, No. 17.]

 [p. 118]

"Incubi sepe improbi existunt mulieribus, et earum peragunt concubitum, quos demones Galli dusios nuncupant." And in another place: "Vilkodlaci, incubi, sive invidi, ab inviando passim cum animalibus, unde et incubi dicuntur ab incubando homines, i. e. stuprando, quos Romani faunos ficarios dicunt."

That the same belief in lycanthropy exists in Armenia is evident from the following story told by Haxthausen, in his Trans-Caucasia (Leipzig, i. 322):--"A man once saw a wolf, which had carried off a child, dash past him. He pursued it hastily, but was unable to overtake it. At last he came upon the hands and feet of a child, and a little further on he found a cave, in which lay a wolf-skin. This he cast into a fire, and immediately a woman appeared, who howled and tried to rescue the skin from the flames. The man, however, resisted, and, as soon as the hide was consumed, the woman had vanished in the smoke."

In India, on account of the prevalence of the doctrine of metempsychosis, the belief in transformation is widely diffused. Traces of genuine lycanthropy are abundant in all regions whither Buddism has reached. In Ceylon, in Thibet, and in China, we find it still forming a portion of the national creed.

[p. 119]

In the Pantschatantra is a story of an enchanted Brahmin's son, who by day was a serpent, by night a man.

Vikramaditya's father, the son of Indra, was condemned to be an ass by day and a man by night.

A modern Indian tale is to this effect:--A prince marries a female ape, but his brothers wed handsome princesses. At a feast given by the queen to her stepdaughters, there appears an exquisitely beautiful lady in gorgeous robes. This is none other than the she-ape, who has laid aside her skin for the occasion: the prince slips out of the room and burns the skin, so that his wife is prevented from resuming her favourite appearance.

Nathaniel Pierce[1] gives an account of an Abyssinian superstition very similar to that prevalent in Europe.

He says that in Abyssinia the gold. and silversmiths are highly regarded, but that the ironworkers are looked upon with contempt, as an inferior grade of beings. Their kinsmen even ascribe to them the power of transforming themselves into hyaenas, or other savage beasts. All convulsions and hysterical disorders are attributed to the effect of their evil eye. The Amhara

 [1. Life and Adventures of Nathaniel Pierce, written by himself during a residence in Abyssinia from 1810-19. London, 1831.]

 [p. 120]

call them Buda, the Tigre, Tebbib. There are also Mahomedan and Jewish Budas. It is difficult to explain the origin of this strange superstition. These Budas are distinguished from other people by wearing gold ear-rings, and Coffin declares that he has often found hyaenas with these rings in their ears, even among the beasts which he has shot or speared himself. But how the rings got into their ears is more than Coffin was able to ascertain.

Beside their power to transform themselves into hyaenas or other wild beasts, all sorts of other strange things are ascribed to them; and the Abyssinians are firmly persuaded that they rob the graves by midnight, and no one would venture to touch what is called quanter, or dried meat in their houses, though they would not object to partake of fresh meat, if they had seen the animal, from which it came, killed before them. Coffin relates, as eye-witness of the fact, the following story:--

Among his servants was a Buda, who, one evening, whilst it was still light, came to his master and asked leave of absence till the following morning. He obtained the required leave and departed; but scarcely had Coffin turned his head, when one of his men

[p. 121]

exclaimed,--"Look! there he is, changing himself into hyaena," pointing in the direction taken by the Buda. Coffin turned to look, and although he did not witness the process of transformation, the young man had vanished from the spot on which he had been standing, not a hundred paces distant, and in his place was a hyaena running away. The place was a plain without either bush or tree to impede the view. Next morning the young man returned, and was charged by his companions with the transformation: this he rather acknowledged than denied, for he excused himself on the plea that it was the habit of his class. This statement of Pierce is corroborated by a note contributed by Sir Gardner Wilkinson to Rawlinson's Herodotus (book iv. chap. 105). "A class of people in Abyssinia are believed to change themselves into hyaenas when they like. On my appearing to discredit it, I was told by one who lived for years there, that no well-informed person doubted it, and that he was once walking with one of them, when he happened to look away for a moment, and on turning again towards his companion, he saw him trotting off in the shape of a hyaena. He met him afterwards in his old form. These worthies are blacksmiths.--G. W."

[p. 122]

A precisely similar superstition seems to have existed in America, for Joseph Acosta (Hist. Nat. des Indes) relates that the ruler of a city in Mexico, who was sent for by the predecessor of Montezuma, transformed himself, before the eyes of those who were sent to seize him, into an eagle, a tiger, and an enormous serpent. He yielded at last, and was condemned to death. No longer in his own house, he was unable to work miracles so as to save his life. The Bishop of Chiapa, a province of Guatemala, in a writing published in 1702, ascribes the same power to the Naguals, or national priests, who laboured to bring back to the religion of their ancestors, the children brought up as Christians by the government. After various ceremonies, when the child instructed advanced to embrace him, the Nagual suddenly assumed a frightful aspect, and under the form of a lion or tiger, appeared chained to the young Christian convert.--(Recueil de Voyages, tom. ii. 187.)

Among the North American Indians, the belief in transformation is very prevalent. The following story closely resembles one very prevalent all over the world.

"One Indian fixed his residence on the borders of the Great Bear lake, taking with him only a dog big

[p. 123]

with young. In due time, this dog brought forth eight pups. Whenever the Indian went out to fish, he tied up the pups, to prevent the straying of the litter. Several times, as he approached his tent, he heard noises proceeding from it, which sounded like the talking, the laughing, the crying, the wail, and the merriment of children; but, on entering it, he only perceived the pups tied up as usual. His curiosity being excited by the noises he had heard, he determined to watch and learn whence these sounds proceeded, and what they were. One day he pretended to go out to fish, but, instead of doing so, he concealed himself in a convenient place. In a short time he again heard -voices, and, rushing suddenly into the tent, beheld some beautiful children sporting and laughing, with the dog-skins lying by their side. He threw the dog-skins into the fire, and the children, retaining their proper forms, grew up, and were the ancestors of the dog-rib nation."--(Traditions of the North American Indians, by T. A. Jones, 1830, Vol. ii. p. 18.)

In the same work is a curious story entitled The Mother of the World, which bears a close analogy to another world-wide myth: a woman marries a dog, by night the dog lays aside its skin, and appears as a man. [p. 124] This may be compared with the tale of Bjorn and Bera already given.

I shall close this chapter with a Slovakian household tale given by T. T. Hanush in the third volume of Zeitschrift fur Deutsche Mythologie.

 The Daughter of the Vlkolak

 "There was once a father, who had nine daughters, and they were all marriageable, but the youngest was the most beautiful. The father was a were-wolf. One day it came into his head: 'What is the good of having to support so many girls?' so he determined to put them all out of the way.

"He went accordingly into the forest to hew wood, and he ordered his daughters to let one of them bring him his dinner. It was the eldest who brought it.

"'Why, how come you so early with the food?' asked the woodcutter.

"'Truly, father, I wished to strengthen you, lest you should fall upon us, if famished!'

"'A good lass! Sit down whilst I eat.' He ate, and whilst he ate he thought of a scheme. He rose and said: I My girl, come, and I will show you a pit I have been digging.'

[p. 125]

"'And what is the pit for? '

"'That we may be buried in it when we die, for poor folk will not be cared for much after they are dead and gone.'

"So the girl went with him to the side of the deep pit. 'Now hear,' said the were-wolf, 'you must die and be cast in there.'

"She begged for her life, but all in vain, so he laid hold of her and cast her into the grave. Then he took a great stone and flung it in upon her and crushed her head, so the poor thing breathed out her soul. When the were-wolf had done this he went back to his work, and as dusk came on, the second daughter arrived, bringing him food. He told her of the pit, and brought her to it, and cast her in, and killed her as the first. And so he dealt with all his girls up to the last. The youngest knew well that her father was a were-wolf, and she was grieved that her sisters did not return; she thought, 'Now where can they be? Has my father kept them for companionship; or to help him in his work?' So she made the food which she was to take him, and crept cautiously through the wood. When she came near the place where her father worked, she heard his strokes felling timber, and smelt smoke. She saw

[p. 126]

presently a large fire and two human heads roasting at it. Turning from the fire, she went in the direction of the axe-strokes, and found her father.

"See,' said she, 'father, I have brought you food.'

"That is a good lass,' said he. 'Now stack the wood for me whilst I eat.'

"'But where are my sisters?' she asked.

"'Down in yon valley drawing wood,' he replied 'follow me, and I will bring you to them.'

"They came to the pit; then he told her that he had dug it for a grave. 'Now,' said he, 'you must die, and be cast into the pit with your sisters. '

"'Turn aside, father,' she asked, 'whilst I strip of my clothes, and then slay me if you will.'

"He turned aside as she requested, and then--tchich! she gave him a push, and he tumbled headlong into the hole he had dug for her.

"She fled for her life, for the were-wolf was not injured, and he soon would scramble out of the pit.

"Now she hears his howls resounding through the gloomy alleys of the forest, and swift as the wind she runs. She hears the tramp of his approaching feet, and the snuffle of his breath. Then she casts behind her her handkerchief. The were-wolf seizes this with teeth

[p. 127]

and nails, and rends it till it is reduced to tiny ribands. In another moment he is again in pursuit foaming at the mouth, and howling dismally, whilst his red eyes gleam like burning coals. As he gains on her, she casts behind her her gown, and bids him tear that. He seizes the gown and rives it to shreds, then again he pursues. This time she casts behind her her apron, next her petticoat, then her shift, and at last rums much in the condition in which she was born. Again the were-wolf approaches; she bounds out of the forest into a hay-field, and hides herself in the smallest heap of hay. Her father enters the field, runs howling about it in search of her, cannot find her, and begins to upset the different haycocks, all the while growling and gnashing his gleaming white fangs in his rage at her having escaped him. The foam flakes drop at every step from his mouth, and his skin is reeking with sweat. Before he has reached the smallest bundle of hay his strength leaves him, he feels exhaustion begin to creep over him, and he retires to the forest.

"The king goes out hunting every clay; one of his dogs carries food to the hay-field, which has most unaccountably been neglected by the hay-makers for three days. The king, following the dog, discovers

[p. 128]

the fair damsel, not exactly 'in the straw,' but up to her neck in hay. She is carried, hay and all, to the palace, where she becomes his wife, making only one stipulation before becoming his bride, and that is, that no beggar shall be permitted to enter the palace.

"After some years a beggar does get in, the beggar being, of course, none other than her were-wolf father. He steals upstairs, enters the nursery, cuts the throats of the two children borne by the queen to her lord, and lays the knife under her pillow.

"In the morning, the king, supposing his wife to be the murderess, drives her from home, with the dead princes hung about her neck. A hermit comes to the rescue, and restores the babies to life. The king finds out his mistake, is reunited to the lady out of the hay, and the were-wolf is cast off a high cliff into the sea, and that is the end of him. The king, the queen, and the princes live happily, and may be living yet, for no notice of their death has appeared in the newspaper."

 

This story bears some resemblance to one told by Von Hahn in his Griechische und Albanesische Marchen; I remember having heard a very similar one in the Pyrenees; but the man who flies from the were-wolf

[p. 129]

is one who, after having stripped off all his clothes, rushes into a cottage and jumps into a bed. The were-wolf dares not, or cannot, follow. The cause of his flight was also different. He was a freemason who had divulged the secret, and the were-wolf was the master of his lodge in pursuit of him. In the Bearnais story, there is nothing similar to the last part of the Slovakian tale, and in the Greek one the transformation and the pursuit are omitted, though the woman-eater is called "dog's-head," much as an outlaw in the north of Europe was said to be wolf-headed.

It is worthy of notice in the tale of The Daughter of the Ulkolak, that the were-wolf fit is followed by great exhaustion,[1] and that the wolf is given clothes to tear, much as in the Danish stories already related. There does not seem to be any indication of his Laving changed his shape, at least no change is mentioned, his hands are spoken of, and he swears and curses his daughter in broad Slovakian. The fit very closely resembles that to which Skallagrim, the Icelander, was subject. It is a pity that the maid Brak in the Icelandic tale did not fall upon her legs like the young lady in the hay.

 [1. Compare this with the exhaustion following a Berserkir fit, and that which succeeded the attacks to which M. Bertrand was subject.]

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 [p. 130]

 

CHAPTER IX.

 

NATURAL CAUSES OF LYCANTHROPY.

Innate Cruelty--Its Three Forms--Dumollard--Andreas Bichel--A Dutch Priest--Other instances of Inherent Cruelty--Cruelty united to Refinement--A Hungarian Bather in Blood--Suddenness with which the Passion is developed--Cannibalism; in pregnant Women; in Maniacs--Hallucination; how Produced--Salves--The Story of Lucius--Self-deception.

WHAT I have related from the chronicles of antiquity, or from the traditional lore of the people, is veiled under the form of myth or legend; and it is only from Scandinavian descriptions of those afflicted with the wolf-madness, and from the trials of those charged with the crime of lycanthropy in the later Middle Ages, that we can arrive at the truth respecting that form of madness which was invested by the superstitious with so much mystery.

It was not till the close of the Middle Ages that

[p. 131]

lycanthropy was recognized as a disease; but it is one which has so much that is ghastly and revolting in its form, and it is so remote from all our ordinary experience, that it is not surprising that the casual observer should leave the consideration of it, as a subject isolated and perplexing, and be disposed to regard as a myth that which the feared investigation might prove a reality.

In this chapter I purpose briefly examining the conditions under which men have been regarded as werewolves.

Startling though the assertion may be, it is a matter of fact, that man, naturally, in common with other carnivora, is actuated by an impulse to kill, and by a love of destroying life.

It is positively true that there are many to whom the sight of suffering causes genuine pleasure, and in whom the passion to kill or torture is as strong as any other passion. Witness the number of boys who assemble around a sheep or pig when it is about to be killed, and who watch the struggle of the dying brute with hearts beating fast with pleasure, and eyes sparkling with delight. Often have I seen an eager crowd of children assembled around the slaughterhouses of French towns, absorbed in the expiring agonies of the sheep and

[p. 132]

cattle, and hushed into silence as they watched the flow of blood.

The propensity, however, exists in different degrees. In some it is manifest simply as indifference to suffering, in others it appears as simple pleasure in seeing killed, and in others again it is dominant as an irresistible desire to torture and destroy.

This propensity is widely diffused; it exists in children and adults, in the gross-minded and the refined., in the well-educated and the ignorant, in those who have never had the opportunity of gratifying it, and those who gratify it habitually, in spite of morality, religion, laws, so that it can only depend on constitutional causes.

The sportsman and the fisherman follow a natural instinct to destroy, when they make wax on bird, beast, and fish: the pretence that the spoil is sought for the table cannot be made with justice, as the sportsman cares little for the game he has obtained, when once it is consigned to his pouch. The motive for his eager pursuit of bird or beast must be sought elsewhere; it will be found in the natural craving to extinguish life, which exists in his soul. Why does a child impulsively strike at a butterfly as it flits past him? He cares

[p. 133]

nothing for the insect when once it is beaten down at his feet, unless it be quivering in its agony, when he will watch it with interest. The child strikes at the fluttering creature because it has life in it, and he has an instinct within him impelling him to destroy life wherever he finds it.

Parents and nurses know well that children by nature are cruel, and that humanity has to be acquired by education. A child will gloat over the sufferings of a wounded animal till his mother bids him "put it out of its misery." An unsophisticated child would not dream of terminating the poor creature's agonies abruptly, any more than he would swallow whole a bon-bon till he had well sucked it. Inherent cruelty may be obscured by after impressions, or may be kept under moral restraint; the person who is constitutionally a Nero, may scarcely know his own nature, till by some accident the master passion becomes dominant, and sweeps all before it. A relaxation of the moral check, a shock to the controlling intellect, an abnormal condition of body, are sufficient to allow the passion to assert itself.

As I have already observed, this passion exists in different persons in different degrees.

[p. 134]

In some it is exhibited in simple want of feeling for other people's sufferings. This temperament may lead to crime, for the individual who is regardless of pain in another, will be ready to destroy that other, if it suit his own purposes. Such an one was the pauper Dumollard, who was the murderer of at least six poor girls, and who attempted to kill several others. He seems not to have felt much gratification in murdering them, but to have been so utterly indifferent to their sufferings, that he killed them solely for the sake of their clothes, which were of the poorest description. He was sentenced to the guillotine, and executed in 1862.[1]

In others, the passion for blood is developed alongside with indifference to suffering.

Thus Andreas Bichel enticed young women into his house, under the pretence that he was possessed of a magic mirror, in which he would show them their future husbands; when he had them in his power he bound their hands behind their backs, and stunned them with a blow. He then stabbed them and despoiled them of their clothes, for the sake of which he committed the murders; but as he killed the young women

 [1. A full account of this man's trial is given by one who was present, in All the Year Round, No. 162.]

 [p. 135]

the passion of cruelty took possession of him, and he hacked the poor girls to pieces whilst they were still alive, in his anxiety to examine their insides. Catherine Seidel he opened with a hammer and a wedge, from her breast downwards, whilst still breathing. "I may say," he remarked at his trial, "that during the operation I was so eager, that I trembled all over, and I longed to rive off a piece and eat it."

Andreas Bichel was executed in 1809.[1]

Again, a third class of persons are cruel and bloodthirsty, because in them bloodthirstiness is a raging insatiable passion. In a civilized country those possessed by this passion are forced to control it through fear of the consequences, or to gratify it upon the brute creation. But in earlier days, when feudal lords were supreme in their domains, there have been frightful instances of their excesses, and the extent to which some of the Roman emperors indulged their passion for blood is matter of history.

Gall gives several authentic instances of bloodthirstiness.[2] A Dutch priest had such a desire to kill

 [1. The case of Andreas Bichel is given in Lady Duff Gordon's Remarkable Criminal Trials.

2. GALL: Sur les Fonctions du Cerveau, tom. iv.]

 [p. 136]

and to see killed, that he became chaplain to a regiment that he might have the satisfaction of seeing deaths occurring wholesale in engagements. The same man kept a large collection of various kinds of domestic animals, that he might be able to torture their young. He killed the animals for his kitchen, and was acquainted with all the hangmen in the country, who sent him notice of executions, and he would walk for days that he might have the gratification of seeing a man executed.

In the field of battle the passion is variously developed; some feel positive delight in slaying, others are indifferent. An old soldier, who had been in Waterloo, informed me that to his mind there was no pleasure equal to running a man through the body, and that he could lie awake at night musing on the pleasurable sensations afforded him by that act.

Highwaymen are frequently not content with robbery, but manifest a bloody inclination to torment and kill. John Rosbeck, for instance, is well known to have invented and exercised the most atrocious cruelties, merely that he might witness the sufferings of his victims, who were especially women and children. Neither fear nor torture could break him of the dreadful passion till he was executed.

[p. 137]

Gall tells of a violin-player, who, being arrested, confessed to thirty-four murders, all of which he had committed, not from enmity or intent to rob, but solely because it afforded him an intense pleasure to kill.

Spurzheim[1] tells of a priest at Strasbourg, who, though rich, and uninfluenced by envy or revenge, from exactly the same motive, killed three persons.

Gall relates the case of a brother of the Duke of Bourbon, Conde, Count of Charlois, who, from infancy, had an inveterate pleasure in torturing animals: growing older, he lived to shed the blood of human beings, and to exercise various kinds of cruelty. He also murdered many from no other motive, and shot at slaters for the pleasure of seeing them fall from the roofs of houses.

Louis XI. of France caused the death of 4,000 people during his reign; he used to watch their executions from a neighbouring lattice. He had gibbets placed outside his own palace, and himself conducted the executions.

It must not be supposed that cruelty exists merely in the coarse and rude; it is quite as frequently observed in the refined and educated. Among the former it is

 [1. Doctrine of the Mind, p. 158.]

 [p. 138]

manifest chiefly in insensibility to the sufferings of others; in the latter it appears as a passion, the indulgence of which causes intense pleasure.

Those bloody tyrants, Nero and Caligula, Alexander Borgia, and Robespierre, whose highest enjoyment consisted in witnessing the agonies of their fellow-men, were full of delicate sensibilities and great refinement of taste and manner.

I have seen an accomplished young woman of considerable refinement and of a highly strung nervous temperament, string flies with her needle on a piece of thread, and watch complacently their flutterings. Cruelty may remain latent till, by some accident. it is aroused, and then it will break forth in a devouring flame. It is the same with the passion for blood as with the passions of love and hate; we have no conception of the violence with which they can rage till circumstances occur which call them into action. Love or hate will be dominant in a breast which has been in serenity, till suddenly the spark falls, passion blazes forth, and the serenity of the quiet breast is shattered for ever. A word, a glance, a touch, are sufficient to fire the magazine of passion in the heart, and to desolate for ever an existence. It is the same with bloodthirstiness. It may lurk in the

[p. 139]

deeps of some heart very dear to us. It may smoulder in the bosom which is most cherished by us, and we may be perfectly unconscious of its existence there. Perhaps circumstances will not cause its development; perhaps moral principle may have bound it down with fetters it can never break.

Michael Wagener[1] relates a horrible story which occurred in Hungary, suppressing the name of the person, as it was that of a still powerful family in the country. It illustrates what I have been saying, and shows how trifling a matter may develope the passion in its most hideous proportions.

"Elizabeth ------ was wont to dress well in order to please her husband, and she spent half the day over her toilet. On one occasion, a lady's-maid saw something wrong in her head-dress, and as a recompence for observing it, received such a severe box on the ears that the blood gushed from her nose, and spirted on to her mistress's face. When the blood drops were washed off her face, her skin appeared much more beautiful--whiter and more transparent on the spots where the blood had been.

"Elizabeth formed the resolution to bathe her face

 [1. Beitrage zur philosophischen Anthropologie, Wien, 1796.]

 [p. 140]

and her whole body in human blood so as to enhance her beauty. Two old women and a certain Fitzko assisted her in her undertaking. This monster used to kill the luckless victim, and the old women caught the blood, in which Elizabeth was wont to bathe at the hour of four in the morning. After the bath she appeared more beautiful than before.

"She continued this habit after the death of her husband (1604) in the hopes of gaining new suitors. The unhappy girls who were allured to the castle, under the plea that they were to be taken into service there, were locked up in a cellar. Here they were beaten till their bodies were swollen. Elizabeth not unfrequently tortured the victims herself; often she changed their clothes which dripped with blood, and then renewed her cruelties. The swollen bodies were then cut up with razors.

"Occasionally she had the girls burned, and then cut up, but the great majority were beaten to death.

"At last her cruelty became so great, that she would stick needles into those who sat with her in a carriage, especially if they were of her own sex. One of her servant-girls she stripped naked, smeared her with honey, and so drove her out of the house.

[p. 141]

"When she was ill, and could not indulge her cruelty, she bit a person who came near her sick bed as though she were a wild beast.

"She caused, in all, the death of 650 girls, some in Tscheita, on the neutral ground, where she had a cellar constructed for the purpose; others in different localities; for murder and bloodshed became with her a necessity.

"When at last the parents of the lost children could no longer be cajoled, the castle was seized, and the traces of the murders were discovered. Her accomplices were executed, and she was imprisoned for life."

 

An equally remarkable example will be found in the account of the Mareschal de Retz given at some length in the sequel. He vas an accomplished man, a scholar, an able general, and a courtier; but suddenly the impulse to murder and destroy came upon him whilst sitting in the library reading Suetonius; he yielded to the impulse, and became one of the greatest monsters of cruelty the world has produced.

The case of Sviatek, the Gallician cannibal, is also to the purpose. This man was a harmless pauper, till one day accident brought him to the scene of a conflagration. Hunger impelled him to taste of the roast

[p. 142]

fragments of a human being who had perished in the fire, and from that moment he ravened for man's flesh.

M. Bertrand was a French gentleman of taste and education. He one day lounged over the churchyard wall in a quiet country village and watched a funeral. Instantly an overwhelming desire to dig up and rend the corpse which he had seen committed to the ground came upon him, and for years he lived as a human hyaena, preying upon the dead. His story is given in detail in the fifteenth chapter.

An abnormal condition of body sometimes produces this desire for blood. It is manifest in certain cases of pregnancy, when the constitution loses its balance, and the appetite becomes diseased. Schenk[1] gives instances.

A pregnant woman saw a baker carrying loaves on his bare shoulder. She was at once filled with such a craving for his flesh that she refused to taste any food till her husband persuaded the baker, by the offer of a large sum, to allow his wife to bite him. The man yielded, and the woman fleshed her teeth in his shoulder twice; but he held out no longer. The wife

 [1. Observationes Medic. lib. iv. De Gravidis.]

 [p. 143]

bore twins on three occasions, twice living, the third time dead.

A woman in an interesting condition, near Andernach on the Rhine, murdered her husband, to whom she was warmly attached, ate half his body, and salted the rest. When the passion left her she became conscious of the horrible nature of her act, and she gave herself up to justice.

In 1553, a wife cut her husband's throat, and gnawed the nose and the left arm, whilst the body was yet warm. She then gutted the corpse, and salted it for future consumption. Shortly after, she gave birth to three children, and she only became conscious of what she had done when her neighbours asked after the father, that they might announce to him the arrival of the little ones.

In the summer of 1845, the Greek papers contained an account of a pregnant woman murdering her husband for the purpose of roasting and eating his liver.

That the passion to destroy is prevalent in certain maniacs is well known; this is sometimes accompanied by cannibalism.

Gruner[1] gives an account of a shepherd who was

 [1. De Anthropophago Bucano. Jen. 1792.]

 [p. 144]

evidently deranged, who killed and ate two men. Marc[1] relates that a woman of Unterelsas, during the absence of her husband, a poor labourer, murdered her son, a lad fifteen months old. She chopped of his legs and stewed them with cabbage. She ate a portion, and offered the rest to her husband. It is true that the family were very poor, but there was food in the house at the time. In prison the woman gave evident signs of derangement.

The cases in which bloodthirstiness and cannibalism are united with insanity are those which properly fall under the head of Lycanthropy. The instances recorded in the preceding chapter point unmistakably to hallucination accompanying the lust for blood. Jean Grenier, Roulet, and others, were firmly convinced that they had undergone transformation. A disordered condition of mind or body may produce hallucination in a form depending on the character and instincts of the individual. Thus, an ambitious man labouring under monomania will imagine himself to be a king; a covetous man will be plunged in despair, believing himself to be penniless, or exult at the vastness of the treasure which he imagines that he has discovered.

 [1. Die Geistes Krankheiten. Berlin, 1844.]

 [p. 145] The old man suffering from rheumatism or gout conceives himself to be formed of china or glass, and the foxhunter tallyhos! at each new moon, as though he were following a pack. In like manner, the naturally cruel man, if the least affected in his brain, will suppose himself to be transformed into the most cruel and bloodthirsty animal with which he is acquainted.

The hallucinations under which lycanthropists suffered may have arisen from various causes. The older writers, as Forestus and Burton, regard the were-wolf mania as a species of melancholy madness, and some do not deem it necessary for the patient to believe in his transformation for them to regard him as a lycanthropist.

In the present state of medical knowledge, we know that very different conditions may give rise to hallucinations.

In fever cases the sensibility is so disturbed that the patient is often deceived as to the space occupied by his limbs, and he supposes them to be preternaturally distended or contracted. In the case of typhus, it is not uncommon for the sick person, with deranged nervous system, to believe himself to be double in the bed, or to be severed in half, or to have lost his limbs. [p. 146] He may regard his members as composed of foreign and often fragile materials, as glass, or he may so lose his personality as to suppose himself to have become a woman.

A monomaniac who believes himself to be some one else, seeks to enter into the feelings, thoughts, and habits of the assumed personality, and from the facility with which this is effected, he draws an argument, conclusive to himself, of the reality of the change. He thenceforth speaks of himself under the assumed character, and experiences all its needs, wishes, passions, and the like. The closer the identification becomes, the more confirmed is the monomaniac in his madness, the character of which varies with the temperament of the individual. If the person's mind be weak, or rude and uncultivated, the tenacity with which he clings to his metamorphosis is feebler, and it becomes more difficult to draw the line between his lucid and insane utterances. Thus Jean Grenier, who laboured under this form of mania, said in his trial much that was true, but it was mixed with the ramblings of insanity.

Hallucination may also be produced by artificial means, and there are evidences afforded by the confessions of those tried for lycanthropy, that these artificial

[p. 147]

means were employed by them. I refer to the salve so frequently mentioned in witch and were-wolf trials. The following passage is from the charming Golden Ass of Apuleius; it proves that salves were extensively used by witches for the purpose of transformation, even in his day:--

"Fotis showed me a crack in the door, and bade me look through it, upon which I looked and saw Pamphile first divest herself of all her garments, and then, having unlocked a chest, take from it several little boxes, and open one of the latter, which contained a certain ointment. Rubbing this ointment a good while previously between the palms of her hands, she anointed her whole body, from the very nails of her toes to the hair on the crown of her head, and when she was anointed all over, she whispered many magic words to a lamp, as if she were talking to it. Then she began to move her arms, first with tremulous jerks, and afterwards by a gentle undulating motion, till a glittering, downy surface by degrees overspread her body, feathers and strong quills burst forth suddenly, her nose became a hard crooked beak, her toes changed to curved talons, and Pamphile was no longer Pamphile, but it was an owl I saw before me. And now, uttering a harsh, querulous scream,

[p. 148]

leaping from the ground by little and little, in order to try her powers, and presently poising herself aloft on her pinions, she stretched forth her wings on either Side to their full extent, and flew straight away.

"Having now been actually a witness of the performance of the magical art, and of the metamorphosis of Pamphile, I remained for some time in a stupefied state of astonishment. . . . At last, after I had rubbed my eyes some time, had recovered a little from the amazement and abstraction of mind, and begun to feel a consciousness of the reality of things about me, I took hold of the hand of Fotis and said,--'Sweet damsel, bring me, I beseech thee, a portion of the ointment with which thy mistress hath just now anointed, and when thou hast made me a bird, I will be thy slave, and even wait upon thee like a winged Cupid.' Accordingly she crept gently into the apartment, quickly returned with the box of ointment, hastily placed it in my hands, and then immediately departed.

"Elated to an extraordinary degree at the sight of the precious treasure, I kissed the box several times successively; and uttering repeated aspirations in hopes of a prosperous flight, I stripped off my clothes as quick as possible, dipped my fingers greedily into the box,

[p. 149]

and having thence extracted a good large lump of ointment, rubbed it all over my body and limbs. When I was thoroughly anointed, I swung my arms up and down, in imitation of the movement of a bird's pinions, and continued to do so a little while, when instead of any perceptible token of feathers or wings making their appearance, my own thin skin, alas! grew into a hard leathern hide, covered with bristly hair, my fingers and toes disappeared, the palms of my hands and the soles of my feet became four solid hoofs, and from the end of my spine a long tail projected. My face was enormous, my mouth wide, my nostrils gaping, my lips pendulous, and I had a pair of immoderately long, rough, hairy ears. In short, when I came to contemplate my transformation to its full extent, I found that, instead of a bird, I had become--an ASS."[1]

Of what these magical salves were composed we know. They were composed of narcotics, to wit, Solanum somniferum, aconite, hyoscyamus, belladonna, opium, acorus vulgaris, sium. These were boiled down with oil, or the fat of little children who were murdered for the purpose. The blood of a bat was added, but its

 [1. APULEIUS, Sir George Head's translation, bk. iii.]

 [p. 150]

effects could have been nil. To these may have been added other foreign narcotics, the names of which have not transpired.

Whatever may have been the cause of the hallucination, it is not surprising that the lycanthropist should have imagined himself transformed into a beast. The cases I have instanced are those of shepherds, who were by nature of their employment, brought into collision with wolves; and it is not surprising that these persons, in a condition liable to hallucinations, should imagine themselves to be transformed into wild beasts, and that their minds reverting to the injuries sustained from these animals, they should, in their state of temporary insanity, accuse themselves of the acts of rapacity committed by the beasts into which they believed themselves to be transformed. It is a well-known fact that men, whose minds are unhinged, will deliver themselves up to justice, accusing themselves of having committed crimes which have actually taken place, and it is only on investigation that their self-accusation proves to be false; and yet they will describe the circumstances with the greatest minuteness, and be thoroughly convinced of their own criminality. I need give but a single instance.

[p. 151]

In the war of the French Revolution, the Hermione frigate was commanded by Capt. Pigot, a harsh man and a severe commander. His crew mutinied, and carried the ship into an enemy's port, having murdered the captain and several of the officers, under circumstances of extreme barbarity. One midshipman escaped, by whom many of the criminals, who were afterwards taken and delivered over to justice, one by one, were identified. Mr. Finlayson, the Government actuary, who at that time held an official situation in the Admiralty, states:--"In my own experience I have known, on separate occasions, more than six sailors who voluntarily confessed to having struck the first blow at Capt. Pigot. These men detailed all the horrid circumstances of the mutiny with extreme minuteness and perfect accuracy; nevertheless, not one of them had ever been in the ship, nor had so much as seen Capt. Pigot in their lives. They had obtained by tradition, from their messmates, the particulars of the story. When long on a foreign station, hungering and thirsting for home, their minds became enfeebled; at length they actually believed themselves guilty of the crime over which they had so long brooded, and submitted with a gloomy pleasure to being sent to England in irons, for judgment. [p. 152] At the Admiralty we were always able to detect and establish their innocence, in defiance of their own solemn asseverations."--(London Judicial Gazette, January, 1803.)

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 153]

 

CHAPTER X.

 

MYTHOLOGICAL ORIGIN OF THE WERE-WOLF MYTH.

Metempsychosis--Sympathy between Men and Beasts--Finnbog and the Bear--Osage and the Beaver--The Connexion of Soul and Body--Buddism--Case of Mr. Holloway--Popular ideas concerning the Body--The derivation of the German Leichnam--Feather Dresses--Transmigration of Souls--A Basque Story--Story from the Pantschatantra--Savage ideas regarding Natural Phenomena--Thunder, Lightning, and Cloud--The origin of the Dragon--John of Bromton's Dragon a Waterspout--The Legend of Typhoeus--Allegorizing of the Effects of a Hurricane--Anthropomorphosis--The Cirrus Cloud, a Heavenly Swan--Urvaci--The Storm-cloud a Daemon--Vritra and Rakschasas--Story of a Brahmin and a Rakschasas

TRANSFORMATION into beasts forms an integral portion of all mythological systems. The gods of Greece were wont to change themselves into animals in order to carry out their designs with greater speed, security, and secrecy, than in human forms. In Scandinavian mythology, Odin changed himself into the shape of an eagle, Loki into that of a salmon. Eastern religions abound in stories of transformation.

The line of demarcation between this and the

[p. 154]

translation of a beast's soul into man, or a man's soul into a beast's (metempsychosis) is very narrow.

The doctrine of metempsychosis is founded on the consciousness of gradation between beasts and men. The belief in a soul-endowed animal world was present among the ancients, and the laws of intelligence and instinct were misconstrued, or were regarded as a puzzle, which no man might solve.

The human soul with its consciousness seemed to be something already perfected in a pre-existing state, and, in the myth of metempsychosis, we trace the yearnings and gropings of the soul after the source whence its own consciousness was derived, counting its dreams and hallucinations as gleams of memory, recording acts which had taken place in a former state of existence.

Modern philosophy has resumed the same thread of conjecture, and thinks to see in man the perfected development of lower organisms.

After death the translation of the soul was supposed to continue. It became either absorbed into the nous, into Brahma, into the deity, or it sank in the scale of creation, and was degraded to animate a brute. Thus the doctrine of metempsychosis was emphatically one of rewards and punishments, for the condition of the soul

[p. 155]

after death depended on its training during life. A savage and bloodthirsty man was exiled, as in the case of Lycaon, into the body of a wild beast: the soul of a timorous man entered a hare, and drunkards or gluttons became swine.

The intelligence which was manifest in the beasts bore such a close resemblance to that of man, in the childhood and youth of the world, that it is not to be wondered at, if our forefathers failed to detect the line of demarcation drawn between instinct and reason. And failing to distinguish this, they naturally fell into the belief in metempsychosis.

It was not merely a fancied external resemblance between the beast and man, but it was the perception of skill, pursuits, desires, sufferings, and griefs like his own, in the animal creation, which led man to detect within the beast something analogous to the soul within himself; and this, notwithstanding the points of contrast existing between them, elicited in his mind so strong a sympathy that, without a great stretch of imagination, he invested the beast with his own attributes, and with the full powers of his own understanding. He regarded it as actuated by the same motives, as subject to the same laws of honour, as moved by the same prejudices, and

[p. 156]

the higher the beast was in the scale, the more he regarded it as an equal. A singular illustration of this will be found in the Finnboga Saga, c. xi.

"Now we must relate about Finnbog. Afterward in the evening, when men slept, he rose, took his weapons, and went forth, following the tracks which led to the dairy farm. As was his wont, he stepped out briskly along the spoor till he came to the dairy. There he found the bear lying down, and he had slain the sheep, and he was lying on them lapping their blood. Then said Finnbog: 'Stand up, Brain! make ready against me; that becomes you more than crouching over those sheep's carcases.'

"The bear sat up, looked at him, and lay down again. Finnbog said, 'If you think that I am too fully armed to match with you, I will do this,' and he took of his helmet and laid aside his shield. Then he said, Stand up now, if you dare! '

"The bear sat up, shook his head, and then cast himself down again. "Finnbog exclaimed, 'I see, you want us both to be boune alike!' so he flung aside his sword and said, 'Be it as you will; now stand up if you have the heart that I believe you have, rather than one such as was possessed by these rent sheep.'

[p. 157]

"Then Bruin stood up and prepared to fight."

The following story taken from the mouth of an Osage Indian by J. A. Jones, and published in his Traditions of the North American Indians, shows how thoroughly the savage mind misses the line of demarcation between instinct and reason, and how the man of the woods looks upon beasts as standing on an equality with himself.

An Osage warrior is in search of a wife: he admires the tidy and shrewd habits of the beaver. He accordingly goes to a beaver-hut to obtain one of that race for a bride. "In one corner of the room sat a beaver-woman combing the heads of some little beavers, whose ears she boxed very soundly when they would not lie still. The warrior, i. e. the beaver-chief, whispered the Osage that she was his second wife, and was very apt to be cross when there was work to be done, which prevented her from going to see her neighbours. Those whose heads she was combing were her children, he said, and she who had made them rub their noses against each other and be friends, was his eldest daughter. Then calling aloud, 'Wife,' said he, 'what have you to eat? The stranger is undoubtedly hungry; see, he is pale, his eye has no fire, and his step is like that of a moose.'

[p. 158]

"Without replying to him, for it was a sulky day with her, she called aloud, and a dirty-looking beaver entered. 'Go,' said she, 'and fetch the stranger something to eat.' With that the beaver girl passed through a small door into another room, from which she soon returned, bringing some large pieces of willow-bark, which she laid at the feet of the warrior and his guest. While the warrior-beaver was chewing the willow, and the Osage was pretending to do so, they fell to talking over many matters, particularly the wars of the beavers with the otters, and their frequent victories over them. He told our father by what means the beavers felled large trees, and moved them to the places where they wished to make dams; how they raised to an erect position the poles for their lodges, and how they plastered them so as to keep out rain. Then he spoke of their employments when they had buried the hatchet; of the peace and happiness and tranquillity they enjoyed when gathered into companies, they rested from their labours, and passed their time in talking and feasting, and bathing, and playing the game of bones, and making love. All the while the young beaver-maiden sat with her eyes fixed upon the Osage, at every pause moving a little nearer, till at length she was at

[p. 159]

his side with her forepaw upon his arm; a minute more and she had placed it around his neck, and was rubbing her soft furry cheek against his. Our ancestor, on his part, betrayed no disinclination to receive her caresses, but returned them with equal ardour. The old beaver seeing what was going on, turned his back upon them, and suffered them to be as kind to each other as they pleased. At last, turning quickly round, while the maiden, suspecting what was coming, and pretending to be abashed, ran behind her mother, he said, 'To end this foolery, what say you to marrying my daughter? She is well brought up, and is the most industrious girl in the village. She will flap more wall with her tail in a day than any maiden in the nation; she will gnaw down a larger tree betwixt the rising of the sun and the coming of the shadows than many a smart beaver of the other sex. As for her wit, try her at the game of the dish, and see who gets up master; and for cleanliness, look at her petticoat?' Our father answered that he did not doubt that she was industrious and cleanly, able to gnaw down a very large tree, and to use her tail to very good purpose; that he loved her much, and wished to make her the mother of his children. And thereupon the bargain was concluded."

[p. 160]

These two stories, the one taken from Icelandic saga, the other from American Indian tradition, shew clearly the oneness which the uncultivated mind believes to exist between the soul of man and the soul of beast. The same sentiments actuate both man and brute, and if their actions are unlike, it is because of the difference in their formation. The soul within is identical, but the external accidents of body are unlike.

Among many rude as well as cultivated people, the body is regarded as a mere garment wrapped around the soul. The Buddist looks upon identity as existing in the soul alone, and the body as no more constituting identity, than the clothes he puts on or takes off. He exists as a spirit; for convenience he vests himself in a body; sometimes that body is human, sometimes it is bestial. As his soul rises in the spiritual scale, the nobler is the animal form which it tenants. Budda himself passed through various stages of existence; in one he was a hare, and his soul being noble, led him to immolate himself, in order that he might offer hospitality to Indra, who, in the form of an old man, craved of him food and shelter. The Buddist regards animals with reverence; an ancestor may be tenanting the body of the ox he is driving, or a descendant may be running at

[p. 161]

his side barking, and wagging his tail. When he falls into an ecstasy, his soul is leaving his body for a little while, it is laying aside its raiment of flesh and blood and bone, to return to it once more when the trance is over. But this idea is not confined to Buddists, it is common everywhere. The spirit or soul is supposed to be imprisoned in the body, the body is but the lantern through which the spirit shines, "the corruptible body" is believed to "press down the soul," and the soul is unable to attain to perfect happiness till it has shuffled off this earthy coil. Butler regards the members of the body as so many instruments used by the soul for the purpose of seeing, hearing, feeling, &c., just as we use telescopes or crutches, and which may be rejected without injury to our individuality.

The late Mr. J. Holloway, of the Bank of England, brother to the engraver of that name, related of himself that, being one night in bed, and unable to sleep, he had fixed his eyes and thoughts with uncommon intensity on a beautiful star that was shining in at the window, when he suddenly found his spirit released from his body and soaring into space. But instantly seized with anxiety for the anguish of his wife, if she discovered his body apparently dead beside her, he

[p. 162]

returned, and re-entered it with difficulty. He described that returning as a returning from light into darkness, and that whilst the spirit was free, he was alternately in the light or the dark, accordingly as his thoughts were with his wife or with the star. Popular mythology in most lands regards the soul as oppressed by the body, and its liberation is considered a deliverance from the "burden" of the flesh. Whether the soul is at all able to act or express itself without a body, any more than a fire is able to make cloth without the apparatus of boiler and machinery, is a question which has not commended itself to the popular mind. But it may be remarked that the Christian religion alone is that which raises the body to a dignity equal to that of the soul, and gives it a hope of ennoblement and resurrection never dreamed of in any mythological system.

But the popular creed, in spite of the most emphatic testimony of Scripture, is that the soul is in bondage so long as it is united to a body, a creed entirely in accordance with that of Buddism.

If the body be but the cage, as a poet[1] of our own has been pleased to call it, in which dwells the imprisoned soul, it is quite possible for the soul to change

 [1. VAUGHN, Sitex Scintillans.]

 [p. 163]

its cage. If the body be but a vesture clothing the soul, as the Buddist asserts, it is not improbable that it may occasionally change its vesture.

This is self-evident, and thus have arisen the countless tales of transformation and transmigration which are found all over the world. That the same view of the body as a mere clothing of the soul was taken by our Teutonic and Scandinavian ancestors, is evident even from the etymology of the words leichnam, likhama, used to express the soulless body.

I have already spoken of the Norse word hamr, I wish now to make some further remarks upon it. Hamr is represented in Anglo-Saxon by hama, homa, in Saxon by hamo, in old High German by hamo, in old French by homa, hama, to which are related the Gothic gahamon, ufar-hamon, ana-hamon, enduesthai, ependuesthai; and-hamon, af-hamon, apekduein ekduesthai thence also the old High German hemidi, and the modern Hemde, garment. In composition we find this word, as lik-hagnr, in old Norse; in old High German lik-hamo, Anglo-Saxon lik-hama, and flaesc-hama, Old Saxon, lik-hamo, modern German Leich-nam, a body, i. e. a garment of flesh, precisely as the bodies of birds are called in old Norse fjathr-hamr, in Anglo-Saxon

[p. 164]

 fetherhoma, in Old Saxon fetherhamo, or feather-dresses and the bodies of wolves are called in old Norse ulfshamr, and seals' bodies in Faroese kopahamr. The significance of the old verb ath hamaz is now evident; it is to migrate from one body to another, and hama-skipti is a transmigration of the soul. The method of this transmigration consisted in simply investing the body with the skin of the animal into which the soul was to migrate. When Loki, the Northern god of evil, went in quest of the stolen Idunn, he borrowed of Freyja her falcon dress, and at once became, to all intents and purposes, a falcon. Thiassi pursued him as he left Thrymheimr, having first taken upon him an eagle's dress, and thereby become an eagle.

In order to seek Thor's lost hammer, Loki borrowed again of Freyja her feather dress, and as be flew away in it, the feathers sounded as they winnowed the breeze (fjathrhamr dunthi).

In like manner Caedmon speaks of an evil spirit flying away in feather-dress: "yat he mid fetherhomon fleogan meahte, windan on wolkne" (Gen. ed. Gr. 417), and of an angel, "yuo yar suogan quam engil yes alowaldon obhana fun radure faran an fetherhamon" (Helj. 171, 23), the very expression made use of when

[p. 165]

speaking of a bird: "farad an fetharhamun" (Helj. 50,11).

The soul, in certain cases, is able to free itself from the body and to enter that of beast or man--in this form stood the myth in various theological systems.

Among the Finns and Lapps it is not uncommon for a magician to fall into a cataleptic condition, and during the period his soul is believed to travel very frequently in bodily form, having assumed that of any animal most suitable for its purpose. I have given instances in a former chapter. The same doctrine is evident in most cases of lycanthropy. The patient is in a state of trance, his body is watched, and it remains motionless, but his soul has migrated into the carcase of a wolf, which it vivifies, and in which it runs its course. A curious Basque story shows that among this strange Turanian people, cut off by such a flood of Aryan nations from any other members of its family, the same superstition remains. A huntsman was once engaged in the chase of it bear among the Pyreneean peaks, when Bruin turned suddenly on him and hugged him to death, but not before he had dealt the brute its mortal wound. As the huntsman expired, he breathed

[p. 166]

his soul into the body of the bear, and thenceforward ranged the mountains as a beast.

One of the tales of the Sanskrit book of fables, the Pantschatantra, affords such a remarkable testimony to the Indian belief in metempsychosis, that I am tempted to give it in abstract.

A king was one day passing through the marketplace of his city, when he observed a hunchbacked merryandrew, whose contortions and jokes kept the bystanders in a roar of laughter. Amused with the fellow, the king brought him to his palace. Shortly after, in the hearing of the clown, a necromancer taught the monarch the art of sending his soul into a body not his own.

Some little while after this, the monarch, anxious to put in practice his newly acquired knowledge, rode into the forest accompanied by his fool, who, he believed, had not heard, or, at all events comprehended, the lesson. They came upon the corpse of a Brahmin lying in the depth of the jungle, where he had died of thirst. The king, leaving his horse, performed the requisite ceremony, and instantly his soul had migrated into the body of the, Brahmin, and his own lay as dead upon the ground. At the same moment,

[p. 167]

however, the hunchback deserted his body, and possessed himself of that which had been the king's, and shouting farewell to the dismayed monarch, he rode back to the palace, where he was received with royal honours. But it was not long before the queen and one of the ministers discovered that a screw was somewhere loose, and when the quondam king, but now Brahmin, arrived and told his tale, a plot was laid for the recovery of his body. The queen asked her false husband whether it were possible to make her parrot talk, and he in a moment of uxorious weakness promised to make it speak. He laid his body aside, and sent his soul into the parrot. Immediately the true king jumped out of his Brahmin body and resumed that which was legitimately his own, and then proceeded, with the queen, to wring the neck of the parrot.

But besides the doctrine of metempsychosis, which proved such a fertile mother of fable, there was another article of popular mythology which gave rise to stories of transformation. Among the abundant superstitions existing relative to transformation, three shapes seem to have been pre-eminently affected--that of the swan, that of the wolf, and that of the serpent. In many of the stories of those transformed, it is evident that the

[p. 168]

individual who changes shape is regarded with superstitious reverence, as a being of a higher order--of a divine nature. In Christian countries, everything relating to heathen mythology was regarded with a suspicious eye by the clergy, and any miraculous powers not sanctioned by the church were attributed to the evil one. The heathen gods became devils, and the marvels related of them were supposed to be effected by diabolic agency. A case of transformation which had shown the power of an ancient god, was in Christian times considered as an instance of witchcraft. Thus stories of transformation fell into bad odour, and those who changed shapes were no longer regarded as heavenly beings, commanding reverence, but as miserable witches deserving the stake.

In the infancy of the world, when natural phenomena were ill-understood, expressions which to us are poetical were of a real significance. When we speak of thunder rolling, we use an expression which conveys no further idea than a certain likeness observed between the detonations and the roll of a vehicle; but to the uninstructed mind it was more. The primaeval savage knew not what caused thunder, and tracing the resemblance between it and the sound of wheels, he at once concluded that the

[p. 169]

chariot of the gods was going abroad, or that the celestial spirits were enjoying a game of bowls.

We speak of fleecy clouds, because they appear to us soft and light as wool, but the first men tracing the same resemblance, believed the light vapours to be flocks of heavenly sheep. Or we say that the clouds are flying: the savage used the same expression, as he looked up at the mackerel sky, and saw in it flights of swans coursing over the heavenly lake. Once more, we creep nearer to the winter fire, shivering at the wind, which we remark is howling around the house, and yet we do not suppose that the wind has a voice. The wild primaeval men thought that it had, and because dogs and wolves howl, and the wind howled, and because they had seen dogs and wolves, they concluded that the storm-wind was a night-hound, or a monstrous wolf, racing over the country in the darkness of the winter night, ravening for prey.

Along with the rise of this system of explaining the operations of nature by analogies in the bestial world, another conclusion forced itself on the untaught mind. The flocks which strayed in heaven were no earthly sheep, but were the property of spiritual beings, and were themselves perhaps spiritual; the swans which flew

[p. 170]

aloft, far above the topmost peak of the Himalaya, were no ordinary swans, but were divine and heavenly. The wolf which howled so wildly in the long winter night, the hounds, whose bay sounded so. dismally through the shaking black forest, were no mundane wolves and hounds, but issued from the home of a divine hunter, and were themselves wondrous, supernatural beings of godlike race.

And so, the clouds having become swans, the swan-clouds were next believed to be divine beings, valkyries, apsaras, and the like, seen by mortals in their feather-dresses, but appearing among the gods as damsels. The storm-wind having been supposed to be a wolf, next was taken to be a tempestuous god, who delighted to hunt on earth in lupine form.

I have mentioned also the serpent shape, as being one very favourite in mythology. The ancient people saw the forked and writhing lightning, and supposed it to be a heavenly fiery serpent, a serpent which had godlike powers, which was in fact a divine being, manifesting himself to mortals under that form. Among the North American Indians, the lightning is still regarded as the great serpent, and the thunder is supposed to be his hissing.

[p. 171]

"Ah!" exclaimed a Magdeburg peasant to a German professor, during a thunder-storm, as a vivid forked gleam shot to earth, "what a glorious snake was that!" And this resemblance did not escape the Greeks.

	 
		elikes d' eklampoysi steropes xapyroi.
		
		
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 
											 
												  Aesch. Prom. 1064.
												
												         drakonta pyrsonuton, os aplaton amfeliktos
		 elik' efrourei, ktanun.
		
		
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 
											 
												  Eurip. Herc. F. 395.
												
												           And according to Aristotle, elikiai are the lightnings, grammoeidus feromenoi.

It is so difficult for us to unlearn all we know of the nature of meteorological phenomena, so hard for us to look upon atmospheric changes as though we knew nothing of the laws that govern them, that we are disposed to treat such explanations of popular myths as I have given above, as fantastic and improbable.

But among the ancients all solutions of natural problems were tentative, and it is only after the failure of every attempt made to explain these phenomena on supernatural grounds that we have been driven to the discovery of the true interpretation. Yet among the vulgar a vast amount of mythology remains, and is used still to explain atmospheric mysteries. The other day a [p. 172] Yorkshire girl, when asked why she was not afraid of thunder, replied because it was only her Father's voice; what knew she of the rushing together of air to fill the vacuum caused by the transit of the electric fluid? to her the thunder-clap was the utterance of the Almighty. Still in North Germany does the peasant say of thunder, that the angels are playing skittles aloft, and of the snow, that they are shaking up the feather-beds in heaven.

The myth of the dragon is one which admits, perhaps more than any other, of identification with a meteorological phenomenon, and presents to us as well the phase of transition from theriomorphosis to anthropomorphosis.

The dragon of popular mythology is nothing else than the thunderstorm, rising at the horizon, rushing with expanded, winnowing, black pennons across the sky, darting out its forked fiery tongue, and belching fire. In a Slovakian legend, the dragon sleeps in a mountain cave through the winter months, but, at the equinox, bursts forth--"In a moment the heaven was darkened and became black as pitch, only illumined by the fire which flashed from dragon's jaws and eyes. The earth shuddered, the stones rattled down the mountain sides into the glens. Right and left, left and

[p. 173]

right, did the dragon lash his tail, overthrowing pines and beeches, snapping them as rods. He evacuated such floods of water that the mountain torrents were full. But after a while his power was exhausted, he lashed no more with his tail, ejected no more water, and spat no more fire."

I think it is impossible not to see in this description, a spring-tide thunderstorm. But to make it more evident that the untaught mind did regard such a storm as a dragon, I think the following quotation from John of Brompton's Chronicle will convince the most sceptical: "Another remarkable thing is this, that took place during a certain month in the Gulf of Satalia (on the coast of Pamphylia). There appeared a great and black dragon which came in clouds, and let down his head into the water, whilst his tail seemed turned to the sky; and the dragon drew the water to him by drinking, with such avidity, that, if any ship, even though laden with men or any other heavy articles, had been near him when drinking, it would nevertheless have been sucked up and carried on high. In order however to avoid this danger, it is necessary, when people see it, at once to make a great uproar, and to shout and hammer tables, so that the dragon, hearing the noise,

[p. 174]

and the voices of those shouting, may withdraw himself far off. Some people, however, assert that this is not a dragon, but the sun drawing up the waters of the sea; which seems more probable."[1] Such is John of Brompton's account of a waterspout. In Greek mythology the dragon of the storm has begun to undergo anthropomorphosis. Typhoeus is the son of Tartarus and Terra; the storm rising from the horizon may well be supposed to issue from the earth's womb, and its characteristics are sufficient to decide its paternity. Typhoeus, the whirlwind or typhoon, has a hundred dragon or serpent heads, the long writhing strive of vapour which run before the hurricane cloud. He belches fire, that is, lightnings issue from the clouds, and his roaring is like the howling of wild dogs. Typhoeus ascends to heaven to make war on the gods, who fly from him in various fantastic shapes; who cannot see in this ascent the hurricane climbing up the vault of sky, and in the flying gods, the many fleeting fragments of white cloud which are seen drifting across the heavens before the gale!

Typhoeus, according to Hesiod, is the father of all bad winds, which destroy with rain and tempest, all in

 [1. Apud TWYSDEN, Hist. Anglicae Script. x. 1652. p. 1216.]

 [p. 175]

fact which went among the Greeks by the name of lailaps, bringing injury to the agriculturist and peril to the voyager.

	 
		'Ek de Tyfueos est' anemun menos ygron aeptun,
		 nosfi Notoy Boreu te, kai argesteu Zefuroy te.
		 oi ge men en theofin genee, thnetois meg' oneiar.
		 ai d' allai mapsaurai epipneioysi thalassan.
		 ai d' e?'toi piptoysai es eeroeidea ponton,
		 peima mega thnetoisi, kakei thuoysin aellei.
		 allote d' allai aeisi, diaskidnasi te neias,
		 nautas te ftheiroysi . kakou d' oy gignetai alke
		 andrasin, oi keineisi sinantuntai kata ponton.
		 ai d' au' kai kata gaian apeiriton, anthemoessan
		 erg' erata ftheiroysi xamaigeneun anthrupun,
		 pimpleusai konios te kai argaleoy kolosyrtou
		
		
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 
											 
												  Hesiod. Theog. 870, seq.
												
												             In both modern Greek and Lithuanian household mythology the dragon or drake has become an ogre, a gigantic man with few of the dracontine attributes remaining. Von Hahn, in his Griechische und Albanesische Marchen, tells many tales of drakes, and in all, the old characteristics have been lost, and the drake is simply a gigantic man with magical and superhuman powers.

It is the same among the Lithuanian peasantry. A dragon walks on two legs, talks, flirts with a lady, and marries her. He retains his evil disposition, but has sloughed off his scales and wings.

[p. 176]

Such is the change which has taken place in the popular conception of the dragon, which is an impersonification of the thunderstorm. A similar change has taken place in the swan-maiden and were-wolf myths.

In ancient Indian Vedaic mythology the apsaras were heavenly damsels who dwelt in the tether, between earth and sun. Their name, which signifies "the shapeless," or "those who go in the water "--it is uncertain which. is the correct derivation--is expressive of the white cirrus, constantly changing form, and apparently floating swan-like on the blue heaven-sea. These apsaras, according to the Vedaic creed, were fond of changing their shapes, appearing generally as ducks or swans, occasionally as human beings. The souls of heroes were given to them for lovers and husbands. One of the most graceful of the early Indian myths is the story of the apsaras, Urvaci. Urvaci loved Puravaras and became his 'wife, on the condition that she was n-ever to behold him in a state of nudity. They remained together for years, till the heavenly companions of Urvaci determined to secure her return to them. They accordingly beguiled Puravaras into leaving his bed in the darkness of night, and then with a lightning flash they disclosed him, in his nudity, to his

[p. 177]

wife, who was thereupon constrained to leave him. He pursued her, full of sorrow at his loss, and found her at length swimming in a large lotus pond, in swan's shape.

That this story is not a mere invention, but rests on some mythological explanation of natural phenomena, I think more than probable, as it is found all over the world with few variations. As every Aryan branch retains the story, or traces of it, there can be no doubt that the belief in swan-maidens, who swam in the heavenly sea, and who sometimes became the wives of those fortunate men who managed to steal from them their feather dresses, formed an integral portion of the old mythological system of the Aryan family, before it was broken up into Indian, Persian, Greek, Latin, Russian, Scandinavian, Teutonic, and other races. But more, as the same myth is found. in tribes not Aryan, and far removed from contact with European or Indian superstition,--as, for instance, among Samoyeds and American Indians,--it is even possible that this story may be a tradition of the first primaeval stock of men.

But it is time for me to leave the summer cirrus and turn to the tempest-born rain-cloud. It is represented

[p. 178]

in ancient Indian mythology by the Vritra or Rakshasas. At first the form of these daemons was uncertain and obscure. Vritra is often used as an appellative for a cloud, and kabhanda, an old name for a rain-cloud, in later times became the name of a devil. Of Vritra, who envelopes the mountains with vapour, it is said, "The darkness stood retaining the water, the mountains lay in the belly of Vritra." By degrees Vritra stood out more prominently as a daemon, and he is described as a "devourer" of gigantic proportions. In the same way Rakshasas obtained corporeal form and individuality. He is a misshapen giant "like to a cloud," with a red beard and red hair, with pointed protruding teeth, ready to lacerate and devour human flesh. His body is covered with coarse bristling hair, his huge mouth is open, he looks from side to side as he walks, lusting after the flesh and blood of men, to satisfy his raging hunger, and quench his consuming thirst. Towards nightfall his strength increases manifold. He can change his shape at will. He haunts the woods, and roams howling through the jungle; in short, he is to the Hindoo what the were-wolf is to the European.

A certain wood was haunted by a Rakschasa; he one day came across a Brahmin, and with a bound reached

[p. 179]

his shoulders, and clung to them, exclaiming, "Heh! go on with you!" And the Brahmin, quaking with fear, advanced with him. But when he observed that the feet of the Rakschasa were as delicate as the stamens of the lotus, he asked him, How is it that you have such weak and slender feet? The Rakschasa replied, "I never walk nor touch the earth with my feet. I have made a vow not to do so." Presently they came to a large pond. Then the Rakschasa bade the Brahmin wait at the edge whilst he bathed and prayed to the gods. But the Brahmin thought: "As soon as these prayers and ablutions are over, he will tear me to pieces with his fangs and eat me. He has vowed not to walk; I will be off post haste!" so he ran away, and the Rakschasa dared not follow him for fear of breaking his VOW. (Pantschatantra, v. 13.) There is a similar story in the Mahabharata, xiii., and in the Katha Sarit Sagara, v. 49-53.

I have said sufficient to show that natural phenomena gave rise to mythological stories, and that these stories have gradually deteriorated, and have been degraded into vulgar superstitions. And I have shown that both the doctrine of metempsychosis and the mythological explanations of meteorological changes have given rise to

[p. 180]

abundant fable, and among others to the popular and wide-spread superstition of lycanthropy. I shall now pass from myth to history, and shall give instances of bloodthirstiness, cruelty, and cannibalism.

[p. 181]

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER XI.

 

THE MARECHAL DE RETZ.-I. THE INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES.

Introduction--History of Gilles de Laval--The Castle of Machecoul--Surrender of the Marshal--Examination of Witnesses--Letter of De Retz--The Duke of Brittany reluctant to move--The Bishop of Nantes

THE history of the man whose name heads this chapter I purpose giving in detail, as the circumstances I shall narrate have, I believe, never before been given with accuracy to the English public. The name of Gilles de Laval may be well known, as sketches of his bloody career have appeared in many biographies, but these sketches have been very incomplete, as the material from which they were composed was meagre. M. Michelet alone ventured to give the public an idea of the crimes which brought a marshal of France to the gallows, and his revelations were such that, in the words of M. Henri

[p. 182]

Martin, "this iron age, which seemed unable to feel surprise at any amount of evil, was struck with dismay."

M. Michelet derived his information from the abstract of the papers relating, to the case, made by order of Ann of Brittany, in the Imperial Library. The original documents were in the library at Nantes, and a great portion of them were destroyed in the Revolution of 1789. But a careful analysis had been made of them, and this valuable abridgment, which was inaccessible to M. Michelet, came into the hands of M. Lacroix, the eminent French antiquarian, who published a memoir of the marshal from the information he had thus obtained, and it is his work, by far the most complete and circumstantial which has appeared, that I condense into the following chapters.

"The most monstrously depraved imagination," says M. Henri Martin, "never could have conceived what the trial reveals." M. Lacroix has been obliged to draw a veil over much that transpired, and I must draw it closer still. I have, however, said enough to show that this memorable trial presents horrors probably unsurpassed in the whole volume of the world's history.

[p. 183]

During the year 1440, a terrible rumour spread through Brittany, and especially through the ancient pays de Retz, which extends along the south of the Loire from Nantes to Paimboeuf, to the effect that one of the most famous and powerful noblemen in Brittany, Gilles de Laval, Marechal de Retz, was guilty of crimes of the most diabolical nature.

Gilles de Laval, eldest son of Gay de Laval, second of his name, Sire de Retz, had raised the junior branch of the illustrious house of Laval above the elder branch, which was related to the reigning family of Brittany. He lost his father when he was aged twenty, and remained master of a vast territorial inheritance, which was increased by his marriage with Catharine de Thouars in 1420. He employed a portion of their fortune in the cause of Charles VII., and in strengthening the French crown. During seven consecutive years, from 1426 to 1433, he was engaged in military enterprises against the English; his name is always cited along with those of Dunois, Xaintrailles, Florent d'Illiers, Gaucourt, Richemont, and the most faithful servants of the king. His services were speedily acknowledged by the king creating him Marshal of France. In 1427, he assaulted the Castle of Lude, and carried it by storm; he killed

[p. 184]

with his own hand the commander of the place; next year he captured from the English the fortress of Rennefort, and the Castle of Malicorne; in 1429, he took an active part in the expedition of Joan of Arc for the deliverance of Orleans, and the occupation of Jargeau, and he was with her in the moat, when she was wounded by an arrow under the walls of Paris.

The marshal, councillor, and chamberlain of the king participated in the direction of public affairs, and soon obtained the entire confidence of his master. He accompanied Charles to Rheims on the occasion of his coronation, and had the honour of bearing the oriflamme, brought for the occasion from the abbey of S. Remi. His intrepidity on the field of battle was as remarkable as his sagacity in council, and he proved himself to be both an excellent warrior and a shrewd politician.

Suddenly, to the surprise of every one, he quitted the service of Charles VII., and sheathed for ever his sword, in the retirement of the country. The death of his maternal grandfather, Jean de Craon, in 1432, made him so enormously wealthy, that his revenues were estimated at 800,000 livres; nevertheless, in two years, by his excessive prodigality, he managed to lose a

[p. 185]

considerable portion of his inheritance. Mauleon, S. Etienne de Malemort, Loroux-Botereau, Pornic, and Chantole, he sold to John V., Duke of Brittany, his kinsman, and other lands and seigneurial rights he ceded to the Bishop of Nantes, and to the chapter of the cathedral in that city.

The rumour soon spread that these extensive cessions of territory were sops thrown to the duke and to the bishop, to restrain the one from confiscating his goods, and the other from pronouncing excommunication, for the crimes of which the people whisperingly accused him; but these rumours were probably without foundation, for eventually it was found hard to persuade the duke of the guilt of his kinsman, and the bishop was the most determined instigator of the trial.

The marshal seldom visited the ducal court, but he often appeared in the city of Nantes, where he inhabited the Hotel de la Suze, with a princely retinue. He had, always accompanying him, a guard of two hundred men at arms, and a numerous suit of pages, esquires, chaplains, singers, astrologers, &c., all of whom he paid handsomely.

Whenever he left the town, or moved to one of his other seats, the cries of the poor, which had been

[p. 186]

restrained during the time of his presence, broke forth. Tears flowed, curses were uttered, a long-continued wail rose to heaven, the moment that the last of the marshal's party had left the neighbourhood. Mothers had lost their children, babes had been snatched from the cradle, infants had been spirited away almost from the maternal arms, and it was known by sad experience that the vanished little ones would never be seen again.

But on no part of the country did the shadow of this great fear fall so deeply as on the villages in the neighbourhood of the Castle of Machecoul, a gloomy chateau, composed of huge towers, and surrounded by deep moats, a residence much frequented by Do Retz, notwithstanding its sombre and repulsive appearance. This fortress was always in a condition to resist a siege: the drawbridge was raised, the portcullis down, the gates closed, the men under arms, the culverins on the bastion always loaded. No one, except the servants, had penetrated into this mysterious asylum and had come forth alive. In the surrounding country strange tales of horror and devilry circulated in whispers, and yet it was observed that the chapel of the castle was gorgeously decked with tapestries of silk and cloth of gold, that the sacred vessels were encrusted with gems,

[p. 187]

and that the vestments of the priests were of the most sumptuous character. The excessive devotion of the marshal was also noticed; he was said to hear mass thrice daily, and to be passionately fond of ecclesiastical music. He was said to have asked permission of the pope, that a crucifer should precede him in processions. But when dusk settled down over the forest, and one by one the windows of the castle became illumined, peasants would point to one casement high up in an isolated tower, from which a clear light streamed through the gloom of night; they spoke of a fierce red glare which irradiated the chamber at times, and of sharp cries ringing out of it, through the hushed woods, to be answered only by the howl of the wolf as it rose from its lair to begin its nocturnal rambles.

On certain days, at fixed hours, the drawbridge sank, and the servants of De Retz stood in the gateway distributing clothes, money, and food to the mendicants who crowded round them soliciting alms. It often happened that children were among the beggars: as often one of the servants would promise them some dainty if they would go to the kitchen for it. Those children who accepted the offer were never seen again.

In 1440 the long-pent-up exasperation of the people

[p. 188]

broke all bounds, and with one voice they charged the marshal with the murder of their children, whom they said he had sacrificed to the devil.

This charge came to the ears of the Duke of Brittany, but he pooh-poohed it, and would have taken no steps to investigate the truth, had not one of his nobles insisted on his doing so. At the same time Jean do Chateaugiron, bishop of Nantes, and the noble and sage Pierre de l'Hospital, grand-seneschal of Brittany, wrote to the duke, expressing very decidedly their views, that the charge demanded thorough investigation.

John V., reluctant to move against a relation, a man who had served his country so well, and was in such a high position, at last yielded to their request, and authorized them to seize the persons of the Sire de Retz and his accomplices. A serjent d'armes, Jean Labbe, was charged with this difficult commission. He picked a band of resolute fellows, twenty in all, and in the middle of September they presented themselves at the gate of the castle, and summoned the Sire do Retz to surrender. As soon as Gilles heard that a troop in the livery of Brittany was at the gate, he inquired who was their leader? On receiving the answer "Labbe,"

[p. 189]

he started, turned pale, crossed himself, and prepared to surrender, observing that it was impossible to resist fate.

Years before, one of his astrologers had assured him that he would one day pass into the hands of an Abbe, and, till this moment, De Retz had supposed that the prophecy signified that he should eventually become a monk.

Gilles de Sille, Roger de Briqueville, and other of the accomplices of the marshal, took to flight, but Henriet and Pontou remained with him.

The drawbridge was lowered and the marshal offered his sword to Jean Labbe. The gallant serjeant approached, knelt to the marshal, and unrolled before him a parchment sealed with the seal of Brittany.

"Tell me the tenor of this parchment?" said Gilles de Retz with dignity.

"Our good Sire of Brittany enjoins you, my lord, by these presents, to follow me to the good town of Nantes, there to clear yourself of certain criminal charges brought against you."

"I will follow immediately, my friend, glad to obey the will of my lord of Brittany: but, that it may not be said that the Seigneur de Retz has received a message

[p. 190]

without largess, I order my treasurer, Henriet, to hand over to you and your followers twenty gold crowns."

"Grand-merci, monseigneur! I pray God that he may give you good and long life."

"Pray God only to have mercy upon me, and to pardon my sins."

The marshal had his horses saddled, and left Machecoul with Pontou and Henriet, who had thrown in their lot with him.

It was with lively emotion that the people in the villages traversed by the little troop, saw the redoubted Gilles de Laval ride through their streets, surrounded by soldiers in the livery of the Duke of Brittany, and unaccompanied by a single soldier of his own. The roads and streets were thronged, peasants left the fields, women their kitchens, labourers deserted their cattle at the plough, to throng the road to Nantes. The cavalcade proceeded in silence. The very crowd which had gathered to see it, was hushed. Presently a shrill woman's voice was raised:--

"My child! restore my child!"

Then a wild, wrathful howl broke from the lips of the throng, rang along the Nantes road, and only died

[p. 191]

away, as the great gates of the Chateau de Bouffay closed on the prisoner.

The whole population of Nantes was in commotion, and it was said that the investigation would be fictitious, that the duke would screen his kinsman, and that the object of general execration would escape with the surrender of some of his lands.

And such would probably have been the event of the trial, had not the Bishop of Nantes and the grand-seneschal taken a very decided course in the matter. They gave the duke no peace till he had yielded to their demand for a thorough investigation and a public trial.

John V. nominated Jean de Toucheronde to collect information, and to take down the charges brought against the marshal. At the same time he was given to understand that the matter was not to be pressed, and that the charges upon which the marshal was to be tried were to be softened down as much as possible.

The commissioner, Jean de Toucheronde, opened the investigation on the 18th September, assisted only by his clerk, Jean Thomas. The witnesses were introduced either singly, or in groups, if they were relations. On entering, the witness knelt before the commissioner,

[p. 192]

kissed the crucifix, and swore with his hand on the Gospels that he would speak the truth, and nothing but the truth: after this he related all the facts referring to the charge, which came under his cognizance, without being interrupted or interrogated.

The first to present herself was Perrine Loessard, living at la Roche-Bernard.

She related, with tears in her eyes, that two years ago, in the month of September, the Sire de Retz had passed with all his retinue through la Roche-Bernard, on his way from Vannes, and had lodged with Jean Collin. She lived opposite the house in which the nobleman was staying.

Her child, the finest in the village, a lad aged ten, had attracted the notice of Pontou, and perhaps of the marshal himself, who stood at a window, leaning on his squire's shoulder.

Pontou spoke to the child, and asked him whether he would like to be a chorister; the boy replied that his ambition was to be a soldier.

"Well, then," said the squire, "I will equip you."

The lad then laid hold of Pontou's dagger, and expressed his desire to have such a weapon in his belt. Thereupon the mother had ran up and had made him

[p. 193]

leave hold of the dagger, saying that the boy was doing very well at school, and was getting on with his letters, for he was one day to be a monk. Pontou had dissuaded her from this project, and had proposed to take the child with him to Machecoul, and to educate him to be a soldier. Thereupon he had paid her clown a hundred sols to buy the lad a dress, and had obtained permission to carry him off.

Next day her son had been mounted on a horse purchased for him from Jean Collin, and had left the village in the retinue of the Sire de Retz. The poor mother at parting had gone in tears to the marshal, and had entreated him to be kind to her child. From that time she had been able to obtain no information regarding her son. She had watched the Sire de Retz whenever he had passed through La Roche Bernard, but had never observed her child among his pages. She had questioned several of the marshal's people, but they had laughed at her; the only answer she had obtained was: "Be not afraid. He is either at Machecoul, or else at Tiffauges, or else at Pornic, or somewhere." Perrine's story was corroborated by Jean Collin, his wife, and his mother-in-law.

Jean Lemegren and his wife, Alain Dulix, Perrot [p. 194] Duponest, Guillaume Guillon, Guillaume Portayer, Etienne de Monclades, and Jean Lefebure, all inhabitants of S. Etienne de Montluc, deposed that a little child, son of Guillaume Brice of the said parish, having lost his father at the age of nine, lived on alms, and went round the country begging.

This child, named Jamet, had vanished suddenly at midsummer, and nothing was known of what had become of him; but strong suspicions were entertained of his having been carried off by an aged hag who had appeared shortly before in the neighbourhood, and who had vanished along with the child.

On the 27th September, Jean de Toucheronde, assisted by Nicolas Chateau, notary of the court at Nantes, received the depositions of several inhabitants of Pont-de-Launay, near Bouvron: to wit, Guillaume Fourage and wife; Jeanne, wife of Jean Leflou; and Richarde, wife of Jean Gandeau.

These depositions, though very vague, afforded sufficient cause for suspicion to rest on the marshal. Two years before, a child of twelve, son of Jean Bernard, and another child of the same age, son of Menegue, had gone to Machecoul. The son of Menegue had returned alone in the evening, relating that his companion

[p. 195]

had asked him to wait for him on the road whilst he begged at the gates of the Sire de Retz. The son of Menegue said that he had waited three hours, but his companion had not returned. The wife of Guillaume Fourage deposed that she had seen the lad at this time with an old hag, who was leading him by the hand towards Machecoul. That same evening this hag passed over the bridge of Launay, and the wife of Fourage asked her what had become of little Bernard. The old woman neither stopped nor answered further than by saying he was well provided for. The boy had not been seen since. On the 28th September, the Duke of Brittany joined another commissioner, Jean Couppegorge, and a second notary, Michel Estallure, to Toucheronde and Chateau.

The inhabitants of Machecoul, a little town over which the Sire de Retz exercised supreme power, appeared now to depose against their lord. Andre Barbier, shoemaker, declared that last Easter, a child, son of his neighbour Georges Lebarbier, had disappeared. He was last seen gathering plums behind the hotel Rondeau. This disappearance surprised none in Machecoul, and no one ventured to comment on it. Andre and his wife were in daily terror of losing their own child. They had been a pilgrimage to S. Jean d'Angely, and had been asked

[p. 196]

there whether it was the custom at Machecoul to eat children. On their return they had heard of two children having vanished--the son of Jean Gendron, and that of Alexandre Chatellier. Andre Barbier had made some inquiries about the circumstances of their disappearance, and had been advised to hold his tongue, and to shut his ears and eyes, unless he were prepared to be thrown into a dungeon by the lord of Machecoul.

"But, bless me!" he had said, "am I to believe that a fairy spirits off and eats our little ones?"

"Believe what you like," was the advice given to him; "but ask no questions." As this conversation had taken place, one of the marshal's men at arms had passed, when all those who had been speaking took to their heels. Andre, who had run with the rest, without knowing exactly why he fled, came upon a man near the church of the Holy Trinity, who was weeping bitterly, and crying out,--"O my God, wilt Thou not restore to me my little one?" This man had also been robbed of his child.

Licette, wife of Guillaume Sergent, living at La Boneardiere, in the parish of S. Croix de Machecoul, had lost her son two years before, and had not seen him

[p. 197]

since; she besought the commissioners, with tears in her eyes, to restore him to her.

"I left him," said she, "at home whilst I went into the field with my husband to sow flax. He was a bonny little lad, and he was as good as he was bonny. He had to look after his tiny sister, who was a year and a half old. On my return home, the little girl was found, but she could not tell me what had become of him. Afterwards we found in the marsh a small red woollen cap which had belonged to my poor darling; but it was in vain that we dragged the marsh, nothing was found more, except good evidence that he had not been drowned. A hawker who sold needles and thread passed through Machecoul at the time, and told me that an old woman in grey, with a black hood on her head, had bought of him some children's toys, and had a few moments after passed him, leading a little boy by the hand."

Georges Lebarbier, living near the gate of the chatelet de Machecoul, gave an account of the manner in which his son had evanesced. The boy was apprenticed to Jean Pelletier, tailor to Mme. de Retz and to the household of the castle. He seemed to be getting on in his profession, when last year, about S. Barnabas'

[p. 198]

day, he went to play at ball on the castle green. He never returned from the game.

This youth and his master, Jean Pelletier, had been in the habit of eating and drinking at the castle, and bad always laughed at the ominous stories told by the people.

Guillaume Hilaire and his wife confirmed the statements of Lebarbier. They also said that they knew of the loss of the sons of Jean Gendron, Jeanne Rouen, and Alexandre Chatellier. The son of Jean Gendron, aged twelve, lived with the said Hilaire and learned of him the trade of skinner. He had been working in the shop for seven or eight years, and was a steady, hardworking lad. One day Messieurs Gilles de Sille and Roger de Briqueville entered the shop to purchase a pair of hunting gloves. They asked if little Gendron might take a message for them to the castle. Hilaire readily consented, and the boy received beforehand the payment for going--a gold angelus, and he started, promising to be back directly. But he had never returned. That evening Hiliare and his wife, observing Gilles de Sille and Roger de Briqueville returning to the castle, ran to them and asked what had become of the apprentice. They replied that they had no notion of where

[p. 199]

he was, as they had been absent hunting, but that it was possible he might have been sent to Tiffauges, another castle of De Retz.

Guillaume Hilaire, whose depositions were more grave and explicit than the others, positively asserted that Jean Dujardin, valet to Roger de Briqueville had told him he knew of a cask secreted in the castle, full of children's corpses. He said that he had often heard people say that children were enticed to the chateau and then murdered, but had treated it as an idle tale. He said, moreover, that the marshal was not accused of having any hand in the murders, but that his servants were supposed to be guilty.

Jean Gendron himself deposed to the loss of his son, and he added that his was not the only child which had vanished mysteriously at Machecoul. He knew of thirty that had disappeared.

Jean Chipholon, elder and junior, Jean Aubin, and Clement Dore, all inhabitants of the parish of Thomage, deposed that they had known a poor man of the same parish, named Mathelin Thomas, who had lost his son, aged twelve, and that he had died of grief in consequence.

Jeanne Rouen, of Machecoul, who for nine years

[p. 200]

had been in a state of uncertainty whether her son were alive or dead, deposed that the child had been carried off whilst keeping sheep. She had thought that he had been devoured of wolves, but two women of Machecoul, now deceased, had seen Gilles de Sille approach the little shepherd, speak to him, and point to the castle. Shortly after the lad had walked off in that direction. The husband of Jeanne Rouen went to the chateau to inquire after his son, but could obtain no information. When next Gilles de Sille appeared in the town, the disconsolate mother entreated him to restore her child to her. Gilles replied that he knew nothing about him, as he had been to the king at Amboise.

Jeanne, widow of Aymery Hedelin, living at Machecoul, had also lost, eight years before, a little child as he had pursued some butterflies into the wood. At the same time four other children had been carried off, those of Gendron, Rouen, and Mace Sorin. She said that the story circulated through the country was, that Gilles de Sille stole children to make them over to the English, in order to obtain the ransom of his brother who was a captive. But she added that this report was traced to the servants of Sille, and that it was propagated by them.

[p. 201]

One of the last children to disappear was that of Noel Aise, living in the parish of S. Croix.

A man from Tiffauges had said to her (Jeanne Hedelin) that for one child stolen at Machecoul, there were seven carried away at Tiffauges.

Mace Sorin confirmed the deposition of the widow Hedelin., and repeated the circumstances connected with the loss of the children of Chatellier, Rouen, Gendron, and Lebarbier.

Perrine Rondeau had entered the castle with the company of Jean Labbe. She had entered a stable, and had found a heap of ashes and powder, which had a sickly and peculiar smell. At the bottom of a trough she had found a child's shirt covered with blood.

Several inhabitants of the bourg of Fresnay, to wit, Perrot, Parqueteau, Jean Soreau, Catherine Degrepie, Gilles Garnier, Perrine Viellard, Marguerite Rediern, Marie Carfin, Jeanne Laudais, said that they had heard Guillaume Hamelin, last Easter, lamenting the loss of two children.

Isabeau, wife of Guillaume Hamelin, confirmed these depositions, saving that she had lost them seven years before. She had at that time four children; the eldest aged fifteen, the youngest aged seven, went

[p. 202]

together to Machecoul to buy some bread, but they did not return. She sat up for them all night and next morning. She heard that another child had been lost, the son of Michaut Bonnel of S. Cire de Retz.

Guillemette, wife of Michaut Bonnel, said that her son had been carried off whilst guarding cows.

Guillaume Rodigo and his wife, living at Bourg-neuf-en-Retz, deposed that on the eve of last S. Bartholomew's day, the Sire do Retz lodged with Guillaume Plumet in his village.

Pontou, who accompanied the marshal, saw a lad of fifteen, named Bernard Lecanino, servant to Rodigo, standing at the door of his house. The lad could not speak much French, but only bas-Breton. Pontou beckoned to him and spoke to him in a low tone. That evening, at ten o'clock, Bernard left his master's house, Rodigo and his wife being absent. The servant maid, who saw him go out, called to him that the supper table was not yet cleared, but he paid no attention to what she said. Rodigo, annoyed at the loss of his servant, asked some of the marshal's men what had become of him. They replied mockingly that they knew nothing of the little Breton, but that he had probably been sent to Tiffauges to be trained as page to their lord.

[p. 203]

Marguerite Sorain, the chambermaid alluded to above, confirmed the statement of Rodigo, adding that Pontou had entered the house and spoken with Bernard. Guillaume Plumet and wife confirmed what Rodigo and Sorain had said.

Thomas Aysee and wife deposed to the loss of their son, aged ten, who had gone to beg at the gate of the castle of Machecoul; and a little girl had seen him drawn by an offer of meat into the chateau.

Jamette, wife of Eustache Drouet of S. Leger, had sent two sons, one aged ten, the other seven, to the castle to obtain alms. They had not been seen since.

On the 2nd October the commissioners sat again, and the charges became graver, and the servants of the marshal became more and more implicated.

The disappearance of thirteen other children was substantiated under circumstances throwing strong suspicion on the inmates of the castle. I will not give the details, for they much resemble those of the former depositions. Suffice it to say that before the commissioners closed the inquiry, a herald of the Duke of Brittany in tabard blew three calls on the trumpet, from the steps of the tower of Bouffay, summoning all

[p. 204]

who had additional charges to bring against the Sire de Retz, to present themselves without delay. As no fresh witnesses arrived, the case was considered to be made out, and the commissioners visited the duke, with the information they had collected, in their hands.

The duke hesitated long as to the steps he should take. Should he judge and sentence a kinsman, the most powerful of his vassals, the bravest of his captains, a councillor of the king, a marshal of France?

Whilst still unsettled in his mind as to the course he should pursue, he received a letter from Gilles de Retz, which produced quite a different effect from that which it had been intended to produce.

"MONSIEUR MY COUSIN AND HONOURED SIRE,--

"IT is quite true that I am perhaps the most detestable of all sinners, having sinned horribly again and again, yet have I never failed in my religious duties. I have heard many masses, vespers, &c., have fasted in Lent and on vigils, have confessed my sins, deploring them heartily, and have received the blood of our Lord at least once in the year.

Since I have been languishing in prison, awaiting your honoured justice, I have been overwhelmed with

[p. 205]

incomparable repentance for my crimes, which I am ready to acknowledge and to expiate as is suitable.

"Wherefore I supplicate you, M. my cousin, to give me licence to retire into a monastery, and there to lead a good and exemplary life. I care not into what monastery I am sent, but I intend that all my goods, &c., should be distributed among the poor, who are the members of Jesus Christ on earth . . . . Awaiting your glorious clemency, on which I rely, I pray God our Lord to protect you and your kingdom.

He who addresses you is in all earthly humility,"

"FRIAR GILLES,   
 Carmelite in intention."

The duke read this letter to Pierre de l'Hospital, president of Brittany, and to the Bishop of Nantes, who were those most resolute in pressing on the trial. They were horrified at the tone of this dreadful communication, and assured the duke that the case was so clear, and the steps taken had been so decided, that it was impossible for him to allow De Retz to escape trial by such an impious device as he suggested. In the meantime, the bishop and the grand-seneschal had set on foot an investigation at the castle of Machecoul, and had

[p. 206]

found numerous traces of human remains. But a complete examination could not be made, as the duke was anxious to screen his kinsman as much as possible, and refused to authorize one.

The duke now summoned his principal officers and held a council with them. They unanimously sided with the bishop and de l'Hospital, and when John still hesitated, the Bishop of Nantes rose and said: "Monseigneur, this case is one for the church as much as for your court to take up. Consequently, if your President of Brittany does not bring the case into secular court, by the Judge of heaven and earth! I will cite the author of these execrable crimes to appear before our ecclesiastical tribunal."

The resolution of the bishop compelled the duke to yield, and it was decided that the trial should take its course without let or hindrance.

In the meantime, the unhappy wife of Gilles de Retz, who had been separated from him for some while, and who loathed his crimes, though she still felt for him as her husband, hurried to the duke with her daughter to entreat pardon for the wretched man. But the duke refused to hear her. Thereupon she went to Amboise to intercede with the king for him who bad once been his close friend and adviser.

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 207]

 

CHAPTER XII.

 

THE MARECHAL DE RETZ.--II. THE TRIAL.

The Appearance of the Marshal--Pierre de l'Hospital--The Requisition--The Trial adjourned--Meeting of the Marshal and his Servants--The Confession of Henriet--Pontou persuaded to confess all--The adjourned Trial not hurried on--The hesitation of the Duke of Brittany.

ON the 10th October, Nicolas Chateau, notary of the duke, went to the Chateau of Bouffay, to read to the prisoner the summons to appear in person on the morrow before Messire de l'Hospital, President of Brittany, Seneschal of Rennes, and Chief Justice of the Duchy of Brittany.

The Sire de Retz, who believed himself already a novice in the Carmelite order, had dressed in white, and was engaged in singing litanies. When the summons had been read, he ordered a page to give the notary wine and cake, and then he returned to his prayers with every appearance of compunction and piety.

[p. 208]

On the morrow Jean Labbe and four soldiers conducted him to the hall of justice. He asked for Pontou and Henriet to accompany him, but this was not permitted.

He was adorned with all his military insignia, as though to impose on his judges; he had around his neck massive chains of gold, and several collars of knightly orders. His costume, with the exception of his purpoint, was white, in token of his repentance. His purpoint was of pearl-grey silk, studded with gold stars, and girded around his waist by a scarlet belt, from which dangled a poignard in scarlet velvet sheath. His collar, cufs, and the edging of his purpoint were of white ermine, his little round cap or chapel was white, surrounded with a belt of ermine--a fur which only the great feudal lords of Brittany had a right to wear. All the rest of his dress, to the shoes which were long and pointed, was white.

No one at a first glance would have thought the Sire do Retz to be by nature so cruel and vicious as he was supposed to be. On the contrary, his physiognomy was calm and phlegmatic, somewhat pale, and expressive of melancholy. His hair and moustache were light brown, and his beard was clipped to a point. This

[p. 209]

beard, which resembled no other beard, was black, but under certain lights it assumed a blue hue, and it was this peculiarity which obtained for the Sire do Retz the surname of Blue-beard, a name which has attached to him in popular romance, at the same time that his story has undergone strange metamorphoses.

But on closer examination of the countenance of Gilles de Retz, contraction in the muscles of the face, nervous quivering of the mouth, spasmodic twitchings of the brows, and above all, the sinister expression of the eyes, showed that there was something strange and frightful in the man. At intervals he ground his teeth like a wild beast preparing to dash upon his prey, and then his lips became so contracted, as they were drawn in and glued, as it were, to his teeth, that their very colour was indiscernible.

At times also his eyes became fixed, and the pupils dilated to such an extent, with a sombre fire quivering in them, that the iris seemed to fill the whole orbit, which became circular, and sank back into the head. At these moments his complexion became livid and cadaverous; his brow, especially just over the nose, was covered with deep wrinkles, and his beard appeared to bristle, and to assume its bluish hues. But, after a few

[p. 210]

moments, his features became again serene, with a sweet smile reposing upon them, and his expression relaxed into a vague and tender melancholy.

"Messires," said he, saluting his judges, "I pray you to expedite my matter, and despatch as speedily as possible my unfortunate case; for I am peculiarly anxious to consecrate myself to the service of God, who has pardoned my great sins. I shall not fail, I assure you, to endow several of the churches in Nantes, and I shall distribute the greater portion of my goods among the poor, to secure the salvation of my soul."

"Monseigneur," replied gravely Pierre de l'Hospital: "It is always well to think of the salvation of one's soul; but, if you please, think now that we are concerned with the salvation of your body."

"I have confessed to the father superior of the Carmelites," replied the marshal, with tranquillity; "and through his absolution I have been able to communicate: I am, therefore, guiltless and purified."

"Men's justice is not in common with that of God, monseigneur, and I cannot tell you what will be your sentence. Be ready to make your defence, and listen to the charges brought against you, which M. le lieutenant du Procureur de Nantes will read."

[p. 211]

The officer rose, and read the following paper of charges, which I shall condense:--

"Having heard the bitter complaints of several of the inhabitants of the diocese of Nantes, whose names follow hereinafter (here follow the names of the parents of the lost children), we, Philippe do Livron, lieutenant assesseur of Messire le Procureur de Nantes, have invited, and do invite, the very noble and very wise Messire Pierre de l'Hospital, President of Brittany, &c., to bring to trial the very high and very powerful lord, Gilles de Laval, Sire de Retz, Machecoul, Ingrande and other places, Councillor of his Majesty the King, and Marshal of France:

"Forasmuch as the said Sire de Retz has seized and caused to be seized several little children, not only ten or twenty, but thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, one hundred, two hundred, and more, and has murdered and slain them inhumanly, and then burned their bodies to convert them to ashes:

"Forasmuch as persevering in evil, the said Sire, notwithstanding that the powers that be are ordained of God, and that every one should be an obedient subject to his prince, . . . has assaulted Jean Leferon, subject of the Duke of Brittany, the said Jean Leferon being

[p. 212]

guardian of the fortress of Malemort, in the name of Geoffrey Leferon, his brother, to whom the said lord had made over the possession of the said place:

"Forasmuch as the said Sire forced Jean Leferon to give up to him the said place, and moreover retook the lordship of Malemort in despite of the order of the duke and of justice:

"Forasmuch as the said Sire arrested Master Jean Rousseau, sergeant of the duke, who was sent to him with injunctions from the said duke, and beat his men with their own staves, although their persons were under the protection of his grace:

"We conclude that the said Sire de Retz, homicide in fact and in intent according to the first count, rebel and felon according to the second, should be condemned to suffer corporal punishment, and to pay a fine of his possessions in lands and goods held in fief to the said nobleman, and that these should be confiscated and remitted to the crown of Brittany."

This requisition was evidently drawn up with the view of saving the life of the Sire de Retz; for the crime of homicide was presented without aggravating circumstances, in such a manner that it could be denied or shelved, whilst the crimes of felony and rebellion

[p. 213]

against the Duke of Brittany were brought into exaggerated prominence.

Gilles de Retz had undoubtedly been forewarned of the course which was to be pursued, and he was prepared to deny totally the charges made in the first count.

"Monseigneur," said Pierre de l'Hospital, whom the form of the requisition had visibly astonished: "What justification have you to make? Take an oath on the Gospels to declare the truth."

"No, messire!" answered the marshal. "The witnesses are bound to declare what they know upon oath, but the accused is never put on his oath."

"Quite so," replied the judge. "Because the accused may be put on the rack and constrained to speak the truth, an' please you."

Gilles de Retz turned pale, bit his lips, and cast a glance of malignant hate at Pierre de l'Hospital; then, composing his countenance, he spoke with an appearance of calm:--

"Messires, I shall not deny that I behaved wrongfully in the case of Jean Rousseau; but, in excuse, let me say that the said Rousseau was full of wine, and he behaved with such indecorum towards me in the presence of my servants, that it was quite intolerable. Nor

[p. 214]

will I deny my revenge on the brothers Leferon: Jean had declared that the said Grace of Brittany had confiscated my fortress of Malemort, which I had sold to him, and for which I have not yet received payment; and Geoffrey Leferon had announced far and wide that I was about to be expelled Brittany as a traitor and a rebel. To punish them I re-entered my fortress of Malemort.--As for the other charges, I shall say nothing about them, they are simply false and calumnious."

"Indeed exclaimed Pierre de l'Hospital, whose blood boiled with indignation against the wretch who stood before him with such effrontery. "All these witnesses who complain of having lost their children, lied under oath!"

"Undoubtedly, if they accuse me of having anything to do with their loss. What am I to know about them, am I their keeper?"

"The answer of Cain!" exclaimed Pierre de l'Hospital, rising from his seat in the vehemence of his emotion. "However, as you solemnly deny these charges, we must question Henriet and Pontou."

"Henriet, Pontou!" cried the marshal, trembling; "they accuse me of nothing, surely!"

[p. 215]

"Not as yet, they have not been questioned, but they are about to be brought into court, and I do not expect that they will lie in the face of justice."

"I demand that my servants be not brought forward as witnesses against their master," said the marshal, his eyes dilating, his brow wrinkling, and his beard bristling blue upon his chin: "a master is above the gossiping tales and charges of his servants."

"Do you think then, messire, that your servants will accuse you?"

"I demand that I, a marshal of France, a baron of the duchy, should be sheltered from the slanders of small folk, whom I disown as my servants if they are untrue to their master."

"Messire, I see we must put you on the rack, or nothing will be got from you."

"Hola! I appeal to his grace the Duke of Brittany, and ask an adjournment, that I may take advice on the charges brought against me, which I have denied, and which I deny still."

"Well, I shall adjourn the case till the 25th of this month, that you may be well prepared to meet the accusations."

On his way back to prison, the marshal passed

[p. 216]

Henriet and Pontou as they were being conducted to the court. Henriet pretended not to see his master, but Pontou burst into tears on meeting him. The marshal held out his hand, and Pontou kissed it affectionately.

"Remember what I have done for you, and be faithful servants," said Gilles de Retz. Henriet recoiled from him with a shudder, and the marshal passed on.

"I shall speak," whispered Henriet; "for we have another master beside our poor master of Retz, and we shall soon be with the heavenly one."

The president ordered the clerk to read again the requisition of the lieutenant, that the two presumed accomplices of Gilles de Retz might be informed of the charges brought against their master. Henriet burst into tears, trembled violently, and cried out that he would tell all. Pontou, alarmed, tried to hinder his companion, and said that Henriet was touched in his head, and that what he was about to say would be the ravings of insanity.

Silence was imposed upon him.

"I will speak out," continued Henriet and yet I dare not speak of the horrors which I know have taken place, before that image of my Lord Christ; "and he

[p. 217]

pointed tremblingly to a large crucifix above the seat of the judge.

"Henriet." moaned Pontou, squeezing his hand, "you will destroy yourself as well as your master."

Pierre de l'Hospital rose, and the figure of our Redeemer was solemnly veiled.

Henriet, who had great difficulty in overcoming his agitation, than began his revelations.

The following is the substance of them:--

On leaving the university of Angers, he had taken the situation of reader in the house of Gilles de Retz. The marshal took a liking to him, and made him his chamberlain and confidant.

On the occasion of the Sire de la Suze, brother of the Sire de Retz, taking possession of the castle of Chantonce, Charles de Soenne, who had arrived at Chantonce, assured Henriet that he had found in the oubliettes of a tower a number of dead children, some headless, others frightfully mutilated. Henriet then thought that this was but a calumny invented by the Sire de la Suze.

But when, some while after, the Sire de Retz retook the castle of Chantonce and had ceded it to the Duke of Brittany, he one evening summoned Henriet,

[p. 218]

Pontou, and a certain Petit Robin to his room; the two latter were already deep in the secrets of their master. But before confiding anything to Henriet, De Retz made him take a solemn oath never to reveal what he was about to tell him. The oath taken, the Sire de Retz, addressing the three, said that on the morrow an officer of the duke would take possession of the castle in the name of the duke, and that it was necessary, before this took place, that a certain well should be emptied of children's corpses, and that their bodies should be put into boxes and transported to Machecoul.

Henriet, Pontou, and Petit Robin went together, furnished with ropes and hooks, to the tower where were the corpses. They toiled all night in removing the half-decayed bodies, and with them they filled three large cases, which they sent by a boat down the Loire to Machecoul, where they were reduced to ashes.

Henriet counted thirty-six children's heads, but there were more bodies than heads. This night's work, he said, bad produced a profound impression on his imagination, and he was constantly haunted with a vision of these heads rolling as in a game of skittles, and clashing with a mournful wail.

[p. 219]

Henriet soon began to collect children for his master, and was present whilst he massacred them. They were murdered invariably in one room at Machecoul. The marshal used to bathe in their blood; he was fond of making Gilles do Sille, Pontou, or Henriet torture them, and he experienced intense pleasure in seeing them in their agonies. But his great passion was to welter in their blood. His servants would stab a child in the jugular vein, and let the blood squirt over him. The room was often steeped in blood. When the horrible deed was done, and the child was dead, the marshal would be filled with grief for what he had done, and would toss weeping and praying on a bed, or recite fervent prayers and litanies on his knees, whilst his servants washed the floor, and burned in the huge fireplace the bodies of the murdered children. With the bodies were burned the clothes and everything that had belonged to the little victims.

An insupportable odour filled the room, but the Marechal do Retz inhaled it with delight.

Henriet acknowledged that he had seen forty children put to death in this manner, and he was able to give an account of several, so that it was possible to identify them with the children reported to be lost.

[p. 220]

"It is quite impossible," said the lieutenant, who had been given the cue to do all that was possible to save the marshal--"It is impossible that bodies could be burned in a chamber fireplace."

"It was done, for all that, messire," replied Henriet. "The fireplace was very large, both at the hotel Suze, and also at Machecoul; we piled up great faggots and logs, and laid the dead children among them. In a few hours the operation was complete, and we flung the ashes out of the window into the moat."

Henriet remembered the case of the two sons of Hamelin; he said that, whilst the one child was being tortured, the other was on its knees sobbing and praying to God, till its own turn came.

"What you have said concerning the excesses of Messire de Retz," exclaimed the lieutenant du procureur, "seems to be pure invention, and destitute of all probability. The greatest monsters of iniquity never committed such crimes, except perhaps some Caesars of old Rome."

"Messire, it was the acts of these Caesars that my Lord of Retz desired to imitate. I used to read to him the chronicles of Suetonius, and Tacitus, in which their cruelties are recorded. He used to delight in hearing

[p. 221]

of them, and he said that it gave him greater pleasure to hack off a child's head than to assist at a banquet. Sometimes he would seat himself on the breast of a little one, and with a knife sever the head from the body at a single blow; sometimes he cut the throat half through very gently, that the child might languish, and he would wash his hands and his beard in its blood. Sometimes he had all the limbs chopped off at once from the trunk; at other times he ordered us to hang the infants till they were nearly dead, and then take them down and cut their throats. I remember having brought to him three little girls who were asking charity at the castle gates. He bade me cut their throats whilst he looked on. Andre Bricket found another little girl crying on the steps of the house at Vannes because she had lost her mother. He brought the little thing--it was but a babe--in his arms to my lord, and it was killed before him. Pontou and I had to make away with the body. We threw it down a privy in one of the towers, but the corpse caught on a nail in the outer wall, so that it would be visible to all who passed. Pontou was let down by a rope, and he disengaged it with great difficulty."

"How many children do you estimate that the Sire de Retz and his servants have killed?"

[p. 222]

"The reckoning is long. I, for my part, confess to having killed twelve with my own hand, by my master's orders, and I have brought him about sixty. I knew that things of the kind went on before I was admitted to the secret; for the castle of Machecoul had been occupied a short while by the Sire do la Sage. My lord recovered it speedily, for he knew that there were many children's corpses hidden in a hayloft. There were forty there quite dry and black as coal, because they had been charred. One of the women of Madame de Retz came by chance into the loft and saw the corpses. Roger de Briqueville wanted to kill her, but the marechal would not let him."

"Have you nothing more to declare?

"Nothing. I ask Pontou, my friend, to corroborate what I have said."

This deposition, so circumstantial and detailed, produced on the judges a profound impression of horror. Human imagination at this time had not penetrated such mysteries of refined cruelty. Several times, as Henriet spake, the president had shown his astonishment and indignation by signing himself with the cross. Several times his face had become scarlet, and his eyes had fallen; he had pressed his hand to his brow, to

[p. 223]

assure himself that he was not labouring under a hideous dream, and a quiver of horror had run through his whole frame.

Pontou had taken no part in the revelation of Henriet; but when the latter appealed to him he raised his head, looked sadly round the court, and sighed.

"Etienne Cornillant, alias Pontou, I command you in the name of God and of justice, to declare what you know."

This injunction of Pierre do l'Hospital remained unresponded to, and Pontou seemed to strengthen himself in his resolution not to accuse his master.

But Henriet, flinging himself into the arms of his accomplice, implored him, as he valued his soul, no longer to harden his heart to the calls of God; but to bring to light the crimes he had committed along with the Sire do Retz.

The lieutenant du procureur, who hitherto had endeavoured to extenuate or discredit the charges brought against Gilles do Retz, tried a last expedient to counterbalance the damaging confessions of Henriet, and to withhold Pontou from giving way.

"You have heard, monseigneur," said he to the president, "the atrocities which have been acknowledged

[p. 224]

by Henriet, and you, as I do, consider them to be pure inventions of the aforesaid, made out of bitter hatred and envy with the purpose of ruining his master. I therefore demand that Henriet should be put on the rack, that he may be brought to give the lie to his former statements."

"You forget," replied de l'Hospital, "that the rack is for those who do not confess, and not for those who freely acknowledge their crimes. Therefore I order the second accused, Etienne Cornillant, alias Pontou, to be placed on the rack if he continues silent. Pontou! will you speak or will you not?"

"Monseigneur, he will speak!" exclaimed Henriet. Oh, Pontou, dear friend, resist not God any more."

"Well then, messeigneurs," said Pontou, with emotion; "I will satisfy you; I cannot defend my poor lord against the allegations of Henriet, who has confessed all through dread of eternal damnation."

He then fully substantiated all the statements of the other, adding other facts of the same character, known only to himself.

Notwithstanding the avowal of Pontou and Henriet, the adjourned trial was not hurried on. It would have been easy to have captured some of the accomplices of

[p. 225]

the wretched man; but the duke, who was informed of the whole of the proceedings, did not wish to augment the scandal by increasing the number of the accused. He even forbade researches to be made in the castles and mansions of the Sire de Retz, fearing lest proofs of fresh crimes, more mysterious and more horrible than those already divulged, should come to light.

The dismay spread through the country by the revelations already made, demanded that religion and morality, which had been so grossly outraged, should be speedily avenged. People wondered at the delay in pronouncing sentence, and it was loudly proclaimed in Nantes that the Sire de Retz was rich enough to purchase his life. It is true that Madame de Retz solicited the king and the duke again to give pardon to her husband; but the duke, counselled by the bishop, refused to extend his authority to interfere with the course of justice; and the king, after having sent one of his councillors to Nantes to investigate the case, determined not to stir in it.

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 226]

 

CHAPTER XIII.

 

MARECHAL DE RETZ.--III. THE SENTENCE AND EXECUTION.

The adjourned Trial--The Marshal Confesses--The Case handed over to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal--Prompt steps taken by the Bishop--The Sentence--Ratified by the Secular Court--The Execution.

ON the 24th October the trial of the Marechal de Retz was resumed. The prisoner entered in a Carmelite habit, knelt and prayed in silence before the examination began. Then he ran his eye over the court, and the sight of the rack, windlass, and cords made a slight shudder run through him.

"Messire Gilles de Laval," began the president; "you appear before me now for the second time to answer to a certain requisition read by M. le Lieutenant du Procureur de Nantes."

"I shall answer frankly, monseigneur," said the prisoner calmly; "but I reserve the right of appeal to

[p. 227]

the benign intervention of the very venerated majesty of the King of France, of whom I am, or have been, chamberlain and marshal, as may be proved by my letters patent duly enregistered in the parliament at Paris--"

"This is no affair of the King of France," interrupted Pierre de l'Hospital; "if you were chamberlain and marshal of his Majesty, you are also vassal of his grace the Duke of Brittany."

"I do not deny it; but, on the contrary, I trust to his Grace of Brittany to allow me to retire to a convent of Carmelites, there to repent me of my sins."

"That is as may be; will you confess, or must I send you to the rack?"

"Torture me not!" exclaimed Gilles de Retz "I will confess all. Tell me first, what have Henriet and Pontou said?"

"They have confessed. M. le Lieutenant du Procureur shall read you their allegations."

"Not so," said the lieutenant, who continued to show favour to the accused; "I pronounce them false, unless Messire de Retz confirms them by oath, which God forbid!"

Pierre de l'Hospital made a motion of anger to check

[p. 228]

this scandalous pleading in favour of the accused, and then nodded to the clerk to read the evidence.

The Sire do Retz, on hearing that his servants had made such explicit avowals of their acts, remained motionless, as though thunderstruck. He saw that it was in vain for him to equivocate, and that he would have to confess all.

"What have you to say?" asked the president, when the confessions of Henriet and Pontou had been read.

"Say what befits you, my lord," interrupted the lieutenant du procureur, as though to indicate to the accused the line he was to take: "are not these abominable lies and calumnies trumped up to ruin you?"

"Alas, no!" replied the Sire do Retz; and his face was pale as death: "Henriet and Pontou have spoken the truth. God has loosened their tongues."

"My lord! relieve yourself of the burden of your crimes by acknowledging them at once," said M. do l'Hospital earnestly.

"Messires!" said the prisoner, after a moment's silence: "it is quite true that I have robbed mothers of their little ones; and that I have killed their

[p. 229]

children, or caused them to be killed, either by cutting their throats with daggers or knives, or by chopping off their heads with cleavers; or else I have had their skulls broken by hammers or sticks; sometimes I had their limbs hewn off one after another; at other times I have ripped them open, that I might examine their entrails and hearts; I have occasionally strangled them or put them to a slow death; and when the children were dead I had their bodies burned and reduced to ashes."

"When did you begin your execrable practices?" asked Pierre de l'Hospital, staggered by the frankness of these horrible avowals: "the evil one must have possessed you."

"It came to me from myself,--no doubt at the instigation of the devil: but still these acts of cruelty afforded me incomparable delight. The desire to commit these atrocities came upon me eight years ago. I left court to go to Chantonce, that I might claim the property of my grandfather, deceased. In the library of the castle I found a Latin book--Suetonius, I believe--full of accounts of the cruelties of the Roman Emperors. I read the charming history of Tiberius, Caracalla, and other Caesars, and the pleasure they took in watching the agonies of tortured children. Thereupon I resolved

[p. 230]

to imitate and surpass these same Caesars, and that very night I began to do so. For some while I confided my secret to no one, but afterwards I communicated it to my cousin, Gilles de Sille, then to Master Roger de Briqueville, next in succession to Henriet, Pontou, Rossignol, and Robin." He then confirmed all the accounts given by his two servants. He confessed to about one hundred and twenty murders in a single year.

"An average of eight hundred in less than seven years!" exclaimed Pierre de l'Hospital, with a cry of pain: "Ah! messire, you were possessed! "

His confession was too explicit and circumstantial for the Lieutenant du Procureur to say another word in his defence; but he pleaded that the case should be made over to the ecclesiastical court, as there were confessions of invocations of the devil and of witchcraft mixed up with those of murder. Pierre de l'Hospital saw that the object of the lieutenant was to gain time for Mme. de Retz to make a fresh attempt to obtain a pardon; however he was unable to resist, so he consented that the case should be transferred to the bishop's court.

But the bishop was not a man to let the matter

[p. 231]

slip, and there and then a sergeant of the bishop summoned Gilles de Laval, Sire do Retz, to appear forthwith before the ecclesiastical tribunal. The marshal was staggered by this unexpected citation, and he did not think of appealing against it to the president; he merely signed his readiness to follow, and he was at once conducted into the ecclesiastical court assembled hurriedly to try him.

This new trial lasted only a few hours.

The marshal, now thoroughly cowed, made no attempt to defend himself, but he endeavoured to bribe the bishop into leniency, by promises of the surrender of all his lands and goods to the Church, and begged to be allowed to retire into the Carmelite monastery at Nantes.

His request was peremptorily refused, and sentence of death was pronounced against him.

On the 25th October, the ecclesiastical court having pronounced judgment, the sentence was transmitted to the secular court, which had now no pretext upon which to withhold ratification.

There was some hesitation as to the kind of death the marshal was to suffer. The members of the secular tribunal were not unanimous on this point. The president

[p. 232]

put it to the vote, and collected the votes himself; then he reseated himself, covered his head, and said in a solemn voice:--

"The court, notwithstanding the quality, dignity, and nobility of the accused, condemns him to be hung and burned. Wherefore I admonish you who are condemned, to ask pardon of God, and grace to die well, in great contrition for having committed the said crimes. And the said sentence shall be carried into execution to-morrow morning between eleven and twelve o'clock." A similar sentence was pronounced upon Henriet and Pontou.

On the morrow, October 26th, at nine o'clock in the morning, a general procession composed of half the people of Nantes, the clergy and the bishop bearing the blessed Sacrament, left the cathedral and went round the city visiting each of the principal churches, where masses were said for the three under sentence.

At eleven the prisoners were conducted to the place of execution, which was in the meadow of Biesse, on the further side of the Loire.

Three gibbets had been erected, one higher than the others, and beneath each was a pile of faggots, tar, and brushwood.

[p. 233]

It was a glorious, breezy day, not a cloud was to be seen in the blue heavens; the Loire rolled silently towards the sea its mighty volumes of turbid water, seeming bright and blue as it reflected the brilliancy and colour of the sky. The poplars shivered and whitened in the fresh air with a pleasant rustle, and the willows flickered and wavered above the stream.

A vast crowd had assembled round the gallows; it was with difficulty that a way was made for the condemned, who came on chanting the De profundis. The spectators of all ages took up the psalm and chanted it with them, so that the surge of the old Gregorian tone might have been heard by the duke and the bishop, who had shut themselves up in the chateau of Nantes during the hour of execution.

After the close of the psalm, which was terminated by the Requiem aeternam instead of the Gloria, the Sire de Retz thanked those who had conducted him, and then embraced Pontou and Henriet, before delivering himself of the following address, or rather sermon:--

"My very dear friends and servants, be strong and courageous against the assaults of the devil, and feel great displeasure and contrition for your ill deeds, without despairing of God's mercy. Believe with me,

[p. 234]

that there is no sin, however great, in the world, which God, in his grace and loving kindness, will not pardon, when one asks it of Him with contrition of heart. Remember that the Lord God is always more ready to receive the sinner than is the sinner to ask of Him pardon. Moreover, let us very humbly thank Him for his great love to us in letting us die in full possession of our faculties, and not cutting us off suddenly in the midst of our misdeeds. Let us conceive such a love of God, and such repentance, that we shall not fear death, which is only a little pang, without which we could not see God in his glory. Besides we must desire to be freed from this world, in which is only misery, that we may go to everlasting glory. Let us rejoice rather, for although we have sinned grievously here below, yet we shall be united in Paradise, our souls being parted from our bodies, and we shall be together for ever and ever, if only we endure in our pious and honourable contrition to our last sigh."[1] Then the marshal, who was to be executed first, left his companions and placed himself in

 [1. The case of the Sire de Retz is one to make us see the great danger there is in trusting to feelings in matters of religion. "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments," said our Lord. How many hope to go to heaven because they have pious emotions!]

 [p. 235]

the hands of his executioners. He took off his cap, knelt, kissed a crucifix, and made a pious oration to the crowd much in the style of his address to his friends Pontou and Henriet.

Then he commenced reciting the prayers of the dying; the executioner passed the cord round his neck, and adjusted the knot. He mounted a tall stool, erected at the foot of the gallows as a last honour paid to the nobility of the criminal. The pile of firewood was lighted before the executioners had left him.

Pontou and Henriet, who were still on their knees, raised their eyes to their master and cried to him, extending their arms,--

"At this last hour, monseigneur, be a good and valiant soldier of God, and remember the passion of Jesus Christ which wrought our redemption. Farewell, we hope soon to meet in Paradise!

The stool was cast down, and the Sire de Retz dropped. The fire roared up, the flames leaped about him, and enveloped him as be swung.

Suddenly, mingling with the deep booming of the cathedral bell, swelled up the wild unearthly wail of the Dies irae.

[p. 236]

No sound among the crowd, only the growl of the fire, and the solemn strain of the hymn

	 
		Lo, the Book, exactly worded,
		 Wherein all hath been recorded;
		 Thence shall judgment be awarded.
		
		When the Judge his seat attaineth,
		 And each hidden deed arraigneth,
		 Nothing unavenged remaineth.
		
		What shall I, frail man, be pleading?
		 Who for me be interceding?
		 When the just are mercy needing.
		
		King of Majesty tremendous,
		 Who dost free salvation send us,
		 Fount of pity! then befriend us.
		
		*    *    *    *
		
		Low I kneel, with heart-submission;
		 See, like ashes, my contrition--
		 Help me in my last condition!
		
		Ah I that day of tears and mourning!
		 From the dust of earth returning,
		 Man for judgment must prepare him!
		 Spare, O, God, in mercy spare him!
		 Lord, who didst our souls redeem,
		 Grant a blessed requiem!
		
		
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 
											 
												AMEN.
												
												           Six women, veiled, and robed in white, and six Carmelites advanced. bearing a coffin.

It was whispered that one of the veiled women was

[p. 237]

Madame de Retz, and that the others were members of the most illustrious houses of Brittany.

The cord by which the marshal was hung was cut, and he fell into a cradle of iron prepared to receive the corpse. The body was removed before the fire had gained any mastery over it. It was placed in the coffin., and the monks and the women transported it to the Carmelite monastery of Nantes, according to the wishes of the deceased.

In the meantime, the sentence had been executed upon Pontou and Henriet; they were hung and burned to dust. Their ashes were cast to the winds; whilst in the Carmelite church of Our Lady were celebrated with pomp the obsequies of the very high, very powerful, very illustrious Seigneur Gilles de Laval, Sire de Retz, late Chamberlain of King Charles VII., and Marshal of France!

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 238]

 

CHAPTER XIV.

 

A GALICIAN WERE-WOLF.

The Inhabitants of Austrian Galicia--The Hamlet of Polomyja--Summer Evening in the Forest--The Beggar Swiatek--A Girl disappears--A School-boy vanishes--A Servant-girl lost--Another Boy carried of--The Discovery made by the Publican of Polomyja--Swiatek locked up--Brought to Dabkow--Commits suicide.

THE inhabitants of Austrian Galicia are quiet, inoffensive people, take them as a whole. The Jews, who number a twelfth of the population, are the most intelligent, energetic, and certainly the most money-making individuals in the province, though the Poles proper, or Mazurs, are not devoid of natural parts.

Perhaps as remarkable a phenomenon as any other in that kingdom--for kingdom of Waldimir it was--is the enormous numerical preponderance of the nobility over the untitled. In 1837 the proportions stood thus: 32,190 nobles to 2,076 tradesmen.

[p. 239]

The average of execution for crime is nine a year, out of a population of four and a half millions,--by no means a high figure, considering the peremptory way in which justice is dealt forth in that province. Yet, in the most quiet and well-disposed neighbourhoods, occasionally the most startling atrocities are committed, occurring when least expected, and sometimes perpetrated by the very person who is least suspected.

Just sixteen years ago there happened in the circle of Tornow, in Western Galicia-the province is divided into nine circles-a circumstance which will probably furnish the grandames with a story for their firesides, during their bitter Galician winters, for many a long year.

In the circle of Tornow, in the lordship of Parkost, is a little hamlet called Polomyja, consisting of eight hovels and a Jewish tavern. The inhabitants are mostly woodcutters, hewing down the firs of the dense forest in which their village is situated, and conveying them to the nearest water, down which they are floated to the Vistula. Each tenant pays no rent for his cottage and pitch of field, but is bound to work a fixed number of days for his landlord: a practice universal in Galicia, and often productive of much discontent and injustice,

[p. 240]

as the proprietor exacts labour from his tenant on those days when the harvest has to be got in, or the land is m best condition for tillage, and just when the peasant would gladly be engaged upon his own small plot. Money is scarce in the province, and this is accordingly the only way in which the landlord can be sure of his dues.

Most of the villagers of Polomyja are miserably poor; but by cultivating a little maize, and keeping a few fowls or a pig, they scrape together sufficient to sustain life. During the summer the men collect resin from the pines, from each of which, once in twelve Years, they strip a slip of bark, leaving the resin to exude and trickle into a small earthenware jar at its roots; and, during the winter, as already stated, they fell the trees and roll them down to the river.

Polomyja is not a cheerful spot--nested among dense masses of pine, which shed a gloom over the little hamlet; yet, on a fine day, it is pleasant enough for the old women to sit at their cottage doors, scenting that matchless pine fragrance, sweeter than the balm of the Spice Islands, for there is nothing cloying in that exquisite and exhilarating odour; listening to the harp-like thrill of the breeze in the old grey tree-tops, and

[p. 241]

knitting quietly at long stockings, whilst their little grandchildren romp in the heather and tufted fern.

Towards evening, too, there is something indescribably beautiful in the firwood. The sun dives among the trees, and paints their boles with patches of luminous saffron, or falling over a level clearing, glorifies it with its orange dye, so visibly contrasting with the blue-purple shadow on the western rim of unreclaimed forest, deep and luscious as the bloom on a plum. The birds then are hastening to their nests, a ger-falcon, high overhead, is kindled with sunlight; capering and gambolling among the branches, the merry squirrel skips home for the night.

The sun goes down, but the sky is still shining with twilight. The wild cat begins to hiss and squall in the forest, the heron to flap hastily by, the stork on the top of the tavern chimney to poise itself on one leg for sleep. To-whoo! an owl begins to wake up. Hark! the woodcutters are coming home with a song.

Such is Polomyja in summer time, and much resembling it are the hamlets scattered about the forest, at intervals of a few miles; in each, the public-house being the most commodious and best-built edifice, the

[p. 242]

church, whenever there is one, not remarkable for anything but its bulbous steeple.

You would hardly believe that amidst all this poverty a beggar could have picked up any subsistence, and yet, a few years ago, Sunday after Sunday, there sat a white-bearded venerable man at the church door, asking alms.

Poor people are proverbially compassionate and liberal, so that the old man generally got a few coppers, and often some good woman bade him come into her cottage, and let him have some food.

Occasionally Swiatek--that was the beggar's name, went his rounds selling small pinchbeck ornaments and beads; generally, however, only appealing to charity.

One Sunday, after church, a Mazur and his wife invited the old man into their hut and gave him a crust of pie and some meat. There were several children about, but a little girl, of nine or ten, attracted the old man's attention by her artless tricks.

Swiatek felt in his pocket and produced a ring, enclosing a piece of coloured glass set over foil. This he presented to the child, who ran off delighted to show her acquisition to her companions.

"Is that little maid your daughter?" asked the beggar.

[p. 243]

"No," answered the house-wife, "she is an orphan; there was a widow in this place who died, leaving the child, and I have taken charge of her; one mouth more will not matter much, and the good God will bless us."

"Ay, ay! to be sure He will; the orphans and fatherless are under His own peculiar care."

"She's a good little thing, and gives no trouble," observed the woman. "You go back to Polomyja tonight, I reckon."

"I do--ah!" exclaimed Swiatek, as the little girl ran up to him. You like the ring, is it not beautiful? I found it under a big fir to the left of the churchyard,there may be dozens there. You must turn round three times, bow to the moon, and say, 'Zaboi!' then look among the tree-roots till you find one."

"Come along!" screamed the child to its comrades; "we will go and look for rings."

"You must seek separately," said Swiatek.

The children scampered off into the wood.

"I have done one good thing for you," laughed the beggar, "in ridding you, for a time, of the noise of those children."

"I am glad of a little quiet now and then," said the

[p. 244]

woman; "the children will not let the baby sleep at times with their clatter. Are you going?"

"Yes; I must reach Polomyja to-night. I am old and very feeble, and poor"--he began to fall into his customary whine-- very poor, but I thank and pray to God for you."

Swiatek left the cottage.

 That little orphan was never seen again.

 The Austrian Government has, of late years, been vigorously advancing education among the lower orders, and establishing schools throughout the province.

The children were returning from class one day, and were scattered among the trees, some pursuing a field-mouse, others collecting juniper-berries, and some sauntering with their hands in their pockets, whistling.

"Where's Peter?" asked one little boy of another who was beside him. "We three go home the same way, let us go together."

"Peter!" shouted the lad.

"Here I am!" was the answer from among the trees; "I'll be with you directly."

"Oh, I see him!" said the elder boy. "There is some one talking to him."

"Where?"

[p. 245]

"Yonder, among the pines. Ah! they have gone further into the shadow, and I cannot see them any more. I wonder who was with him; a man, I think."

The boys waited till they were tired, and then they sauntered home, determined to thrash Peter for having kept them waiting. But Peter was never seen again.

 Some time after this a servant-girl, belonging to a small store kept by a Russian, disappeared from a village five miles from Polomyja. She had been sent with a parcel of grocery to a cottage at no very great distance, but lying apart from the main cluster of hovels, and surrounded by trees.

The day closed in, and her master waited her return anxiously, but as several hours elapsed without any sign of her, he--assisted by the neighbours--went in search of her.

A slight powdering of snow covered the ground, and her footsteps could be traced at intervals where she had diverged from the beaten track. In that part of the road where the trees were thickest, there were marks of two pair of feet leaving the path; but owing to the density of the trees at that spot and to the slightness of the fall of snow, which did not reach the soil, where shaded by the pines, the footprints were immediately

[p. 246]

lost. By the following morning a heavy fall had obliterated any further traces which day-light might have discovered.

 The servant-girl also was never seen again.

 During the winter of 1849 the wolves were supposed to have been particularly ravenous, for thus alone did people account for the mysterious disappearances of children.

A little boy had been sent to a fountain to fetch water; the pitcher was found standing by the well, but the boy had vanished. The villagers turned out, and those wolves which could be found were despatched.

We have already introduced our readers to Polomyja, although the occurrences above related did not take place among those eight hovels, but in neighbouring villages. The reason for our having given a more detailed account of this cluster of houses--rude cabins they were--will now become apparent.

In May, 1849, the innkeeper of Polomyja missed a couple of ducks, and his suspicions fell upon the beggar who lived there, and whom he held in no esteem, as he himself was a hard-working industrious man, whilst Swiatek maintained himself, his wife, and children by mendicity, although possessed of sufficient arable land

[p. 247]

to yield an excellent crop of maize, and produce vegetables, if tilled with ordinary care.

As the publican approached the cottage a fragrant whiff of roast greeted his nostrils.

"I'll catch the fellow in the act," said the innkeeper to himself, stealing up to the door, and taking good care not to be observed.

As he threw open the door, he saw the mendicant hurriedly shuffle something under his feet, and conceal it beneath his long clothes. The publican was on him in an instant, had him by the throat, charged him with theft, and dragged him from his seat. Judge of his sickening horror when from beneath the pauper's clothes rolled forth the head of a girl about the age of fourteen or fifteen years, carefully separated from the trunk.

In a short while the neighbours came up. The venerable Swiatek was locked up, along with his wife, his daughter--a girl of sixteen--and a son, aged five.

The hut was thoroughly examined, and the mutilated remains of the poor girl discovered. In a vat were found the legs and thighs, partly raw, partly stewed or roasted. In a chest were the heart, liver, and entrails, all prepared and cleaned, as neatly as though done by a skilful butcher; and, finally, under the oven was a bowl full of

[p. 248]

fresh blood. On his way to the magistrate of the district. the wretched man flung himself repeatedly on the ground, struggled with his guards, and endeavoured to suffocate himself by gulping clown clods of earth and stones, but was prevented by his conductors.

When taken before the Protokoll at Dabkow, he stated that he had already killed and--assisted by his family--eaten six persons: his children, however, asserted most positively that the number was much greater than he had represented, and their testimony is borne out by the fact, that the remains of fourteen different caps and suits of clothes, male as well as female, were found in his house.

The origin of this horrible and depraved taste was as follows, according to Swiatek's own confession:--

In 1846, three years previous, a Jewish tavern in the neighbourhood had been burned down, and the host had himself perished in the flames. Swiatek, whilst examining the ruins, had found the half-roasted corpse of the publican among the charred rafters of the house. At that time the old man was craving with hunger, having been destitute of food for some time. The scent and the sight of the roasted flesh inspired him with an uncontrollable desire to taste of it. He tore off a portion

[p. 249]

of the carcase and satiated his hunger upon it, and at the same time he conceived such a liking for it, that he could feel no rest till he had tasted again. His second victim was the orphan above alluded to; since then--that is, during the period of no less than three years--he had frequently subsisted in the same manner, and had actually grown sleek and fat upon his frightful meals.

The excitement roused by the discovery of these atrocities was intense; several poor mothers who had bewailed the loss of their little ones, felt their wounds reopened agonisingly. Popular indignation rose to the highest pitch: there was some fear lest the criminal should be torn in pieces himself by the enraged people, as soon as he was brought to trial: but he saved the necessity of precautions being taken to ensure his safety, for, on the first night of his confinement, he hanged himself from the bars of the prison-window.

     
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 250]

 

CHAPTER XV.

 

ANOMALOUS CASE.--THE HUMAN HYAeNA.

Ghouls--Story from Fornari--Quotation from Apuleius--Incident mentioned by Marcassus--Cemeteries of Paris violated--Discovery of Violator--Confession of M. Bertrand.

IT is well known that Oriental romance is full of stories of violators of graves. Eastern superstition attributes to certain individuals a passion for unearthing corpses and mangling them. Of a moonlight night weird forms are seen stealing among the tombs, and burrowing into them with their long nails, desiring to reach the bodies of the dead ere the first streak of dawn compels them to retire. These ghouls, as they are called, are supposed generally to require the flesh of the dead for incantations or magical compositions, but very often they are actuated by the sole desire of rending the sleeping corpse, and disturbing its repose. There is

[p. 251]

every probability that these ghouls were no mere creations of the imagination, but were actual resurrectionists. Human fat and the hair of a corpse which has grown in the grave, form ingredients in many a necromantic receipt, and the witches who compounded these diabolical mixtures, would unearth corpses in order to obtain the requisite ingredients. It was the same in the middle ages, and to such an extent did the fear of ghouls extend, that it was common in Brittany for churchyards to be provided with lamps, kept burning during the night, that witches might be deterred from venturing under cover of darkness to open the graves.

Fornari gives the following story of a ghoul in his History of Sorcerers:--

In the beginning of the 15th century, there lived at Bagdad an aged merchant who had grown wealthy in his business, and who had an only son to whom he was tenderly attached. He resolved to marry him to the daughter of another merchant, a girl of considerable fortune, but without any personal attractions. Abul-Hassan, the merchant's son, on being shown the portrait of the lady, requested his father to delay the marriage till he could reconcile his mind to it. Instead, however, of doing this, he fell in love with another girl,

[p. 252]

the daughter of a sage, and he gave his father no peace till he consented to the marriage with the object of his affections. The old man stood out as long as he could, but finding that his son was bent on acquiring the hand of the fair Nadilla, and was equally resolute not to accept the rich and ugly lady, he did what most fathers, under such circumstances, are constrained to do, he acquiesced.

The wedding took place with great pomp and ceremony, and a happy honeymoon ensued, which might have been happier but for one little circumstance which led to very serious consequences.

Abul-Hassan noticed that his bride quitted the nuptial couch as soon as she thought her husband was asleep, and did not return to it, till an boar before dawn.

Filled with curiosity, Hassan one night feigned sleep, and saw his wife rise and leave the room as usual. He followed cautiously, and saw her enter a cemetery. By the straggling moonbeams he beheld her go into a tomb; he stepped in after her.

The scene within was horrible. A party of ghouls were assembled with the spoils of the graves they had violated., and were feasting on the flesh of the long-buried corpses. His own wife, who, by the way, never

[p. 253]

touched supper at home, played no inconsiderable part in the hideous banquet.

As soon as he could safely escape, Abul-Hassan stole back to his bed.

He said nothing to his bride till next evening when supper was laid, and she declined to eat; then he insisted on her partaking, and when she positively refused, he exclaimed wrathfully,--"Yes, you keep your appetite for your feast with the ghouls!" Nadilla was silent; she turned pale and trembled, and without a word sought her bed. At midnight she rose, fell on her husband with her nails and teeth, tore his throat, and having opened a vein, attempted to suck his blood; but Abul-Hassan springing to his feet threw her down, and with a blow killed her. She was buried next day.

Three days after, at midnight, she re-appeared, attacked her husband again, and again attempted to suck his blood. He fled from her, and on the morrow opened her tomb, burned her to ashes, and cast them into the Tigris.

This story connects the ghoul with the vampire. As will be seen by a former chapter, the were-wolf and the vampire are closely related.

That the ancients held the same belief that the

[p. 254]

witches violate corpses, is evident from the third episode in the Golden Ass of Apuleius. I will only quote the words of the crier:--

"I pray thee, tell me," replied I, "of what kind are the duties attached to this funeral guardianship?" "Duties!" quoth the crier; "why, keep wide awake all night, with thine eyes fixed steadily upon the corpse, neither winking nor blinking, nor looking to the right nor looking to the left, either to one side or the other, be it even little; for the witches, infamous wretches that they are! can slip out of their skins in an instant and change themselves into the form of any animal they have a mind; and then they crawl along so slyly, that the eyes of justice, nay, the eyes of the sun himself, are not keen enough to perceive them. At all events, their wicked devices are infinite in number and variety; and whether it be in the shape of a bird, or a dog, or a mouse, or even of a common house-fly, that they exercise their dire incantations, if thou art not vigilant in the extreme, they will deceive thee one way or other, and overwhelm thee with sleep; nevertheless, as regards the reward, 'twill be from four to six aurei; nor, although 'tis a perilous service, wilt thou receive more. Nay, hold! I had almost forgotten to

[p. 255]

give thee a necessary caution. Clearly understand, that it the corpse be not restored to the relatives entire, the deficient pieces of flesh torn off by the teeth of the witches must be replaced from the face of the sleepy guardian."

Here we have the rending of corpses connected with change of form.

Marcassus relates that after a long war in Syria, during the night, troops of lamias, female evil spirits, appeared upon the field of battle, unearthing the hastily buried bodies of the soldiers, and devouring the flesh off their bones. They were pursued and fired upon, and some young men succeeded in killing a considerable number; but during the day they had all of them the forms of wolves or hyaenas. That there is a foundation of truth in these horrible stories, and that it is quite possible for a human being to be possessed of a depraved appetite for rending corpses, is proved by an extraordinary case brought before a court-martial in Paris, so late as July 10th, 1849.

The details are given with fulness in the Annales Medico-psychologiques for that month and year. They are too revolting for reproduction. I will, however, give an outline of this remarkable case.

[p. 256]

In the autumn of 1848, several of the cemeteries in the neighbourhood of Paris were found to have been entered during the night, and graves to have been rifled. The deeds were not those of medical students, for the bodies had not been carried of, but were found lying about the tombs in fragments. It was at first supposed that the perpetration of these outrages must have been a wild beast, but footprints in the soft earth left no doubt that it was a man. Close watch was kept at Pere la Chaise; but after a few corpses had been mangled there, the outrages ceased.

In the winter, another cemetery was ravaged, and it was not till March in 1849, that a spring gun which had been set in the cemetery of S. Parnasse, went off during the night, and warned the guardians of the place that the mysterious visitor had fallen into their trap. They rushed to the spot, only to see a dark figure in a military mantle leap the wall, and disappear in the gloom. Marks of blood, however, gave evidence that he had been hit by the gun when it had discharged. At the same time, a fragment of blue cloth, torn from the mantle, was obtained, and afforded a clue towards the identification of the ravisher of the tombs.

On the following day, the police went from barrack

[p. 257]

to barrack, inquiring whether officer or man were suffering from a gun-shot wound. By this means they discovered the person. He was a junior officer in the 1st Infantry regiment, of the name of Bertrand.

He was taken to the hospital to be cured of his wound, and on his recovery, he was tried by court-martial.

His history was this.

He had been educated in the theological seminary of Langres, till, at the age of twenty, he entered the army. He was a young man of retiring habits, frank and cheerful to his comrades, so as to be greatly beloved by them, of feminine delicacy and refinement, and subject to fits of depression and melancholy. In February, 1847, as he was walking with a friend in the country, he came to a churchyard, the gate of which stood open. The day before a woman had been buried, but the sexton had not completed filling in the grave, and he had been engaged upon it on the present occasion, when a storm of rain had driven him to shelter. Bertrand noticed the spade and pick lying beside the grave, and--to use his own words:--"A cette vue des idees noires me vinrent, j'eus comme un violent mal de tete, mon coeur battait avec force, je no me possedais plus." He managed by some

[p. 258]

excuse to get rid of his companion, and then returning to the churchyard, he caught up a spade and began to dig into the grave. "Soon I dragged the corpse out of the earth, and I began to hash it with the spade, without well knowing what I was about. A labourer saw me, and I laid myself flat on the ground till he was out of sight, and then I cast the body back into the grave. I then went away, bathed in a cold sweat, to a little grove, where I reposed for several hours, notwithstanding the cold rain which fell, in a condition of complete exhaustion. When I rose, my limbs were as if broken, and my head weak. The same prostration and sensation followed each attack.

Two days after, I returned to the cemetery, and opened the grave with my hands. My hands bled, but I did not feel the pain; I tore the corpse to shreds, and flung it back into the pit."

He had no further attack for four months, till his regiment came to Paris. As he was one day walking in the gloomy, shadowy, alleys of Pere la Chaise, the same feeling came over him like a flood. In the night he climbed the wall, and dug up a little girl of seven years old. He tore her in half. A few days later, he opened the grave of a woman who had died in childbirth, and

[p. 259]

had lain in the grave for thirteen days. On the 16th November, he dug up an old woman of fifty, and, ripping her to pieces, rolled among the fragments. He did the same to another corpse on the 12th December. These are only a few of the numerous cases of violation of tombs to which he owned. It was on the night of the 15th March that the spring-gun shot him.

Bertrand declared at his trial, that whilst he was in the hospital he had not felt any desire to renew his attempts, and that he considered himself cured of his horrible propensities, for he had seen men dying in the beds around him, and now: "Je suis gueri, car aujourd'hui j'ai peur d'un mort."

The fits of exhaustion which followed his accesses are very remarkable, as they precisely resemble those which followed the berserkir rages of the Northmen, and the expeditions of the Lycanthropists.

The case of M. Bertrand is indubitably most singular and anomalous; it scarcely bears the character of insanity, but seems to point rather to a species of diabolical possession. At first the accesses chiefly followed upon his drinking wine, but after a while they came upon him without exciting cause. The manner in which he mutilated the dead was different. Some he chopped

[p. 260]

with the spade, others he tore and ripped with his teeth and nails. Sometimes he tore the mouth open and rent the face back to the ears, he opened the stomachs, and pulled off the limbs. Although he dug up the bodies of several men he felt no inclination to mutilate them, whereas he delighted in rending female corpses. He was sentenced to a year's imprisonment.

    
The Book of Were-Wolves, by Sabine Baring-Gould, [1865], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 261]

 

CHAPTER XVI.

 

A SERMON ON WERE -WOLVES.

The discourses of Dr. Johann Geiler--The Sermon--Remarks.

THE following curious specimen of a late mediaeval sermon is taken from the old German edition of the discourses of Dr. Johann Geiler von Keysersperg, a famous preacher in Strasbourg. The volume is entitled: "Die Emeis. Dis ist das Buch von der Omeissen, und durch Herr der Kunnig ich diente gern. Und sagt von Eigenschafft der Omeissen, und gibt underweisung von der Unholden oder Hexen, und von Gespenst, der Geist, und von dem Wutenden Heer Wunderbarlich."

This strange series of sermons was preached at Strasbourg in the year 1508, and was taken down and written out by a barefooted friar, Johann Pauli, and by him published in 1517. The doctor died on Mid-Lent Sunday, 1510. There is a Latin edition of his sermons,

[p. 262]

but whether of the same series or not I cannot tell, as I have been unable to obtain a sight of the volume. The German edition is illustrated with bold and clever woodcuts. Among other, there are representations of the Witches' Sabbath, the Wild Huntsman, and a Werewolf attacking a Man.

The sermon was preached on the third Sunday in Lent. No text is given, but there is a general reference to the gospel for the day. This is the discourse:--[1]

"What shall we say about were-wolves? for there are were-wolves which run about the villages devouring men and children. As men say about them, they run about full gallop, injuring men, and are called ber-wolff, or wer-wolff. Do you ask me if I know aught about them? I answer, Yes. They are apparently wolves which cat men and children, and that happens on seven accounts:--

  1. Esuriem  Hunger. 
  2. Rabiem  Savageness. 
  3. Senectutem  Old age. 
  4. Experientiam  Experience. 
  5. Insaniem  Madness. 
  6. Diabolum  The Devil. 
  7. Deum  God. 
  

The first happens through hunger; when the wolves

 [1. Headed thus:--"Am dritte sontag a faste, occuli, predigt de doctor vo de Werwolffenn."]

 [p. 263]

find nothing to eat in the woods, they must come to people and eat men when hunger drives them to it. You see well, when it is very cold, that the stags come in search of food up to the villages, and the birds actually into the dining-room in search of victuals.

"Under the second head, wolves eat children through their innate savageness, because they are savage, and that is (propter locum coitum ferum). Their savageness arises first from their condition. Wolves which live in cold places are smaller on that account, and more savage than other wolves. Secondly, their savageness depends on the season; they are more savage about Candlemas than at any other time of the year, and men must be more on their guard against them then than at other times. It is a proverb, 'He who seeks a wolf at Candlemas, a peasant on Shrove Tuesday, and a parson in Lent, is a man of pluck.' . . . Thirdly, their savageness depends on their having young. When the wolves have young, they are more savage than when they have not. You see it so in all beasts. A wild duck, when it has young poults, you see what an uproar it makes. A cat fights for its young kittens; the wolves do ditto.

"Under the third head, the wolves do injury on

[p. 264]

account of their age. When a wolf is old, it is weak and feeble in its leas, so it can't ran fast enough to catch stags, and therefore it rends a man, whom it can catch easier than a wild animal. It also tears children and men easier than wild animals, because of its teeth, for its teeth break off when it is very old; you see it well in old women: how the last teeth wobble, and they have scarcely a tooth left in their heads, and they open their mouths for men to feed them with mash and stewed substances.

"Under the fourth head, the injury the were-wolves do arises from experience. It is said that human flesh is far sweeter than other flesh; so when a wolf has once tasted human flesh, he desires to taste it again. So he acts like old topers, who, when they know the best wine, will not be put off with inferior quality.

"Under the fifth head, the injury arises from ignorance. A dog when it is mad is also inconsiderate, and it bites any man; it does not recognize its own lord: and what is a wolf but a wild dog which is mad and inconsiderate, so that it regards no man.

"Under the sixth head, the injury comes of the Devil, who transforms himself, and takes on him the form of a wolf So writes Vincentius in his Speculum Historiale. [p. 265] And he has taken it from Valerius Maximus in the Punic war. When the Romans fought against the men of Africa, when the captain lay asleep, there came a wolf and drew his sword, and carried it off. That was the Devil in a, wolf's form. The like writes William of Paris,--that a wolf will kill and devour children, and do the greatest mischief. There was a man who had the phantasy that he himself was a wolf. And afterwards he was found lying in the wood, and he was dead out of sheer hunger.

"Under the seventh head, the injury comes of God's ordinance. For God will sometimes punish certain lands and villages with wolves. So we read of Elisha,--that when Elisha wanted to go up a mountain out of Jericho, some naughty boys made a mock of him and said, 'O bald head, step up! O glossy pate, step up!' What happened? He cursed them. Then came two bears out of the desert and tore about forty-two of the children. That was God's ordinance. The like we read of a prophet who would set at naught the commands he had received of God, for he was persuaded to eat bread at the house of another. As he went home he rode upon his ass. Then came a lion which slew him and left the ass alone. That was God's ordinance. [p. 266] Therefore must man turn to God when He brings wild beasts to do him a mischief: which same brutes may He not bring now or evermore. Amen."

It will be seen from this extraordinary sermon that Dr. Johann Geiler von Keysersperg did not regard werewolves in any other light than natural wolves filled with a lust for human flesh; and he puts aside altogether the view that they are men in a state of metamorphosis. However, he alludes to this superstition in his sermon on wild-men of the woods, but translates his lycanthropists to Spain.

THE END.




===== BOOK: brfb.txt =====


The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

THE BROWN FAIRY BOOK

Edited by Andrew Lang

New York: McGraw-Hill

[1904]

Dedicated to Diana Scott Lang

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

Contents

[*Preface]

[*What the Rose did to the Cypress]

[*Ball-Carrier and the Bad One]

[*How Ball-Carrier finished his Task]

[*The Bunyip]

[*Father Grumbler]

[*The Story of the Yara]

[*The Cunning Hare]

[*The Turtle and his Bride]

[*How Geirald the Coward was Punished]

[*Habogi]

[*How the Little Brother set Free his Big Brothers]

[*The Sacred Milk of Koumongoe]

[*The Wicked Wolverine]

[*The Husband of the Rat's Daughter]

[*The Mermaid and the Boy]

[*Pivi and Kabo]

[*The Elf Maiden]

[*How Some Wild Animals became Tame Ones]

[*Fortune and the Wood-Cutter]

[*The Enchanted Head]

[*The Sister of the Sun]

[*The Prince and the Three Fates]

[*The Fox and the Lapp]

[*Kisa the Cat]

[*The Lion and the Cat]

[*Which was the Foolishest?]

[*Asmund and Signy]

[*Rubezahl]

[*Story of the King who would be Stronger then Fate]

[*Story of Wali Dad the Simple-hearted]

[*Tale of a Tortoise and of a Mischievous Monkey]

[*The Knights of the Fish]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

Preface

The stories in this Fairy Book come from all quarters of the world. For example, the adventures of 'Ball-Carrier and the Bad One' are told by Red Indian grandmothers to Red Indian children who never go to school, nor see pen and ink. 'The Bunyip' is known to even more uneducated little ones, running about with no clothes at all in the bush, in Australia. You may see photographs of these merry little black fellows before their troubles begin, in 'Northern Races of Central Australia,' by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen. They have no lessons except in tracking and catching birds, beasts, fishes, lizards, and snakes, all of which they eat. But when they grow up to be big boys and girls, they are cruelly cut about with stone knives and frightened with sham bogies all for their good' their parents say and I think they would rather go to school, if they had their choice, and take their chance of being birched and bullied. However, many boys might think it better fun to begin to learn hunting as soon as they can walk. Other stories, like 'The Sacred Milk of Koumongoe,' come from the Kaffirs in Africa, whose dear papas are not so poor as those in Australia, but have plenty of cattle and milk, and good mealies to eat, and live in houses like very big bee-hives, and wear clothes of a sort, though not very like our own. 'Pivi and Kabo' is a tale from the brown people in the island of New Caledonia, where a boy is never allowed to speak to or even look at his own sisters; nobody knows why, so curious are the manners of this remote island. The story shows the advantages of good manners and pleasant behaviour; and the natives do not now cook and eat each other, but live on fish, vegetables, pork, and chickens, and dwell in houses. 'What the Rose did to the Cypress,' is a story from Persia, where the people, of course, are civilised, and much like those of whom you read in 'The Arabian Nights.' Then there are tales like 'The Fox and the Lapp' from the very north of Europe, where it is dark for half the year and day-light for the other half. The Lapps are a people not fond of soap and water, and very much given to art magic. Then there are tales from India, told to Major Campbell, who wrote them out, by Hindoos; these stories are 'Wali Dad the Simple-hearted,' and 'The King who would be Stronger than Fate,' but was not so clever as his daughter. From Brazil, in South America, comes 'The Tortoise and the Mischievous Monkey,' with the adventures of other animals. Other tales are told in various parts of Europe, and in many languages; but all people, black, white, brown, red, and yellow, are like each other when they tell stories; for these are meant for children, who like the same sort of thing, whether they go to school and wear clothes, or, on the other hand, wear skins of beasts, or even nothing at all, and live on grubs and lizards and hawks and crows and serpents, like the little Australian blacks.

The tale of 'What the Rose did to the Cypress,' is translated out of a Persian manuscript by Mrs. Beveridge. 'Pivi and Kabo' is translated by the Editor from a French version; 'Asmund and Signy' by Miss Blackley; the Indian stories by Major Campbell, and all the rest are told by Mrs. Lang, who does not give them exactly as they are told by all sorts of outlandish natives, but makes them up in the hope white people will like them, skipping the pieces which they will not like. That is how this Fairy Book was made up for your entertainment.

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

The Brown Fairy Book

What the Rose did to the Cypress [1]

Once upon a time a great king of the East, named Saman-lalposh, [2] had three brave and clever sons--Tahmasp, Qamas, and Almas-ruh-baksh. [3] One day, when the king was sitting in his hall of audience, his eldest son, Prince Tahmasp, came before him, and after greeting his father with due respect, said: 'O my royal father! I am tired of the town; if you will give me leave, I will take my servants to-morrow and will go into the country and hunt on the hill-skirts; and when I have taken some game I will come back, at evening-prayer time.' His father consented, and sent with him some of his own trusted servants, and also hawks, and falcons, hunting dogs, cheetahs and leopards.

At the place where the prince intended to hunt he saw a most beautiful deer. He ordered that it should not be killed, but trapped or captured with a noose. The deer looked about for a place where he might escape from the ring of the beaters, and spied one unwatched close to the prince himself. It bounded high and leaped right over his head, got out of the ring, and tore like the eastern wind into the waste. The prince put spurs to his horse and pursued it; and was soon lost to the sight of his followers. Until the world-lighting sun stood above his head in the zenith he did not take his eyes off the deer; suddenly it disappeared behind some rising ground, and with all his search he could not find any further trace of it. He was now drenched in sweat, and he breathed with pain; and his horse's tongue hung from its mouth with thirst. He dismounted and toiled on, with bridle on arm, praying and casting himself on the mercy of heaven. Then his horse fell and surrendered its life to God. On and on he went across the sandy waste, weeping and with burning breast, till at length a hill rose into sight. He mustered his strength and climbed to the top, and there he found a giant tree whose foot kept firm the wrinkled earth, and whose crest touched the very heaven. Its branches had put forth a glory of leaves, and there were grass and a spring underneath it, and flowers of many colours.

Gladdened by this sight, he dragged himself to the water's edge, drank his fill, and returned thanks for his deliverance from thirst.

He looked about him and, to his amazement, saw close by a royal seat. While he was pondering what could have brought this into the merciless desert, a man drew near who was dressed like a faqir, and had bare head and feet, but walked with the free carriage of a person of rank. His face was kind, and wise and thoughtful, and he came on and spoke to the prince.

'O good youth! how did you come here? Who are you? Where do you come from?'

The prince told everything just as it had happened to him, and then respectfully added: 'I have made known my own circumstances to you, and now I venture to beg you to tell me your own. Who are you? How did you come to make your dwelling in this wilderness?'

To this the faqir replied: 'O youth! it would be best for you to have nothing to do with me and to know nothing of my fortunes, for my story is fit neither for telling nor for hearing.' The prince, however, pleaded so hard to be told, that at last there was nothing to be done but to let him hear.

'Learn and know, O young man! that I am King Janangir [4] of Babylon, and that once I had army and servants, family and treasure; untold wealth and belongings. The Most High God gave me seven sons who grew up well versed in all princely arts. My eldest son heard from travellers that in Turkistan, on the Chinese frontier, there is a king named Quimus, the son of Timus, and that he has an only child, a daughter named Mihr-afruz, [5] who, under all the azure heaven, is unrivalled for beauty. Princes come from all quarters to ask her hand, and on one and all she imposes a condition. She says to them: "I know a riddle; and I will marry anyone who answers it, and will bestow on him all my possessions. But if a suitor cannot answer my question I cut off his head and hang it on the battlements of the citadel." The riddle she asks is, "What did the rose do to the cypress?"

'Now, when my son heard this tale, he fell in love with that unseen girl, and he came to me lamenting and bewailing himself. Nothing that I could say had the slightest effect on him. I said: "Oh my son! if there must be fruit of this fancy of yours, I will lead forth a great army against King Quimus. If he will give you his daughter freely, well and good; and if not, I will ravage his kingdom and bring her away by force." This plan did not please him; he said: "It is not right to lay a kingdom waste and to destroy a palace so that I may attain my desire. I will go alone; I will answer the riddle, and win her in this way." At last, out of pity for him, I let him go. He reached the city of King Quimus. He was asked the riddle and could not give the true answer; and his head was cut off and hung upon the battlements. Then I mourned him in black raiment for forty days.

After this another and another of my sons were seized by the same desire, and in the end all my seven sons went, and all were killed. In grief for their death I have abandoned my throne, and I abide here in this desert, withholding my hand from all State business and wearing myself away in sorrow.'

Prince Tahmasp listened to this tale, and then the arrow of love for that unseen girl struck his heart also. Just at this moment of his ill-fate his people came up, and gathered round him like moths round a light. They brought him a horse, fleet as the breeze of the dawn; he set his willing foot in the stirrup of safety and rode off. As the days went by the thorn of love rankled in his heart, and he became the very example of lovers, and grew faint and feeble. At last his confidants searched his heart and lifted the veil from the face of his love, and then set the matter before his father, King Saman-lal-posh. 'Your son, Prince Tahmasp, loves distractedly the Princess Mihr-afruz, daughter of King Quimus, son of Timus.' Then they told the king all about her and her doings. A mist of sadness clouded the king's mind, and he said to his son: 'If this thing is so, I will in the first place send a courier with friendly letters to King Quimus, and will ask the hand of his daughter for you. I will send an abundance of gifts, and a string of camels laden with flashing stones and rubies of Badakhsham In this way I will bring her and her suite, and I will give her to you to be your solace. But if King Quimus is unwilling to give her to you, I will pour a whirlwind of soldiers upon him, and I will bring to you, in this way, that most consequential of girls.' But the prince said that this plan would not be right, and that he would go himself, and would answer the riddle. Then the king's wise men said: 'This is a very weighty matter; it would be best to allow the prince to set out accompanied by some persons in whom you have confidence. Maybe he will repent and come back.' So King Saman ordered all preparations for the journey to be made, and then Prince Tahmasp took his leave and set out, accompanied by some of the courtiers, and taking with him a string of two-humped and raven-eyed camels laden with jewels, and gold, and costly stuffs.

By stage after stage, and after many days' journeying, he arrived at the city of King Quimus. What did he see? A towering citadel whose foot kept firm the wrinkled earth, and whose battlements touched the blue heaven. He saw hanging from its battlements many heads, but it had not the least effect upon him that these were heads of men of rank; he listened to no advice about laying aside his fancy, but rode up to the gate and on into the heart of the city. The place was so splendid that the eyes of the ages have never seen its like, and there, in an open square, he found a tent of crimson satin set up, and beneath it two jewelled drums with jewelled sticks. These drums were put there so that the suitors of the princess might announce their arrival by beating on them, after which some one would come and take them to the king's presence. The sight of the drums stirred the fire of Prince Tahmasp's love. He dismounted, and moved towards them; but his companions hurried after and begged him first to let them go and announce him to the king, and said that then, when they had put their possessions in a place of security, they would enter into the all important matter of the princess. The prince, however, replied that he was there for one thing only; that his first duty was to beat the drums and announce himself as a suitor, when he would be taken, as such, to the king, who would then give him proper lodgment. So he struck upon the drums, and at once summoned an officer who took him to King Quimus.

When the king saw how very young the prince looked, and that he was still drinking of the fountain of wonder, he said: 'O youth! leave aside this fancy which my daughter has conceived in the pride of her beauty. No one can answer er her riddle, and she has done to death many men who had had no pleasure in life nor tasted its charms. God forbid that your spring also should be ravaged by the autumn winds of martyrdom.' All his urgency, however, had no effect in making the prince withdraw. At length it was settled between them that three days should be given to pleasant hospitality and that then should follow what had to be said and done. Then the prince went to his own quarters and was treated as became his station.

King Quimus now sent for his daughter and for her mother, Gulrukh, [6] and talked to them. He said to Mibrafruz: 'Listen to me, you cruel flirt! Why do you persist in this folly? Now there has come to ask your hand a prince of the east, so handsome that the very sun grows modest before the splendour of his face; he is rich, and he has brought gold and jewels, all for you, if you will marry him. A better husband you will not find.'

But all the arguments of father and mother were wasted, for her only answer was: 'O my father! I have sworn to myself that I will not marry, even if a thousand years go by, unless someone answers my riddle, and that I will give myself to that man only who does answer it.'

The three days passed; then the riddle was asked: 'What did the rose do to the cypress?' The prince had an eloquent tongue, which could split a hair, and without hesitation he replied to her with a verse: 'Only the Omnipotent has knowledge of secrets; if any man says, "I know" do not believe him.'

Then a servant fetched in the polluted, blue-eyed headsman, who asked: 'Whose sun of life has come near its setting?' took the prince by the arm, placed him upon the cloth of execution, and then, all merciless and stony hearted, cut his head from his body and hung it on the battlements.

The news of the death of Prince Tahmasp plunged his father into despair and stupefaction. He mourned for him in black raiment for forty days; and then, a few days later, his second son, Prince Qamas, extracted from him leave to go too; and he, also, was put to death. One son only now remained, the brave, eloquent, happy-natured Prince Almas-ruh-bakhsh. One day, when his father sat brooding over his lost children, Almas came before him and said: 'O father mine! the daughter of King Quimus has done my two brothers to death; I wish to avenge them upon her.' These words brought his father to tears. 'O light of your father!' he cried, 'I have no one left but you, and now you ask me to let you go to your death.'

'Dear father!' pleaded the prince, 'until I have lowered the pride of that beauty, and have set her here before you, I cannot settle down or indeed sit down off my feet.'

In the end he, too, got leave to go; but he went a without a following and alone. Like his brothers, he made the long journey to the city of Quimus the son of Timus; like them he saw the citadel, but he saw there the heads of Tahmasp and Qamas. He went about in the city, saw the tent and the drums, and then went out again to a village not far off. Here he found out a very old man who had a wife 120 years old, or rather more. Their lives were coming to their end, but they had never beheld face of child of their own. They were glad when the prince came to their house, and they dealt with him as with a son. He put all his belongings into their charge, and fastened his horse in their out-house. Then he asked them not to speak of him to anyone, and to keep his affairs secret. He exchanged his royal dress for another, and next morning, just as the sun looked forth from its eastern oratory, he went again into the city. He turned over in his mind without ceasing how he was to find out the meaning of the riddle, and to give them a right answer, and who could help him, and how to avenge his brothers. He wandered about the city, but heard nothing of service, for there was no one in all that land who understood the riddle of Princess Mihr-afruz.

One day he thought he would go to her own palace and see if he could learn anything there, so he went out to her garden-house. It was a very splendid place, with a wonderful gateway, and walls like Alexander's ramparts. Many gate-keepers were on guard, and there was no chance of passing them. His heart was full of bitterness, but he said to himself: 'All will be well! it is here I shall get what I want.' He went round outside the garden wall hoping to find a gap, and he made supplication in the Court of Supplications and prayed, 'O Holder of the hand of the helpless! show me my way.'

While he prayed he bethought himself that he could get into the garden with a stream of inflowing water. He looked carefully round, fearing to be seen, stripped, slid into the stream and was carried within the great walls. There he hid himself till his loin cloth was dry. The garden was a very Eden, with running water amongst its lawns, with flowers and the lament of doves and the jug-jug of nightingales. It was a place to steal the senses from the brain, and he wandered about and saw the house, but there seemed to be no one there. In the forecourt was a royal seat of polished jasper, and in the middle of the platform was a basin of purest water that flashed like a mirror. He pleased himself with these sights for a while, and then went back to the garden and hid himself from the gardeners and passed the night. Next morning he put on the appearance of a madman and wandered about till he came to a lawn where several pert-faced girls were amusing themselves. On a throne, jewelled and overspread with silken stuffs, sat a girl the splendour of whose beauty lighted up the place, and whose ambergris and attar perfumed the whole air. 'That must be Mihrafruz,' he thought, 'she is indeed lovely.' Just then one of the attendants came to the water's edge to fill a cup, and though the prince was in hiding, his face was reflected in the water. When she saw this image she was frightened, and let her cup fall into the stream, and thought, 'Is it an angel, or a peri, or a man?' Fear and trembling took hold of her, and she screamed as women scream. Then some of the other girls came and took her to the princess who asked: 'What is the matter, pretty one?'

'O princess! I went for water, and I saw an image, and I was afraid.' So another girl went to the water and saw the same thing, and came back with the same story. The princess wished to see for herself; she rose and paced to the spot with the march of a prancing peacock. When she saw the image she said to her nurse: 'Find out who is reflected in the water, and where he lives.' Her words reached the prince's ear, he lifted up his head; she saw him and beheld beauty such as she had never seen before. She lost a hundred hearts to him, and signed to her nurse to bring him to her presence. The prince let himself be persuaded to go with the nurse, but when the princess questioned him as to who he was and how he had got into her garden, he behaved like a man out of his mind--sometimes smiling, sometimes crying, and saying: 'I am hungry,'Or words misplaced and random, civil mixed with the rude.

'What a pity!' said the princess, 'he is mad!' As she liked him she said: 'He is my madman; let no one hurt him.' She took him to her house and told him not to go away, for that she would provide for all his wants. The prince thought, 'It would be excellent if here, in her very house, I could get the answer to her riddle; but I must be silent, on pain of death.'

Now in the princess's household there was a girl called Dil-aram [7]; she it was who had first seen the image of the prince. She came to love him very much, and she spent day and night thinking how she could make her affection known to him. One day she escaped from the princess's notice and went to the prince, and laid her head on his feet and said: 'Heaven has bestowed on you beauty and charm. Tell me your secret; who are you, and how did you come here? I love you very much, and if you would like to leave this place I will go with you. I have wealth equal to the treasure of the miserly Qarun.' But the prince only made answer like a man distraught, and told her nothing. He said to himself, 'God forbid that the veil should be taken in vain from my secret; that would indeed disgrace me.' So, with streaming eyes and burning breast, Dil-aram arose and went to her house and lamented and fretted.

Now whenever the princess commanded the prince's attendance, Dil-aram, of all the girls, paid him attention and waited on him best. The princess noticed this, and said: 'O Dil-aram! you must take my madman into your charge and give him whatever he wants.' This was the very thing Dilaram had prayed for. A little later she took the prince into a private place and she made him take an oath of secrecy, and she herself took one and swore, 'By Heaven! I will not tell your secret. Tell me all about yourself so that I may help you to get what you want.' The prince now recognised in her words the perfume of true love, and he made compact with her. 'O lovely girl! I want to know what the rose did to the cypress. Your mistress cuts off men's heads because of this riddle; what is at the bottom of it, and why does she do it?' Then Dil-aram answered: 'If you will promise to marry me and to keep me always amongst those you favour, I will tell you all I know, and I will keep watch about the riddle.'

'O lovely girl,' rejoined he, 'if I accomplish my purpose, so that I need no longer strive for it, I will keep my compact with you. When I have this woman in my power and have avenged my brothers, I will make you my solace.'

'O wealth of my life and source of my joy!' responded Dil-aram, 'I do not know what the rose did to the cypress; but so much I know that the person who told Mihr-afruz about it is a negro whom she hides under her throne. He fled here from Waq of the Caucasus--it is there you must make inquiry; there is no other way of getting at the truth.'On hearing these words, the prince said to his heart, 'O my heart! your task will yet wear away much of your life.'

He fell into long and far thought, and Dil-aram looked at him and said: 'O my life and my soul! do not be sad. If you would like this woman killed, I will put poison into her cup so that she will never lift her head from her drugged sleep again.'

'O Dil-aram! such a vengeance is not manly. I shall not rest till I have gone to Waq of the Caucasus and have cleared up the matter.' Then they repeated the agreement about their marriage, and bade one another goodbye.

The prince now went back to the village, and told the old man that he was setting out on a long journey, and begged him not to be anxious, and to keep safe the goods which had been entrusted to him.

The prince had not the least knowledge of the way to Waq of the Caucasus, and was cast down by the sense of his helplessness. He was walking along by his horse's side when there appeared before him an old man of serene countenance, dressed in green and carrying a staff, who resembled Khizr. [8] The prince thanked heaven, laid the hands of reverence on his breast and salaamed. The old man returned the greeting graciously, and asked: 'How fare you? Whither are you bound? You look like a traveller.'

'O revered saint! I am in this difficulty: I do not know the way to Waq of the Caucasus.' The old man of good counsel looked at the young prince and said: 'Turn back from this dangerous undertaking. Do not go; choose some other task! If you had a hundred lives you would not bring one out safe from this journey.' But his words had no effect on the prince's resolve. 'What object have you,' the old man asked, 'in thus consuming your life?'

'I have an important piece of business to do, and only this journey makes it possible. I must go; I pray you, ill God's name, tell me the way.'

When the saint saw that the prince was not to be moved, he said: 'Learn and know, O youth! that Waq of Qaf is in the Caucasus and is a dependency of it. In it there are jins, demons, and peris. You must go on along this road till it forks into three; take neither the right hand nor the left, but the middle path. Follow this for a day and a night. Then you will come to a column on which is a marble slab inscribed with Cufic characters. Do what is written there; beware of disobedience.' Then he gave his good wishes for the journey and his blessing, and the prince kissed his feet, said good-bye, and, with thanks to the Causer of Causes, took the road.

After a day and a night he saw the column rise in silent beauty to the heavens. Everything was as the wise old man had said it would be, and the prince, who was skilled in all tongues, read the following Cufic inscription: 'O travellers! be it known to you that this column has been set up with its tablet to give true directions about these roads. If a man would pass his life in ease and pleasantness, let him take the right-hand path. If he take the left, he will have some trouble, but he will reach his goal without much delay. Woe to him who chooses the middle path! if he had a thousand lives he would not save one; it is very hazardous; it leads to the Caucasus, and is an endless road. Beware of it!'

The prince read and bared his head and lifted his hands in supplication to Him who has no needs, and prayed, 'O Friend of the traveller! I, Thy servant, come to Thee for succour. My purpose lies in the land of Qaf and my road is full of peril. Lead me by it.' Then he took a handful of earth and cast it on his collar, and said: 'O earth! be thou my grave; and O vest! tee thou my winding-sheet!' Then he took the middle road and went along it, day after day, with many a silent prayer, till he saw trees rise from the weary waste of sand. They grew in a garden, and he went up to the gate and found it a slab of beautifully worked marble, and that near it there lay sleeping, with his head on a stone, a negro whose face was so black that it made darkness round him. His upper lip, arched like an eyebrow, curved upwards to his nostrils and his lower hung down like a camel's. Four millstones formed his shield, and on a box-tree close by hung his giant sword. His loin-cloth was fashioned of twelve skins of beasts, and was bound round his waist by a chain of which each link was as big as an elephant's thigh.

The prince approached and tied up his horse near the negro's head. Then he let fall the Bismillah from his lips, entered the garden and walked through it till he came to the private part, delighting in the great trees, the lovely verdure, and the flowery borders. In the inner garden there were very many deer. These signed to him with eye and foot to go back, for that this was enchanted ground; but he did not understand them, and thought their pretty gestures were a welcome. After a while he reached a palace which had a porch more splendid than Caesar's, and was built of gold and silver bricks. In its midst was a high seat, overlaid with fine carpets, and into it opened eight doors, each having opposite to it a marble basin.

Banishing care, Prince Almas walked on through the garden, when suddenly a window opened and a girl, who was lovely enough to make the moon writhe with jealousy, put out her head. She lost her heart to the good looks of the prince, and sent her nurse to fetch him so that she might learn where he came from and how he had got into her private garden where even lions and wolves did not venture. The nurse went, and was struck with amazement at the sun-like radiance of his face; she salaamed and said: 'O youth! welcome! the lady of the garden calls you; come!' He went with her and into a palace which was like a house in Paradise, and saw seated on the royal carpets of the throne a girl whose brilliance shamed the shining sun. He salaamed; she rose, took him by the hand and placed him near her. 'O young man! who are you? Where do you come from? How did you get into this garden?' He told her his story from beginning to end, and Lady Latifa [9] replied: 'This is folly! It will make you a vagabond of the earth, and lead you to destruction. Come, cease such talk! No one can go to the Caucasus. Stay with me and be thankful, for here is a throne which you can share with me, and in my society you can enjoy my wealth. I will do whatever you wish; I will bring here King Qulmus and his daughter, and you can deal with them as you will.'

'O Lady Latifa,' he said, 'I have made a compact with heaven not to sit down off my feet till I have been to Waq of Qaf and have cleared up this matter, and have taken Mihrafruz from her father, as brave men take, and have put her in prison. When I have done all this I will come back to you in state and with a great following, and I will marry you according to the law.' Lady Latifa argued and urged her wishes, but in vain; the prince was not to be moved. Then she called to the cupbearers for new wine, for she thought that when his head was hot with it he might consent to stay. The pure, clear wine was brought; she filled a cup and gave to him. He said: 'O most enchanting sweetheart! it is the rule for the host to drink first and then the guest.' So to make him lose his head, she drained the cup; then filled it again and gave him. He drank it off, and she took a lute from one of the singers and played upon it with skill which witched away the sense of all who heard. But it was all in vain; three days passed in such festivities, and on the fourth the prince said: 'O joy of my eyes! I beg now that you will bid me farewell, for my way is long and the fire of your love darts flame into the harvest of my heart. By heaven's grace I may accomplish my purpose, and, if so, I will come back to you.'

Now she saw that she could not in any way change his resolve, she told her nurse to bring a certain casket which contained, she said, something exhilarating which would help the prince on his journey. The box was brought, and she divided off a portion of what was within and gave it to the prince to eat. Then, and while he was all unaware, she put forth her hand to a stick fashioned like a snake; she said some words over it and struck him so sharply on the shoulder that he cried out; then he made a pirouette and found that he was a deer.

When he knew what had been done to him he thought, 'All the threads of affliction are gathered together; I have lost my last chance!' He tried to escape, but the magician sent for her goldsmith, who, coming, overlaid the deer-horns with gold and jewels. The kerchief which that day she had had in her hand was then tied round its neck, and this freed it from her attentions.

The prince-deer now bounded into the garden and at once sought some way of escape. It found none, and it joined the other deer, which soon made it their leader. Now, although the prince had been transformed into the form of a deer, he kept his man's heart and mind. He said to himself, 'Thank heaven that the Lady Latifa has changed me into this shape, for at least deer are beautiful.' He remained for some time living as a deer amongst the rest, but at length resolved that an end to such a life must be put ill some way. He looked again for some place by which he could get out of the magic garden. Following round the wall he reached a lower part; he remembered the Divine Names and flung himself over, saying, 'Whatever happens is by the will of God.' When he looked about he found that he was in the very same place he had jumped from; there was the palace, there the garden and the deer! Eight times he leaped over the wall and eight times found himself where he had started from; but after the ninth leap there was a change, there was a palace and there was a garden, but the deer were gone.

Presently a girl of such moon-like beauty opened a window that the prince lost to her a hundred hearts. She was delighted with the beautiful deer, and cried to her nurse: 'Catch it! if you will I will give you this necklace, every pearl of which is worth a kingdom.' The nurse coveted the pearls, but as she was three hundred years old she did not know how she could catch a deer. However, she went down into the garden and held out some grass, but when she went near the creature ran away. The girl watched with great excitement from the palace window, and called: 'O nurse, if you don't catch it, I will kill you!' 'I am killing myself,' shouted back the old woman. The girl saw that nurse tottering along and went down to help, marching with the gait of a prancing peacock. When she saw the gilded horns and the kerchief she said: 'It must be accustomed to the hand, and be some royal pet!' The prince had it in mind that this might be another magician who could give him some other shape, but still it seemed best to allow himself to be caught. So he played about the girl and let her catch him by the neck. A leash was brought, fruits were given, and it was caressed with delight. It was taken to the palace and tied at the foot of the Lady Jamila's raised seat, but she ordered a longer cord to be brought so that it might be able to jump up beside her.

When the nurse went to fix the cord she saw tears falling from its eyes, and that it was dejected and sorrowful 'O Lady Jamila! this is a wonderful deer, it is crying; I never saw a deer cry before.' Jamila darted down like a flash of lightning, and saw that it was so. It rubbed its head on her feet and then shook it so sadly that the girl cried for sympathy. She patted it and said: 'Why are you sad, my heart? Why do you cry, my soul? Is it because I have caught you? I love you better than my own life.' But, spite of her comforting, it cried the more. Then Jamila said: 'Unless I am mistaken, this is the work of my wicked sister Latifa, who by magic art turns servants of God into beasts of the field.' At these words the deer uttered sounds, and laid its head on her feet. Then Jamila was sure it was a man, and said: 'Be comforted, I will restore you to your own shape.' She bathed herself and ordered the deer to be bathed, put on clean raiment, called for a box which stood in an alcove, opened it and gave a portion of what was in it to the deer to eat. Then she slipped her hand under her carpet and produced a stick to which she said something. She struck the deer hard, it pirouetted and became Prince Almas.

The broidered kerchief and the jewels lay upon the ground. The prince prostrated himself in thanks to heaven and Jamila, and said: 'O delicious person! O Chinese Venus! how shall I excuse myself for giving you so much trouble? With what words can I thank you?' Then she called for a clothes-wallet and chose out a royal dress of honour. Her attendants dressed him in it, and brought him again before the tender-hearted lady. She turned to him a hundred hearts, took his hand and seated him beside her, and said: 'O youth! tell me truly who you are and where you come from, and how you fell into the power of my sister.'

Even when he was a deer the prince had much admired Jamila now he thought her a thousand times more lovely than before. He judged that in truth alone was safety, and so told her his whole story. Then she asked: 'O Prince Almas-ruh-bakhsh, do you still wish so much to make this journey to Waq of Qaf? What hope is there in it? The road is dangerous even near here, and this is not yet the borderland of the Caucasus. Come, give it up! It is a great risk, and to go is not wise. It would be a pity for a man like you to fall into the hands of jins and demons. Stay with me, and I will do whatever you wish.'

'O most delicious person!' he answered, 'you are very generous, and the choice of my life lies in truth in your hands; but I beg one favour of you. If you love me, so do I too love you. If you really love me, do not forbid me to make this journey, but help me as far as you can. Then it may be that I shall succeed, and if I return with my purpose fulfilled I will marry you according to the law, and take you to my own country, and we will spend the rest of our lives together in pleasure and good companionship. Help me, if you can, and give me your counsel.'

'O very stuff of my life,' replied Jamila 'I will give you things that are not in kings' treasuries, and which will be of the greatest use to you. First, there are the bow and arrows of his Reverence the Prophet Salih. Secondly, there is the Scorpion of Solomon (on whom be peace), which is a sword such as no king has; steel and stone are one to it; if you bring it down on a rock it will not be injured, and it will cleave whatever you strike. Thirdly, there is the dagger which the sage Timus himself made; this is most useful, and the man who wears it would not bend under seven camels' loads. What you have to do first is to get to the home of the Simurgh, [10] and to make friends with him. If he favours you, he will take you to Waq of Qaf; if not, you will never get there, for seven seas are on the way, and they are such seas that if all the kings of the earth, and all their wazirs, and all their wise men considered for a thousand years, they would not be able to cross them.'

'O most delicious person! where is the Simurgh's home? How shall I get there?'

'O new fruit of life! you must just do what I tell you, and you must use your eyes and your brains, for if you don't you will find yourself at the place of the negroes, who are a bloodthirsty set; and God forbid they should lay hands on your precious person.'

Then she took the bow and quiver of arrows, the sword, and the dagger out of a box, and the prince let fall a Bismillah, and girt them all on. Then Jamila of the houri-face, produced two saddle-bags of ruby-red silk, one filled with roasted fowl and little cakes, and the other with stones of price. Next she gave him a horse as swift as the breeze of the morning, and she said: 'Accept all these things from me; ride till you come to a rising ground, at no great distance from here, where there is a spring. It is called the Place of Gifts, and you must stay there one night. There you will see many wild beasts--lions, tigers, leopards, apes, and so on. Before you get there you must capture some game. On the long road beyond there dwells a lion-king, alla if other beasts did not fear him they would ravage the whole country and let no one pass. The lion is a red transgressor, so when he comes rise and do him reverence; take a cloth and rub the dust and earth from his face, then set the game you have taken before him, well cleansed, and lay the hands of respect on your breast. When he wishes to eat, take your knife and cut pieces of the meat and set them before him with a bow. In this way you will enfold that lion-king in perfect friendship, and he will be most useful to you, and you will be safe from molestation by the negroes. When you go on from the Place of Gifts, be sure you do not take the right-hand road; take the left, for the other leads by the negro castle, which is known as the Place of Clashing Swords, and where there are forty negro captains each over three thousand or four thousand more. Their chief is Taramtaq. [11] Further on than this is the home of the Simurgh.'

Having stored these things in the prince's memory, she said: 'You will see everything happen just as I have said.' Then she escorted him a little way; they parted, and she went home to mourn his absence.

Prince Almas, relying on the Causer of Causes, rode on to the Place of Gifts and dismounted at the platform. Everything happened just as Jamila had foretold; when one or two watches of the night had passed, he saw that the open ground around him was full of such stately and splendid animals as he had never seen before. By-and-by, they made way for a wonderfully big lion, which was eighty yards from nose to tail-tip, and was a magnificent creature. The prince advanced and saluted it; it proudly drooped its head and forelocks and paced to the platform. Seventy or eighty others were with it, and now encircled it at a little distance. It laid its right paw over its left, and the prince took the kerchief Jamila had given him for the purpose, and rubbed the dust and earth from its face; then brought forward the game he had prepared, and crossing his hands respectfully on his breast stood waiting before it. When it wished for food he cut off pieces of the meat and put them in its mouth. The serving lions also came near and the prince would have stayed his hand, but the king-lion signed to him to feed them too. This he did, laying the meat on the platform. Then the king-lion beckoned the prince to come near and said: 'Sleep at ease; my guards will watch.'. So, surrounded by the lion-guard, he slept till dawn, when the king lion said good-bye, and gave him a few of his own hairs and said: 'When you are in any difficulty, burn one of these and I will be there.' Then it went off into the jungle.

Prince Almas immediately started; he rode till he came to the parting of the ways. He remembered quite well that the right-hand way was short and dangerous, but he bethought himself too that whatever was written on his forehead would happen, and took the forbidden road. By-and-by he saw a castle, and knew from what Jamila had told him that it was the Place of Clashing Swords. He would have liked to go back by the way ho had come, but courage forbade, and he said, 'What has been preordained from eternity will happen to me,' and went on towards the castle. He was thinking of tying his horse to a tree which grew near the gate when a negro came out and spied him. 'Ha!' said the wretch to himself, 'this is good; Taram-taq has not eaten man-meat for a long time, and is craving for some. I will take this creature to him.' He took hold of the prince's reins, and said: 'Dismount, man-child! Come to my master. He has wanted to eat man-meat this long time back.' 'What nonsense are you saying?' said the prince, and other such words. When the negro understood that he was being abused, he cried: 'Come along! I will put you into such a state that the birds of the air will weep for you.' Then the prince drew the Scorpion of Solomon and struck him--struck him on the leathern belt and shore him through so that the sword came out on the other side. He stood upright for a little while, muttered some words, put out his hand to seize the prince, then fell in two and surrendered his life.

There was water close at hand, and the prince made his ablution, and then said: 'O my heart! a wonderful task lies upon you.' A second negro came out of the fort, and seeing what had been done, went back and told his chief. Others wished to be doubled, and went out, and of every one the Scorpion of Solomon made two. Then Taram-taq sent for a giant negro named Chil-maq, who in the day of battle was worth three hundred, and said to him: 'I shall thank you to fetch me that man.'

Chil-maq went out, tall as a tower, and bearing a shield of eight millstones, and as he walked he shouted: 'Ho! blunder-head! by what right do you come to our country and kill our people? Come! make two of me.' As the prince was despicable in his eyes, he tossed aside his club and rushed to grip him with his hands. He caught him by the collar, tucked him under his arm and set off with him to Taram-taq. But the prince drew the dagger of Timus and thrust it upwards through the giant's armpit, for its full length. This made Chil-maq drop him and try to pick up his club; but when he stooped the mighty sword shore him through at the waist.

When news of his champion's death reached Taram-taq he put himself at the head of an army of his negroes and led them forth. Many fell before the magic sword, and the prince laboured on in spite of weakness and fatigue till he was almost worn out. In a moment of respite from attack he struck his fire-steel and burned a hair of the king-lion; and he had just succeeded in this when the negroes charged again and all but took him prisoner. Suddenly from behind the distant veil of the desert appeared an army of lions led by their king. 'What brings these scourges of heaven here?' cried the negroes. They came roaring up, and put fresh life into the prince. He fought on, and when he struck on a belt the wearer fell in two, and when on a head he cleft to the waist. Then the ten thousand mighty lions joined the fray and tore in pieces man and horse.

Taram-taq was left alone; he would have retired into his fort, but the prince shouted: 'Whither away, accursed one? Are you fleeing before me?' At these defiant words the chief shouted back, 'Welcome, man! Come here and I will soften you to wax beneath my club.' Then he hurled his club at the prince's head, but it fell harmless because the prince had quickly spurred his horse forward. The chief, believing he had hit him, was looking down for him, when all at once he came up behind and cleft him to the waist and sent him straight to hell.

The king-lion greatly praised the dashing courage of Prince Almas. They went together into the Castle of Clashing Swords and found it adorned and fitted in princely fashion. In it was a daughter of Taram taq, still a child She sent a message to Prince Almas saying, 'O king of the world! choose this slave to be your handmaid. Keep her with you; where you go, there she will go!' He sent for her and she kissed his feet and received the Mussulman faith at his hands. He told her he was going a long journey on important business, and that when he came back he would take her and her possessions to his own country, but that for the present she must stay in the castle. Then he made over the fort and all that was in it to the care of the lion, saying: 'Guard them, brother! let no one lay a hand on them.' He said goodbye, chose a fresh horse from the chief's stable and once again took the road.

After travelling many stages and for many days, he reached a plain of marvellous beauty and refreshment. It was carpeted with flowers--roses, tulips, and clover; it had lovely lawns, and amongst them running water. This choicest place of earth filled him with wonder. There was a tree such as he had never seen before; its branches were alike, but it bore flowers and fruit of a thousand kinds. Near it a reservoir had been fashioned of four sorts of stone--touchstone, pure stone, marble, and loadstone. In and out of it flowed water like attar. The prince felt sure this must be the place of the Simurgh.' he dismounted, turned his horse loose to graze, ate some of the food Jamila had given him, drank of the stream and lay down to sleep.

He was still dozing when he was aroused by the neighing and pawing of his horse. When he could see clearly he made out a mountain-like dragon whose heavy breast crushed the stones beneath it into putty. He remembered the Thousand Names of God and took the bow of Salih from its case and three arrows from their quiver. He bound the dagger of Timus firmly to his waist and hung the scorpion of Solomon round his neck. Then he set an arrow on the string and released it with such force that it went in at the monster's eye right up to the notch. The dragon writhed on itself, and belched forth an evil vapour, and beat the ground with its head till the earth quaked. Then the prince took a second arrow and shot into its throat. It drew in its breath and would have sucked the prince into its maw, but when he was within striking distance he drew his sword and, having committed himself to God, struck a mighty blow which cut the creature's neck down to the gullet. The foul vapour of the beast and horror at its strangeness now overcame the prince, and he fainted. When he came to himself he found that he was drenched in the gore of the dead monster. He rose and thanked God for his deliverance.

The nest of the Simurgh was in the wonderful tree above him, and in it were young birds; the parents were away searching for food. They always told the children, before they left them, not to put their heads out of the nest; but, to-day, at the noise of the fight below, they looked down and so saw the whole affair. By the time the dragon had been killed they were very hungry and set up a clamour for food. The prince therefore cut up the dragon and fed them with it, bit by bit, till they had eaten the whole. He then washed himself and lay down to rest, and he was still asleep when the Simurgh came home. As a rule, the young birds raised a clamour of welcome when their parents came near, but on this day they were so full of dragon-meat that they had no choice, they had to go to sleep.

As they flew nearer, the old birds saw the prince lying under the tree and no sign of life in the nest. They thought that the misfortune which for so many earlier years had befallen them had again happened and that their nestlings had disappeared. They had never been able to find out the murderer, and now suspected the prince. 'He has eaten our children and sleeps after it; he must die,' said the father-bird, and flew back to the hills and clawed up a huge stone which he meant to let fall on the prince's head. But his mate said, 'Let us look into the nest first for to kill an innocent person would condemn us at the Day of Resurrection.' They flew nearer, and presently the young birds woke and cried, 'Mother, what have you brought for us?' and they told the whole story of the fight, and of how they were alive only by the favour of the young man under the tree, and of his cutting up the dragon and of their eating it. The mother-bird then remarked, 'Truly, father! you were about to do a strange thing, and a terrible sin has been averted from you.' Then the Simurgh flew off to a distance with the great stone and dropped it. It sank down to the very middle of the earth.

Coming back, the Simurgh saw that a little sunshine fell upon the prince through the leaves, and it spread its wings and shaded him till he woke. When he got up he salaamed to it, who returned his greeting with joy and gratitude, and caressed him and said: 'O youth, tell me true! who are you, and where are you going? And how did you cross that pitiless desert where never yet foot of man had trod?' The prince told his story from beginning to end, and finished by saying: 'Now it is my heart's wish that you should help me to get to Waq of the Caucasus. Perhaps, by your favour, I shall accomplish my task and avenge my brothers.' In reply the Simurgh.' first blessed the deliverer of his children, and then went on: 'What you have done no child of man has ever done before; you assuredly have a claim on all my help, for every year up till now that dragon has come here and has destroyed my nestlings, and I have never been able to find who was the murderer and to avenge myself. By God's grace you have removed my children's powerful foe. I regard you as a child of my own. Stay with me; I will give you everything you desire, and I will establish a city here for you, and will furnish it with every requisite; I will give you the land of the Caucasus, and will make its princes subject to you. Give up the journey to Waq, it is full of risk, and the jins there will certainly kill you.' But nothing could move the prince, and seeing this the bird went on: 'Well, so be it! When you wish to set forth you must go into the plain and take seven head of deer, and must make water-tight bags of their hides and keep their flesh in seven portions. Seven seas lie on our way--I will carry you over them; but if I have not food and drink we shall fall into the sea and be drowned. When I ask for it you must put food and water into my mouth. So we shall make the journey safely.'

The prince did all as he was told, then they took flight; they crossed the seven seas, and at each one the prince fed the Simurgh When they alighted on the shore of the last sea, it said: 'O my son! there lies your road; follow it to the city. Take thee three feathers of mine, and, if you are in a difficulty, burn one and I will be with you in the twinkling of an eye.'

The prince walked on in solitude till he reached the city. He went in and wandered about through all quarters, and through bazaars and lanes and squares, in the least knowing from whom he could ask information about the riddle of Mihr-afruz. He spent seven days thinking it over in silence. From the first day of his coming he had made friends with a young cloth-merchant, and a great liking had sprung up between them. One day he said abruptly to his companion: 'O dear friend! I wish you would tell me what the rose did to the cypress, and what the sense of the riddle is.' The merchant started, and exclaimed: 'If there were not brotherly affection between us, I would cut off your head for asking me this!' 'If you meant to kill me,' retorted the prince, 'you would still have first to tell me what I want to know.' When the merchant saw that the prince was in deadly earnest, he said: 'If you wish to hear the truth of the matter you must wait upon our king. There is no other way; no one else will tell you. I have a well-wisher at the Court, named Farrukh-fal, [12] and will introduce you to him.' 'That would be excellent,' cried the prince. A meeting was arranged between Farrukhfal and Almas, and then the amir took him to the king's presence and introduced him as a stranger and traveller who had come from afar to sit in the shadow of King Sinaubar.

Now the Simurgh had given the prince a diamond weighing thirty misqals, and he ordered this to the king, who at once recognised its value, and asked where it had been obtained. 'I, your slave, once had riches and state and power; there are many such stones in my country. On my way here I was plundered at the Castle of Clashing Swords, and I saved this one thing only, hidden in my bathing-cloth.' In return for the diamond, King Sinaubar showered gifts of much greater value, for he remembered that it was the last possession of the prince. He showed the utmost kindness and hospitality, and gave his wazir orders to instal the prince in the royal guest-house. He took much pleasure in his visitor's society; they were together every day and spent the time most pleasantly. Several times the king said: 'Ask me for something, that I may give it you.'One day he so pressed to know what would pleasure the prince, that the latter said: 'I have only one wish, and that I will name to you in private.' The king at once commanded every one to withdraw, and then Prince Almas said: 'The desire of my life is to know what the rose did to the cypress, and what meaning there is in the words.' The king was astounded. 'In God's name! if anyone else had said that to me I should have cut off his head instantly.' The prince heard this in silence, and presently so beguiled the king with pleasant talk that to kill him was impossible.

Time flew by, the king again and again begged the prince to ask some gift of him, and always received this same reply: 'I wish for your Majesty's welfare, what more can I desire?'One night there was a banquet, and cupbearers carried round gold and silver cups of sparkling wine, and singers with sweetest voices contended for the prize. The prince drank from the king's own cup, and when his head was hot with wine he took a lute from one of the musicians and placed himself on the carpet border and sang and sang till he witched away the sense of all who listened. Applause and compliments rang from every side. The king filled his cup and called the prince and gave it him and said: 'Name your wish! it is yours.' The prince drained off the wine and answered: 'O king of the world! learn and know that I have only one aim in life, and this is to know what the rose did to the cypress.'

'Never yet,' replied the king, 'has any man come out from that question alive. If this is your only wish, so be it; I will tell you. But I will do this on one condition only, namely, that when you have heard you will submit yourself to death.' To this the prince agreed, and said: 'I set my foot firmly on this compact.'

The king then gave an order to an attendant; a costly carpet overlaid with European velvet was placed near him, and a dog was led in by a golden and jewelled chain and set upon the splendid stuffs. A band of fair girls came in and stood round it in waiting.

Then, with ill words, twelve negroes dragged in a lovely woman, fettered on hands and feet and meanly dressed, and they set her down on the bare floor. She was extraordinarily beautiful, and shamed the glorious sun. The king ordered a hundred stripes to be laid on her tender body; she sighed a long sigh. Food was called for and table-cloths were spread. Delicate meats were set before the dog, and water given it in a royal cup of Chinese crystal. When it had eaten its fill, its leavings were placed before the lovely woman and she was made to eat of them. She wept and her tears were pearls; she smiled and her lips shed roses. Pearls and flowers were gathered up and taken to the treasury.

'Now,' said the king, 'you have seen these things and your purpose is fulfilled.' 'Truly,' said the prince, 'I have seen things which I have not understood; what do they mean, and what is the story of them? Tell me and kill me.'

Then said the king: 'The woman you see there in chains is my wife; she is called Gul, the Rose, and I am Sinaubar, the Cypress. One day I was hunting and became very thirsty. After great search I discovered a well in a place so secret that neither bird nor beast nor man could find it without labour. I was alone, I took my turban for a rope and my cap for a bucket. There was a good deal of water, but when I let down my rope, something caught it, and I could not in any way draw it back. I shouted down into the well: "O! servant of God! whoever you are, why do you deal unfairly with me? I am dying of thirst, let go! in God's name." A cry came up in answer, "O servant of God! we have been in the well a long time; in God's name get us out!" After trying a thousand schemes, I drew up two blind women. They said they were peris, and that their king had blinded them in his anger and had left them in the well alone.

'"Now," they said, "if you will get us the cure for our blindness we will devote ourselves to your service, and will do whatever you wish."

'"What is the cure for your blindness?"

'"Not far from this place," they said, "a cow comes up from the great sea to graze; a little of her dung would cure us. We should be eternally your debtors. Do not let the cow see you, or she will assuredly kill you."

'With renewed strength and spirit I went to the shore. There I watched the cow come up from the sea, graze, and go back. Then I came out of my hiding, took a little of her dung and conveyed it to the peris. They rubbed it on their eyes, and by the Divine might saw again.

'They thanked heaven and me, and then considered what they could do to show their gratitude to me. "Our peri-king," they said, "has a daughter whom he keeps under his own eye and thinks the most lovely girl on earth. In good sooth, she has not her equal! Now we will get you into her house and you must win her heart, and if she has an inclination for another, you must drive it out and win her for yourself. Her mother loves her so dearly that she has no ease but in her presence, and she will give her to no one in marriage. Teach her to love you so that she cannot exist without you. But if the matter becomes known to her mother she will have you burned in the fire. Then you must beg, as a last favour, that your body may be anointed with oil so that you may burn the more quickly and be spared torture. If the peri-king allows this favour, we two will manage to be your anointers, and we will put an oil on you such that if you were a thousand years in the fire not a trace of burning would remain."

'In the end the two peris took me to the girl's house. I saw her sleeping daintily. She was most lovely, and I was so amazed at the perfection of her beauty that I stood with senses lost, and did not know if she were real or a dream. When at last I saw that she was a real girl, I returned thanks that I, the runner, had come to my goal, and that I, the seeker, had found my treasure.

'When the peri opened her eyes she asked in affright: "Who are you? Have you come to steal? How did you get here? Be quick! save yourself from this whirlpool of destruction, for the demons and peris. who guard me will wake and seize you."

'But love's arrow had struck me deep, and the girl, too, looked kindly on me. I could not go away. For some months I remained hidden in her house. 'We did not dare to let her mother know of our love. Sometimes the girl was very sad and fearful lest her mother should come to know. One day her father said to her: "Sweetheart, for some time I have noticed that your beauty is not what it was. How is this? Has sickness touched you? Tell me that I may seek a cure." Alas! there was now no way of concealing the mingled delight and anguish of our love; from secret it became known. I was put in prison and the world grew dark to my rose, bereft of her lover.

'The peri-king ordered me to be burnt, and said: "Why have you, a man, done this perfidious thing in my house?" His demons and peris. collected amber-wood and made a pile, and would have set me on it, when I remembered the word of life which the two peris. I had rescued had breathed into my ear, and I asked that my body might be rubbed with oil to release me the sooner from torture. This was allowed, and those two contrived to be the anointers. I was put into the fire and it was kept up for seven days and nights. By the will of the Great King it left no trace upon me. At the end of a week the pert-king ordered the ashes to be cast upon the dust-heap, and I was found alive and unharmed.

'Peris who had seen Gul consumed by her love for me now interceded with the king, and said: "It is clear that your daughter's fortunes are bound up with his, for the fire has not hurt him. It is best to give him the girl, for they love one another. He is King of Waq of Qaf, and you will find none better."

'To this the king agreed, and made formal marriage between Gul and me. You now know the price I paid for this faithless creature. O prince! remember our compact.'

'I remember,' said the prince; 'but tell me what brought Queen Gul to her present pass?'

'One night,' continued King Sinaubar,'I was aroused by feeling Gul's hands and feet, deadly cold, against my body. I asked her where she had been to get so cold, and she said she had had to go out. Next morning, when I went to my stable I saw that two of my horses, Windfoot and Tiger, were thin and worn out. I reprimanded the groom and beat him. He asked where his fault lay, and said that every night my wife took one or other of these horses and rode away, and came back only just before dawn. A flame kindled in my heart, and I asked myself where she could go and what she could do. I told the groom to be silent, and when next Gul took a horse from the stable to saddle another quickly and bring it to me. That day I did not hunt, but stayed at home to follow the matter up. I lay down as usual at night and pretended to fall asleep. When I seemed safely off Gul got up and went to the stable as her custom was. That night it was Tiger's turn. She rode off on him, and I took Windfoot and followed. With me went that dog you see, a faithful friend who never left me.

'When I came to the foot of those hills which lie outside the city I saw Gul dismount and go towards a house which some negroes have built there. Over against the door was a high seat, and on it lay a giant negro, before whom she salaamed. He got up and beat her till she was marked with weals, but she uttered no complaint. I was dumfounded, for once when I had struck her with a rose stalk she had complained and fretted for three days! Then the negro said to her: "How now, ugly one and shaven head! Why are you so late, and why are you not wearing wedding garments?" She answered him: "That person did not go to sleep quickly, and he stayed at home all day, so that I was not able to adorn myself. I came as soon as I could." In a little while he called her to sit beside him; but this was more than I could bear. I lost control of myself and rushed upon him. He clutched my collar and we grappled in a death struggle. Suddenly she came behind me, caught my feet and threw me. While he held me on the ground, she drew out my own knife and gave it to him. I should have been killed but for that faithful dog which seized his throat and pulled him down and pinned him to the ground. Then I got up and despatched the wretch. There were four other negroes at the place; three I killed and the fourth got away, and has taken refuge beneath the throne of Mihr-afruz, daughter of King Quimus. I took Gul back to my palace, and from that time till now I have treated her as a dog is treated, and I have cared for my dog as though it were my wife. Now you know what the rose did to the cypress; and now you must keep compact with me.'

'I shall keep my word,' said the prince; 'but may a little water be taken to the roof so that I may make my last ablution?'

To this request the king consented. The prince mounted to the roof, and, getting into a corner, struck his fire-steel and burned one of the Sirurgh's feathers in the flame. Straightway it appeared, and by the majesty of its presence made the city quake. It took the prince on its back and soared away to the zenith.

After a time King Sinaubar said: 'That young man is a long time on the roof; go and bring him here.' But there was no sign of the prince upon the roof; only, far away in the sky, the Simurgh was seen carrying him off. When the king heard of his escape he thanked heaven that his hands were clean of this blood.

Up and up flew the Simurgh, till earth looked like an egg resting on an ocean. At length it dropped straight down to its own place, where the kind prince was welcomed by the young birds and most hospitably entertained. He told the whole story of the rose and the cypress, and then, laden with gifts which the Simurgh had gathered from cities far and near, he set his face for the Castle of Clashing Swords. The king-lion came out to meet him; he took the negro chief's daughter---whose name was also Gul--in lawful marriage, and then marched with her and her possessions and her attendants to the Place of Gifts. Here they halted for a night, and at dawn said good-bye to the king-lion and set out for Jamila's country.

When the Lady Jamila heard that Prince Almas was near, she went out, with many a fair handmaid, to give him loving reception. Their meeting was joyful, and they went together to the garden-palace. Jamila summoned all her notables, and in their presence her marriage with the prince was solemnised. A few days later she entrusted her affairs to her wazir, and made preparation to go with the prince to his own country. Before she started she restored all the men whom her sister, Latifa, had bewitched, to their own forms, and received their blessings, and set them forward to their homes. The wicked Latifa herself she left quite alone in her garden-house. When all was ready they set out with all her servants and slaves, all her treasure and goods, and journeyed at ease to the city of King Quimus.

When King Quimus heard of the approach of such a great company, he sent out his wazir to give the prince honourable meeting, and to ask what had procured him the favour of the visit. The prince sent back word that he had no thought of war, but he wrote: 'Learn and know, King Quimus, that I am here to end the crimes of your insolent daughter who has tyrannously done to death many kings and kings sons, and has hung their heads on your citadel. I am here to give her the answer to her riddle.' Later on he entered the city, beat boldly on the drums, and was conducted to the presence.

The king entreated him to have nothing to do with the riddle, for that no man had come out of it alive. 'O king!' replied the prince, 'it is to answer it that I am here; I will not withdraw.'

Mihr-afruz was told that one man more had staked his head on her question, and that this was one who said he knew the answer. At the request of the prince, all the officers and notables of the land were summoned to hear his reply to the princess. All assembled, and the king and his queen Gul-rakh, and the girl and the prince were there.

The prince addressed Mihr-afruz: 'What is the question you ask?'

'What did the rose do to the cypress?' she rejoined.

The prince smiled, and turned and addressed the assembly.

'You who are experienced men and versed in affairs, did you ever know or hear and see anything of this matter?'

'No!' they answered, 'no one has ever known or heard or seen aught about it; it is an empty fancy.'

'From whom, then, did the princess hear of it? This empty fancy it is that has done many a servant of God to death!'

All saw the good sense of his words and showed their approval. Then he turned to the princess: 'Tell us the truth, princess; who told you of this thing? I know it hair by hair, and in and out; but if I tell you what I know, who is there that can say I speak the truth? You must produce the person who can confirm my words.'

Her heart sank, for she feared that her long-kept secret was now to be noised abroad. But she said merely: 'Explain yourself.'

'I shall explain myself fully when you bring here the negro whom you hide beneath your throne.'

Here the king shouted in wonderment: 'Explain yourself, young man! What negro does my daughter hide beneath her throne?'

'That,' said the prince, 'you will see if you order to be brought here the negro who will be found beneath the throne of the princess.'

Messengers were forthwith despatched to the garden house, and after awhile they returned bringing a negro whom they had discovered in a secret chamber underneath the throne of Mihr-afruz, dressed in a dress of honour, and surrounded with luxury. The king was overwhelmed with astonishment, but the girl had taken heart again. She had had time to think that perhaps the prince had heard of the presence of the negro, and knew no more. So she said haughtily: 'Prince! you have not answered my riddle.'

'O most amazingly impudent person,' cried he, 'do you not yet repent?'

Then he turned to the people, and told them the whole story of the rose and the cypress, of King Sinaubar and Queen Gul. When he came to the killing of the negroes, he said to the one who stood before them: 'You, too, were present.'

'That is so; all happened as you have told it!'

There was great rejoicing in the court and all through the country over the solving of the riddle, and because now no more kings and princes would be killed. King Quimus made over his daughter to Prince Almas, but the latter refused to marry her, and took her as his captive. He then asked that the heads should be removed from the battlements and given decent burial. This was done. He received from the king everything that belonged to Mihr-afruz; her treasure of gold and silver; her costly stuffs and carpets; her household plenishing; her horses and camels; her servants and slaves.

Then he returned to his camp and sent for Dil-aram, who came bringing her goods and chattels, her gold and her jewels. When all was ready, Prince Almas set out for home, taking with him Jamila, and Dil-aram and Gul, daughter of Taram-taq, and the wicked Mihr-afruz, and all the belongings of the four, packed on horses and camels, and in carts without number.

As he approached the borders of his father's country word of his coming went before him, and all the city came forth to give him welcome. King Saman-lal-posh--Jessamine, wearer of rubies--had so bewept the loss of his sons that he was now blind. When the prince had kissed his feet and received his blessing, he took from a casket a little collyrium of Solomon, which the Simurgh had given him, and which reveals the hidden things of earth, and rubbed it on his father's eyes. Light came, and the king saw his son.

Mihr-afruz was brought before the king, and the prince said: 'This is the murderer of your sons; do with her as you will.' The king fancied that the prince might care for the girl's beauty, and replied: 'You have humbled her; do with her as you will.'

Upon this the prince sent for four swift and strong horses, and had the negro bound to each one of them; then each was driven to one of the four quarters, and he tore in pieces like muslin.

This frightened Mihr-afruz horribly, for she thought the same thing might be done to herself. She cried out to the prince: 'O Prince Almas! what is hardest to get is most valued. Up till now I have been subject to no man, and no man had had my love. The many kings and kings sons who have died at my hands have died because it was their fate to die like this. In this matter I have not sinned. That was their fate from eternity; and from the beginning it was predestined that my fate should be bound up with yours.'

The prince gave ear to the argument from pre-ordainment, and as she was a very lovely maiden he took her too in lawful marriage. She and Jamila, set up house together, and Dil-aram and Gul set up theirs; and the prince passed the rest of his life with the four in perfect happiness, and in pleasant and sociable entertainment.

Now has been told what the rose did to the cypress.  Finished, finished, finished!

 

Footnotes:

[Footnote 1: Translated from two Persian MSS. in the possession of the British Museum and the India Office, and adapted, with some reservations, by Annette S. Beveridge.]

[Footnote 2: Jessamine, ruby-decked.]

[Footnote 3: Life-giving diamond.]

[Footnote 4: World-gripper.]

[Footnote 5: Love-enkindler.]

[Footnote 6: Rose-cheek.]

[Footnote 7: Heartsease.]

[Footnote 8: Elias.]

[Footnote 9: Pleasure.]

[Footnote 10: Thirty-birds.]

[Footnote 11: Pomp and Pride.]

[Footnote 12: Of happy omen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

Ball-carrier and the Bad One

Far, far in the forest there were two little huts, and in each of them lived a man who was a famous hunter, his wife, and three or four children. Now the children were forbidden to play more than a short distance from the door, as it was known that, away on the other side of the wood near the great river, there dwelt a witch who had a magic ball that she used as a means of stealing children.  Her plan was a very simple one, and had never yet failed. When she wanted a child she just flung her ball in the direction of the child's home, and however far off it might be, the ball was sure to reach it. Then, as soon as the child saw it, the ball would begin rolling slowly back to the witch, just keeping a little ahead of the child, so that he always thought that he could catch it the next minute. But he never did, and, what was more, his parents never saw him again.

Of course you must not suppose that all the fathers and mothers who had lost children made no attempts to find them, but the forest was so large, and the witch was so cunning in knowing exactly where they were going to search, that it was very easy for her to keep out of the way. Besides, there was always the chance that the children might have been eaten by wolves, of which large herds roamed about in winter.

One day the old witch happened to want a little boy, so she threw her ball in the direction of the hunters' huts. A child was standing outside, shooting at a mark with his bow and arrows, but the moment he saw the ball, which was made of glass whose blues and greens and whites, all frosted over, kept changing one into the other, he flung down his bow, and stooped to pick the ball up. But as he did so it began to roll very gently downhill. The boy could not let it roll away, when it was so close to him, so he gave chase. The ball seemed always within his grasp, yet he could never catch it; it went quicker and quicker, and the boy grew more and more excited. That time he almost touched it--no, he missed it by a hair's breadth! Now, surely, if he gave a spring he could get in front of it! He sprang forward, tripped and fell, and found himself in the witch's house!

'Welcome! welcome! grandson!' said she; 'get up and rest yourself, for you have had a long walk, and I am sure you must be tired!' So the boy sat down, and ate some food which she gave him in a bowl. It was quite different from anything he had tasted before, and he thought it was delicious. When he had eaten up every bit, the witch asked him if he had ever fasted.

'No,' replied the boy, 'at least I have been obliged to sometimes, but never if there was any food to be had.'

'You will have to fast if you want the spirits to make you strong and wise, and the sooner you begin the better.'

'Very well,' said the boy, 'what do I do first?'

'Lie down on those buffalo skins by the door of the hut,' answered she; and the boy lay down, and the squirrels and little bears and the birds came and talked to him.

At the end of ten days the old woman came to him with a bowl of the same food that he had eaten before.

'Get up, my grandson, you have fasted long enough. Have the good spirits visited you, and granted you the strength and wisdom that you desire?'

'Some of them have come, and have given me a portion of both,' answered the boy, 'but many have stayed away from me.'

'Then,' said she, 'you must fast ten days more.'

So the boy lay down again on the buffalo skins, and fasted for ten days, and at the end of that time he turned his face to the wall, and fasted for twenty days longer. At length the witch called to him, and said:

'Come and eat something, my grandson.' At the sound of her voice the boy got up and ate the food she gave him. When he had finished every scrap she spoke as before: 'Tell me, my grandson, have not the good spirits visited you all these many days that you have fasted?'

'Not all, grandmother,' answered he; 'there are still some who keep away from me and say that I have not fasted long enough.'

'Then you must fast again,' replied the old woman, 'and go on fasting till you receive the gifts of all the good spirits. Not one must be missing.'

The boy said nothing, but lay down for the third time on the buffalo skins, and fasted for twenty days more. And at the end of that time the witch thought he was dead, his face was so white and his body so still. But when she had fed him out of the bowl he grew stronger, and soon was able to sit up.

'You have fasted a long time,' said she, 'longer than anyone ever fasted before. Surely the good spirits must be satisfied now?'

'Yes, grandmother,' answered the boy, 'they have all come, and have given me their gifts.'

This pleased the old woman so much that she brought him another basin of food, and while he was eating it she talked to him, and this is what she said: 'Far away, on the other side of the great river, is the home of the Bad One. In his house is much gold, and what is more precious even than the gold, a little bridge, which lengthens out when the Bad One waves his hand, so that there is no river or sea that he cannot cross. Now I want that bridge and some of the gold for myself, and that is the reason that I have stolen so many boys by means of my ball. I have tried to teach them how to gain the gifts of the good spirits, but none of them would fast long enough, and at last I had to send them away to perform simple, easy little tasks. But you have been strong and faithful, and you can do this thing if you listen to what I tell you! When you reach the river tie this ball to your foot, and it will take you across--you cannot manage it in any other way. But do not be afraid; trust to the ball, and you will be quite safe!'

The boy took the ball and put it in a bag. Then he made himself a club and a bow, and some arrows which would fly further than anyone else's arrows, because of the strength the good spirits had given him. They had also bestowed on him the power of changing his shape, and had increased the quickness of his eyes and ears so that nothing escaped him. And in some way or other they made him understand that if he needed more help they would give it to him.

When all these things were ready the boy bade farewell to the witch and set out. He walked through the forest for several days without seeing anyone but his friends the squirrels and the bears and the birds, but though he stopped and spoke to them all, he was careful not to let them know where he was going.

At last, after many days, he came to the river, and beyond it he noticed a small hut standing on a hill which he guessed to be the home of the Bad One. But the stream flowed so quickly that he could not see how he was ever to cross it, and in order to test how swift the current really was, he broke a branch from a tree and threw it in. It seemed hardly to touch the water before it was carried away, and even his magic sight could not follow it. He could not help feeling frightened, but he hated giving up anything that he had once undertaken, and, fastening the ball on his right foot, he ventured on the river. To his surprise he was able to stand up; then a panic seized him, and he scrambled up the bank again. In a minute or two he plucked up courage to go a little further into the river, but again its width frightened him, and a second time he turned back. However, he felt rather ashamed of his cowardice, as it was quite clear that his ball could support him, and on his third trial he got safely to the other side.

Once there he replaced the ball in the bag, and looked carefully round him. The door of the Bad One's hut was open, and he saw that the ceiling was supported by great wooden beams, from which hung the bags of gold and the little bridge. He saw, too, the Bad One sitting in the midst of his treasures eating his dinner, and drinking something out of a horn. It was plain to the boy that he must invent some plan of getting the Bad One out of the way, or else he would never be able to steal the gold or the bridge.

What should he do? Give horrible shrieks as if he were in pain? But the Bad One would not care whether he were murdered or not! Call him by his name? But the Bad One was very cunning, and would suspect some trick. He must try something better than that! Then suddenly an idea came to him, and he gave a little jump of joy. 'Oh, how stupid of me not to think of that before!' said he, and he wished with all his might that the Bad One should become very hungry--so hungry that he could not wait a moment for fresh food to be brought to him. And sure enough at that instant the Bad One called out to his servant, 'You did not bring food that would satisfy a sparrow Fetch some more at once, for I am perfectly starving.' Then, without giving the woman time to go to the larder, he got up from his chair, and rolled, staggering from hunger, towards the kitchen.

Directly the door had closed on the Bad One the boy ran in, pulled down a bag of gold from the beam, and tucked it under his left arm. Next he unhooked the little bridge and put it under his right. He did not try to escape, as most boys of his age would have done, for the wisdom put into his mind by the good spirits taught him that before he could reach the river and make use of the bridge the Bad One would have tracked him by his footsteps and been upon him. So, making himself very small and thin, he hid himself behind a pile of buffalo skins in the corner, first tearing a slit through one of them, so that he could see what was going on.

He had hardly settled himself when the servant entered the room, and, as she did so, the last bag of gold on the beam fell to the ground--for they had begun to fall directly the boy had taken the first one. She cried to her master that someone had stolen both the bag and the bridge, and the Bad One rushed in, mad with anger, and bade her go and seek for footsteps outside, that they might find out where the thief had gone. In a few minutes she returned, saying that he must be in the house, as she could not see any footsteps leading to the river, and began to move all the furniture in the room, without discovering Ball Carrier.

'But he must be here somewhere,' she said to herself, examining for the second time the pile of buffalo skins; and Ball-Carrier, knowing that he could not possibly escape now, hastily wished that the Bad One should be unable to eat any more food at present.

'Ah, there is a slit in this one,' cried the servant, shaking the skin; 'and here he is.' And she pulled out Ball-Carrier, looking so lean and small that he would hardly have made a mouthful for a sparrow.

'Was it you who took my gold and bridge?' asked the Bad One.

'Yes,' answered Ball-Carrier, 'it was I who took them.'

The Bad One made a sign to the woman, who inquired where he had hidden them. He lifted his left arm where the gold was, and she picked up a knife and scraped his skin so that no gold should be left sticking to it.

'What have you done with the bridge?' said she. And he lifted his right arm, from which she took the bridge, while the Bad One looked on, well pleased. 'Be sure that he does not run away,' chuckled he. 'Boil some water, and get him ready for cooking, while I go and invite my friends the water-demons to the feast.'

The woman seized Ball-Carrier between her finger and thumb, and was going to carry him to the kitchen, when the boy spoke:

'I am very lean and small now,' he said, 'hardly worth the trouble of cooking; but if you were to keep me two days, and gave me plenty of food, I should get big and fat. As it is, your friends the water-demons would think you meant to laugh at them, when they found that I was the feast.'

'Well, perhaps you are right,' answered the Bad One; 'I will keep you for two days.' And he went out to visit the water-demons.

Meanwhile the servant, whose name was Lung Woman, led him into a little shed, and chained him up to a ring in the wall. But food was given him every hour, and at the end of two days he was as fat and big as a Christmas turkey, and could hardly move his head from one side to the other.

'He will do now,' said the Bad One, who came constantly to see how he was getting on. 'I shall go and tell the water-demons that we expect them to dinner to-night. Put the kettle on the fire, but be sure on no account to taste the broth.'

Lung-Woman lost no time in obeying her orders. She built up the fire, which had got very low, filled the kettle with water, and passing a rope which hung from the ceiling through the handle, swung it over the flames. Then she brought in Ball-Carrier, who, seeing all these preparations, wished that as long as he was in the kettle the water might not really boil, though it would hiss and bubble, and also, that the spirits would turn the water into fat.

The kettle soon began to sing and bubble, and Ball Carrier was lifted in. Very soon the fat which was to make the sauce rose to the surface, and Ball-Carrier, who was bobbing about from one side to the other, called out that Lung-Woman had better taste the broth, as he though that some salt should be added to it. The servant knew quite well that her master had forbidden her to do any thing of the kind, but when once the idea was put into her head, she found the smell from the kettle so delicious that she unhooked a long ladle from the wall and plunged it into the kettle.

'You will spill it all, if you stand so far off,' said the boy; 'why don't you come a little nearer?' And as she did so he cried to the spirits to give him back his usual size and strength and to make the water scalding hot Then he gave the kettle a kick, which upset all the boiling water upon her, and jumping over her body he seized once more the gold and the bridge, picked up his club and bow and arrows, and after setting fire to the Bad One's hut, ran down to the river, which he crossed safely by the help of the bridge.

The hut, which was made of wood, was burned to the ground before the Bad One came back with a large crowd of water-demons. There was not a sign of anyone or anything, so he started for the river, where he saw Ball Carrier sitting quietly on the other side. Then the Bad One knew what had happened, and after telling the water demons that there would be no feast after all, he called to Ball-Carrier, who was eating an apple.

'I know your name now,' he said, 'and as you have ruined me, and I am not rich any more, will you take me as your servant?'  'Yes, I will, though you have tried to kill me,' answered Ball-Carrier, throwing the bridge across the water as he spoke. But when the Bad One was in the midst of the stream, the boy wished it to become small; and the Bad One fell into the water and was drowned, and the world was rid of him.

[U.S.. Bureau of Ethnology.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

How Ball-carrier Finished His Task

After Ball-Carrier had managed to drown the Bad One so that he could not do any more mischief, he forgot the way to his grandmother's house, and could not find it again, though he searched everywhere. During this time he wandered into many strange places, and had many adventures; and one day he came to a hut where a young girl lived. He was tired and hungry and begged her to let him in and rest, and he stayed a long while, and the girl became his wife. One morning he saw two children playing in front of the hut, and went out to speak to them. But as soon as they saw him they set up cries of horror and ran away. 'They are the children of my sister who has been on a long journey,' replied his wife, 'and now that she knows you are my husband she wants to kill you.'

'Oh, well, let her try,' replied Ball-Carrier. 'It is not the first time people have wished to do that. And here I am still, you see!'

'Be careful,' said the wife, 'she is very cunning.' But at this moment the sister-in-law came up.

'How do you do, brother-in-law? I have heard of you so often that I am very glad to meet you. I am told that you are more powerful than any man on earth, and as I am powerful too, let us try which is the strongest.'

'That will be delightful,' answered he. 'Suppose we begin with a short race, and then we will go on to other things.'

'That will suit me very well,' replied the woman, who was a witch. 'And let us agree that the one who wins shall have the right to kill the other.'

'Oh, certainly,' said Ball-Carrier;' and I don't think we shall find a flatter course than the prairie itself--no one knows how many miles it stretches. We will run to the end and back again.'

This being settled they both made ready for the race, and Ball-Carrier silently begged the good spirits to help him, and not to let him fall into the hands of this wicked witch.

'When the sun touches the trunk of that tree we will start,' said she, as they both stood side by side. But with the first step Ball-Carrier changed himself into a wolf and for a long way kept ahead. Then gradually he heard her creeping up behind him, and soon she was in front. So Ball-Carrier took the shape of a pigeon and flew rapidly past her, but in a little while she was in front again and the end of the prairie was in sight. 'A crow can fly faster than a pigeon,' thought he, and as a crow he managed to pass her and held his ground so long that he fancied she was quite beaten. The witch began to be afraid of it too, and putting out all her strength slipped past him. Next he put on the shape of a hawk, and in this form he reached the bounds of the prairie, he and the witch turning homewards at the moment.

Bird after bird he tried, but every time the witch gained on him and took the lead. At length the goal was in sight, and Ball-Carrier knew that unless he could get ahead now he would be killed before his own door, under the eyes of his wife. His eyes had grown dim from fatigue, his wings flapped wearily and hardly bore him along, while the witch seemed as fresh as ever. What bird was there whose flight was swifter than his? Would not the good spirits tell him? Ah, of course he knew; why had he not thought of it at first and spared himself all that fatigue? And the next instant a humming bird, dressed in green and blue, flashed past the woman and entered the house. The witch came panting up, furious at having lost the race which she felt certain of winning; and Ball-Carrier, who had by this time changed back into his own shape, struck her on the head and killed her.

For a long while Ball-Carrier was content to stay quietly at home with his wife and children, for he was tired of adventures, and only did enough hunting to supply the house with food. But one day he happened to eat some poisonous berries that he had found in the forest, and grew so ill that he felt he was going to die.

'When I am dead do not bury me in the earth,' he said, 'but put me over there, among that clump of trees.' So his wife and her three children watched by him as long as he was alive, and after he was dead they took him up and laid the body on a platform of stakes which they had prepared in the grove. And as they returned weeping to the hut they caught a glimpse of the ball rolling away down the path back to the old grandmother. One of the sons sprang forward to stop it, for Ball-Carrier had often told them the tale of how it had helped him to cross the river, but it was too quick for him, and they had to content themselves with the war club and bow and arrows, which were put carefully away.

By-and-by some travellers came past, and the chief among them asked leave to marry Ball-Carrier's daughter. The mother said she must have a little time to think over it, as her daughter was still very young; so it was settled that the man should go away for a month with his friends, and then come back to see if the girl was willing.

Now ever since Ball-Carrier's death the family had been very poor, and often could not get enough to eat. One morning the girl, who had had no supper and no breakfast, wandered off to look for cranberries, and though she was quite near home was astonished at noticing a large hut, which certainly had not been there when last she had come that way. No one was about, so she ventured to peep in, and her surprise was increased at seeing, heaped up in one corner, a quantity of food of all sorts, while a little robin redbreast stood perched on a beam looking down upon her.

'It is my father, I am sure,' she cried; and the bird piped in answer.

From that day, whenever they wanted food they went to the hut, and though the robin could not speak, he would hop on their shoulders and let them feed him with the food they knew he liked best.

When the man came back he found the girl looking so much prettier and fatter than when he had left her, that he insisted that they should be married on the spot. And the mother, who did not know how to get rid of him, gave in.

The husband spent all his time in hunting, and the family had never had so much meat before; but the man, who had seen for himself how poor they were, noticed with amazement that they did not seem to care about it, or to be hungry. 'They must get food from somewhere,' he thought, and one morning, when he pretended to be going out to hunt, he hid in a thicket to watch. Very soon they all left the house together, and walked to the other hut, which the girl's husband saw for the first time, as it was hid in a hollow. He followed, and noticed that each one went up to the redbreast, and shook him by the claw; and he then entered boldly and shook the bird's claw too. The whole party afterwards sat down to dinner, after which they all returned to their own hut.

The next day the husband declared that he was very ill, and could not eat anything; but this was only a presence so that he might get what he wanted. The family were all much distressed, and begged him to tell them what food he fancied.

'Oh! I could not eat any food,' he answered every time, and at each answer his voice grew fainter and fainter, till they thought he would die from weakness before their eyes.

'There must be some thing you could take, if you would only say what it is,' implored his wife.

'No, nothing, nothing; except, perhaps--but of course that is impossible!'

'No, I am sure it is not,' replied she; 'you shall have it, I promise--only tell me what it is.'

'I think--but I could not ask you to do such a thing. Leave me alone, and let me die quietly.'

'You shall not die,' cried the girl, who was very fond of her husband, for he did not beat her as most girls' husbands did. 'Whatever it is, I will manage to get it for you.'

'Well, then, I think, if I had that--redbreast, nicely roasted, I could eat a little bit of his wing!'

The wife started back in horror at such a request; but the man turned his face to the wall, and took no notice, as he thought it was better to leave her to herself for a little.

Weeping and wringing her hands, the girl went down to her mother. The brothers were very angry when they heard the story, and declared that, if any one were to die, it certainly should not be the robin. But all that night the man seemed getting weaker and weaker, and at last, quite early, the wife crept out, and stealing to the hut, killed the bird, and brought him home to her husband.

Just as she was going to cook it her two brothers came in. They cried out in horror at the sight, and, rushing out of the hut, declared they would never see her any more. And the poor girl, with a heavy heart, took the body of the redbreast up to her husband.

But directly she entered the room the man told her that he felt a great deal better, and that he would rather have a piece of bear's flesh, well boiled, than any bird, however tender. His wife felt very miserable to think that their beloved redbreast had been sacrificed for nothing, and begged him to try a little bit.

'You felt so sure that it would do you good before,' said she, 'that I can't help thinking it would quite cure you now.' But the man only flew into a rage, and flung the bird out of the window. Then he got up and went out.

Now all this while the ball had been rolling, rolling, rolling to the old grandmother's hut on the other side of the world, and directly it rolled into her hut she knew that her grandson must be dead. Without wasting any time she took a fox skin and tied it round her forehead, and fastened another round her waist, as witches always do when they leave their own homes. When she was ready she said to the ball: 'Go back the way you came, and lead me to my grandson.' And the ball started with the old woman following.

It was a long journey, even for a witch, but, like other things, it ended at last; and the old woman stood before the platform of stakes, where the body of Ball-Carrier lay.

'Wake up, my grandson, it is time to go home,' the witch said. And Ball-Carrier stepped down oft the platform, and brought his club and bow and arrows out of the hut, and set out, for the other side of the world, behind the old woman.

When they reached the hut where Ball-Carrier had fasted so many years ago, the old woman spoke for the first time since they had started on their way.

'My grandson, did you ever manage to get that gold from the Bad One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got it.'

'Where is it?' she asked.

'Here, in my left arm-pit,' answered he.

So she picked up a knife and scraped away all the gold which had stuck to his skin, and which had been sticking there ever since he first stole it. After she had finished she asked again:

'My grandson, did you manage to get that bridge from the Bad One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got that too,' answered he.

'Where is it?' she asked, and Ball-Carrier lifted his right arm, and pointed to his arm-pit.

'Here is the bridge, grandmother,' said he.

Then the witch did something that nobody in the world could have guessed that she would do. First, she took the gold and said to Ball-carrier:

'My grandson, this gold must be hidden in the earth, for if people think they can get it when they choose, they will become lazy and stupid. But if we take it and bury it in different parts of the world they will have to work for it if they want it, and then will only find a little at a time.' And as she spoke, she pulled up one of the poles of the hut, and Ball-Carrier saw that underneath was a deep, deep hole, which seemed to have no bottom. Down this hole she poured all the gold, and when it was out of sight it ran about all over the world, where people that dig hard sometimes find it. And after that was done she put the pole back again.

Next she lifted down a spade from a high shelf, where it had grown quite rusty, and dug a very small hole on the opposite side of the hut--very small, but very deep.

'Give me the bridge,' said she, 'for I am going to bury it here. If anyone was to get hold of it, and find that they could cross rivers and seas without any trouble, they would never discover how to cross them for themselves. I am a witch, and if I had chosen I could easily have cast my spells over the Bad One, and have made him deliver them to you the first day you came into my hut. But then you would never have fasted, and never have planned how to get what you wanted, and never have known the good spirits, and would have been fat and idle to the end of your days. And now go; in that hut, which you can just see far away, live your father and mother, who are old people now, and need a son to hunt for them. You have done what you were set to do, and I need you no more.'

Then Ball-Carrier remembered his parents and went back to them.

[From Bureau of Ethnology. 'Indian Folklore.']

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

The Bunyip

Long, long ago, far, far away on the other side of the world, some young men left the camp where they lived to get some food for their wives and children. The sun was hot, but they liked heat, and as they went they ran races and tried who could hurl his spear the farthest, or was cleverest in throwing a strange weapon called a boomerang, which always returns to the thrower. They did not get on very fast at this rate, but presently they reached a flat place that in time of flood was full of water, but was now, in the height of summer, only a set of pools, each surrounded with a fringe of plants, with bulrushes standing in the inside of all. In that country the people are fond of the roots of bulrushes, which they think as good as onions, and one of the young men said that they had better collect some of the roots and carry them back to the camp. It did not take them long to weave the tops of the willows into a basket, and they were just going to wade into the water and pull up the bulrush roots when a youth suddenly called out: 'After all, why should we waste our time in doing work that is only fit for women and children? Let them come and get the roots for themselves; but we will fish for eels and anything else we can get.'

This delighted the rest of the party, and they all began to arrange their fishing lines, made from the bark of the yellow mimosa, and to search for bait for their hooks. Most of them used worms, but one, who had put a piece of raw meat for dinner into his skin wallet, cut off a little bit and baited his line with it, unseen by his companions.

For a long time they cast patiently, without receiving a single bite; the sun had grown low in the sky, and it seemed as if they would have to go home empty-handed, not even with a basket of roots to show; when the youth, who had baited his hook with raw meat, suddenly saw his line disappear under the water. Something, a very heavy fish he supposed, was pulling so hard that he could hardly keep his feet, and for a few minutes it seemed either as if he must let go or be dragged into the pool. He cried to his friends to help him, and at last, trembling with fright at what they were going to see, they managed between them to land on the bank a creature that was neither a calf nor a seal, but something of both, with a long, broad tail. They looked at each other with horror, cold shivers running down their spines; for though they had never beheld it, there was not a man amongst them who did not know what it was--the cub of the awful Bunyip!

All of a sudden the silence was broken by a low wail, answered by another from the other side of the pool, as the mother rose up from her den and came towards them, rage flashing from her horrible yellow eyes. 'Let it go! let it go!' whispered the young men to each other; but the captor declared that he had caught it, and was going to keep it. 'He had promised his sweetheart,' he said, 'that he would bring back enough meat for her father's house to feast on for three days, and though they could not eat the little Bunyip, her brothers and sisters should have it to play with.' So, flinging his spear at the mother to keep her back, he threw the little Bunyip on to his shoulders, and set out for the camp, never heeding the poor mother's cries of distress.

By this time it was getting near sunset, and the plain was in shadow, though the tops of the mountains were still quite bright. The youths had all ceased to be afraid, when they were startled by a low rushing sound behind them, and, looking round, saw that the pool was slowly rising, and the spot where they had landed the Bunyip was quite covered. 'What could it be?' they asked one of another; 'there was not a cloud in the sky, yet the water had risen higher already than they had ever known it do before.' For an instant they stood watching as if they were frozen, then they turned and ran with all their might, the man with the Bunyip running faster than all. When he reached a high peak over-looking all the plain he stopped to take breath, and turned to see if he was safe yet. Safe! why only the tops of the trees remained above that sea of water, and these were fast disappearing. They must run fast indeed if they were to escape. So on they flew, scarcely feeling the ground as they went, till they flung themselves on the ground before the holes scooped out of the earth where they had all been born. The old men were sitting in front, the children were playing, and the women chattering together, when the little Bunyip fell into their midst, and there was scarcely a child among them who did not know that something terrible was upon them. 'The water! the water!' gasped one of the young men; and there it was, slowly but steadily mounting the ridge itself. Parents and children clung together, as if by that means they could drive back the advancing flood; and the youth who had caused all this terrible catastrophe, seized his sweetheart, and cried: 'I will climb with you to the top of that tree, and there no waters can reach us.' But, as he spoke, something cold touched him, and quickly he glanced down at his feet. Then with a shudder he saw that they were feet no longer, but bird's claws. He looked at the girl he was clasping, and beheld a great black bird standing at his side; he turned to his friends, but a flock of great awkward flapping creatures stood in their place He put up his hands to cover his face, but they were no more hands, only the ends of wings; and when he tried to speak, a noise such as he had never heard before seemed to come from his throat, which had suddenly become narrow and slender. Already the water had risen to his waist, and he found himself sitting easily upon it, while its surface reflected back the image of a black swan, one of many.

Never again did the swans become men; but they are still different from other swans, for in the night-time those who listen can hear them talk in a language that is certainly not swan's language; and there are even sounds of laughing and talking, unlike any noise made by the swans whom we know.

The little Bunyip was carried home by its mother, and after that the waters sank back to their own channels. The side of the pool where she lives is always shunned by everyone, as nobody knows when she may suddenly put out her head and draw him into her mighty jaws. But people say that underneath the black waters of the pool she has a house filled with beautiful things, such as mortals who dwell on the earth have no idea of. Though how they know I cannot tell you, as nobody has ever seen it.

[From Journal of Anthropological-Institute.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

Father Grumbler

Once upon a time there lived a man who had nearly as many children as there were sparrows in the garden. He had to work very hard all day to get them enough to eat, and was often tired and cross, and abused everything and everybody, so that people called him 'Father Grumbler.'

By-and-by he grew weary of always working, and on Sundays he lay a long while in bed, instead of going to church. Then after a time he found it dull to sit so many hours by himself, thinking of nothing but how to pay the rent that was owing, and as the tavern across the road looked bright and cheerful, he walked in one day and sat down with his friends. 'It was just to chase away Care,' he said; but when he came out, hours and hours after, Care came out with him.

Father Grumbler entered his house feeling more dismal than when he left it, for he knew that he had wasted both his time and his money.

'I will go and see the Holy Man in the cave near the well,' he said to himself, 'and perhaps he can tell me why all the luck is for other people, and only misfortunes happen to me.' And he set out at once for the cave.

It was a long way off, and the road led over mountains and through valleys; but at last he reached the cave where the Holy Man dwelt, and knocked at the door.

'Who is there?' asked a voice from within.

'It is I, Holy Man, Father Grumbler, you know, who has as many children as sparrows in the garden.'

'Well, and what is it that you want?'

'I want to know why other people have all the luck, and only misfortunes happen to me!'

The Holy Man did not answer, but went into an inner cave, from which he came out bearing something in his hand. 'Do you see this basket?' said he. 'It is a magical basket, and if you are hungry you have only got to say: "Little basket, little basket, do your duty," and you will eat the best dinner you ever had in your life. But when you have had enough, be sure you don't forget to cry out: "That will do for to-day." Oh!--and one thing more--you need not show it to everybody and declare that I have give it to you. Do you understand?'

Father Grumbler was always accustomed to think of himself as so unlucky that he did not know whether the Holy Man was not playing a trick upon him; but he took the basket without being polite enough to say either 'Thank you,' or 'Good-morning,' and went away. However, he only waited till he was out of sight of the cave before he stooped down and whispered: 'Little basket, little basket, do your duty.'

Now the basket had a lid, so that he could not see what was inside, but he heard quite clearly strange noises, as if a sort of scuffling was going on. Then the lid burst open, and a quantity of delicious little white rolls came tumbling out one after the other, followed by a stream of small fishes all ready cooked. What a quantity there were to be sure! The whole road was covered with them, and the banks on each side were beginning to disappear. Father Grumbler felt quite frightened at the torrent, but at last he remembered what the Holy Man had told him, and cried at the top of his voice: 'Enough! enough! That will do for to-day!' And the lid of the basket closed with a snap.

Father Grumbler sighed with relief and happiness as he looked around him, and sitting down on a heap of stones, he ate till he could eat no more. Trout, salmon, turbot, soles, and a hundred other fishes whose names he did not know, lay boiled, fried, and grilled within reach of his hands. As the Holy Man had said, he had never eaten such a dinner; still, when he had done, he shook his head, and grumbled; 'Yes, there is plenty to eat, of course, but it only makes me thirsty, and there is not a drop to drink anywhere.'

Yet, somehow, he could never tell why, he looked up and saw the tavern in front of him, which he thought was miles, and miles, and miles away.

'Bring the best wine you have got, and two glasses, good mother,' he said as he entered, 'and if you are fond of fish there is enough here to feed the house. Only there is no need to chatter about it all over the place. You understand? Eh?' And without waiting for an answer he whispered to the basket: 'Little basket, little basket, do your duty.' The innkeeper and his wife thought that their customer had gone suddenly mad, and watched him closely, ready to spring on him if he became violent; but both instinctively jumped backwards, nearly into the fire, as rolls and fishes of every kind came tumbling out of the basket, covering the tables and chairs and the floor, and even overflowing into the street.

'Be quick, be quick, and pick them up,' cried the man. 'And if these are not enough, there are plenty more to be had for the asking.'

The innkeeper and his wife did not need telling twice. Down they went on their knees and gathered up everything they could lay hands on. But busy though they seemed, they found time to whisper to each other:

'If we can only get hold of that basket it will make our fortune!'

So they began by inviting Father Grumbler to sit down to the table, and brought out the best wine in the cellar, hoping it might loosen his tongue. But Father Grumbler was wiser than they gave him credit for, and though they tried in all manner of ways to find out who had given him the basket, he put them off, and kept his secret to himself. Unluckily, though he did not SPEAK, he did drink, and it was not long before he fell fast asleep. Then the woman fetched from her kitchen a basket, so like the magic one that no one, without looking very closely, could tell the difference, and placed it in Father Grumbler's hand, while she hid the other carefully away.

It was dinner time when the man awoke, and, jumping up hastily, he set out for home, where he found all the children gathered round a basin of thin soup, and pushing their wooden bowls forward, hoping to have the first spoonful. Their father burst into the midst of them, bearing his basket, and crying:

'Don't spoil your appetites, children, with that stuff. Do you see this basket? Well, I have only got to say, "Little basket, little basket, do your duty," and you will see what will happen. Now you shall say it instead of me, for a treat.'

The children, wondering and delighted, repeated the words, but nothing happened. Again and again they tried, but the basket was only a basket, with a few scales of fish sticking to the bottom, for the innkeeper's wife had taken it to market the day before.

'What is the matter with the thing?' cried the father at last, snatching the basket from them, and turning it all over, grumbling and swearing while he did so, under the eyes of his astonished wife and children, who did not know whether to cry or to laugh.

'It certainly smells of fish,' he said, and then he stopped, for a sudden thought had come to him.

'Suppose it is not mine at all; supposing--Ah, the scoundrels!'

And without listening to his wife and children, who were frightened at his strange conduct and begged him to stay at home, he ran across to the tavern and burst open the door.

'Can I do anything for you, Father Grumbler?' asked the innkeeper's wife in her softest voice.

'I have taken the wrong basket--by mistake, of course,' said he. 'Here is yours, will you give me back my own?'

'Why, what are you talking about?' answered she. 'You can see for yourself that there is no basket here.'

And though Father Grumbler DID look, it was quite true that none was to be seen.

'Come, take a glass to warm you this cold day,' said the woman, who was anxious to keep him in a good temper, and as this was an invitation Father Grumbler never refused, he tossed it off and left the house.

He took the road that led to the Holy Man's cave, and made such haste that it was not long before he reached it.

'Who is there?' said a voice in answer to his knock.

'It is me, it is me, Holy man. You know quite well. Father Grumbler, who has as many children as sparrows in the garden.'

'But, my good man, it was only yesterday that I gave you a handsome present.'

'Yes, Holy Man, and here it is. But something has happened, I don't know what, and it won't work any more.'

'Well, put it down. I will go and see if I can find anything for you.'

In a few minutes the Holy Man returned with a cock under his arm.

'Listen to me,' he said, 'whenever you want money, you only have to say: "Show me what you can do, cock," and you will see some wonderful things. But, remember, it is not necessary to let all the world into the secret.'

'Oh no, Holy Man, I am not so foolish as that.'

'Nor to tell everybody that I gave it to you,' went on the Holy Man. 'I have not got these treasures by the dozen.'

And without waiting for an answer he shut the door.

As before, the distance seemed to have wonderfully shortened, and in a moment the tavern rose up in front of Father Grumbler. Without stopping to think, he went straight in, and found the innkeeper's wife in the kitchen making a cake.

'Where have you come from, with that fine red cock in your basket,' asked she, for the bird was so big that the lid would not shut down properly.

'Oh, I come from a place where they don't keep these things by the dozen,' he replied, sitting down in front of the table.

The woman said no more, but set before him a bottle of his favourite wine, and soon he began to wish to display his prize.

'Show me what you can do, cock,' cried he. And the cock stood up and flapped his wings three times, crowing 'coquerico' with a voice like a trumpet, and at each crow there fell from his beak golden drops, and diamonds as large as peas.

This time Father Grumbler did not invite the innkeeper's wife to pick up his treasures, but put his own hat under the cock's beak, so as to catch everything he let fall; and he did not see the husband and wife exchanging glances with each other which said, 'That would be a splendid cock to put with our basket.'

'Have another glass of wine?' suggested the innkeeper, when they had finished admiring the beauty of the cock, for they pretended not to have seen the gold or the diamonds. And Father Grumbler, nothing loth, drank one glass after another, till his head fell forward on the table, and once more he was sound asleep. Then the woman gently coaxed the cock from the basket and carried it off to her own poultry yard, from which she brought one exactly like it, and popped it in its place.

Night was falling when the man awoke, and throwing proudly some grains of gold on the table to pay for the wine he had drunk, he tucked the cock comfortably into his basket and set out for home.

His wife and all the children were waiting for him at the door, and as soon as she caught sight of him she broke out:

'You are a nice man to go wasting your time and your money drinking in that tavern, and leaving us to starve! Aren't you ashamed of yourself?'

'You don't know what you are talking of,' he answered. 'Money? Why, I have gold and diamonds now, as much as I want. Do you see that cock? Well, you have only to say to him, "Show me what you can do, cock," and something splendid will happen.'

Neither wife nor children were inclined to put much faith in him after their last experience; however, they thought it was worth trying, and did as he told them. The cock flew round the room like a mad thing, and crowed till their heads nearly split with the noise; but no gold or diamonds dropped on the brick floor--not the tiniest grain of either.

Father Grumbler stared in silence for an instant, and then he began to swear so loudly that even his family, accustomed as they were to his language, wondered at him.

At last he grew a little quieter, but remained as puzzled as ever.

'Can I have forgotten the words? But I KNOW that was what he said! And I saw the diamonds with my own eyes!' Then suddenly he seized the cock, shut it into the basket, and rushed out of the house.

His heavy wooden shoes clattered as he ran along the road, and he made such haste that the stars were only just beginning to come out when he reached the cave of the Holy Man.

'Who is that knocking?' asked a voice from within.

'It is me! It is me! Holy Man! you know! Father--'

'But, my good fellow, you really should give some one else a chance. This is the third time you have been--and at such an hour, too!'

'Oh, yes, Holy Man, I know it is very late, but you will forgive me! It is your cock--there is something the matter. It is like the basket. Look!'

'THAT my cock? THAT my basket? Somebody has played you a trick, my good man!'

'A trick?' repeated Father Grumbler, who began to understand what had happened. 'Then it must have been those two--'

'I warned you not to show them to anybody,' said the Holy Man. 'You deserve--but I will give you one more chance.' And, turning, he unhooked something from the wall.

'When you wish to dust your own jacket or those of your friends,' he said, 'you have only got to say, "Flack, flick, switch, be quick," and you will see what happens. That is all I have to tell you.' And, smiling to himself, the Holy Man pushed Father Grumbler out of the cave.

'Ah, I understand now,' muttered the good man, as he took the road home; 'but I think I have got you two rascals!' and he hurried on to the tavern with his basket under his arm, and the cock and the switch both inside.

'Good evening, friends!' he said, as he entered the inn. 'I am very hungry, and should be glad if you would roast this cock for me as soon as possible. THIS cock and no other--mind what I say,' he went on. 'Oh, and another thing! You can light the fire with this basket. When you have done that I will show you something I have in my bag,' and, as he spoke, he tried to imitate the smile that the Holy Man had given HIM.

These directions made the innkeeper's wife very uneasy. However, she said nothing, and began to roast the cock, while her husband did his best to make the man sleepy with wine, but all in vain.

After dinner, which he did not eat without grumbling, for the cock was very tough, the man struck his hand on the table, and said: 'Now listen to me. Go and fetch my cock and my basket, at once. Do you hear?'

'Your cock, and your basket, Father Grumbler? But you have just--'

'MY cock and MY basket!' interrupted he. 'And, if you are too deaf and too stupid to understand what that means, I have got something which may help to teach you.' And opening the bag, he cried: 'Flack, flick, switch, be quick.'

And flack! flick! like lightening a white switch sprang out of the bag, and gave such hearty blows to the innkeeper and his wife, and to Father Grumbler into the bargain, that they all jumped as high as feathers when a mattress is shaken.

'Stop! stop! make it stop, and you shall have back your cock and basket,' cried the man and his wife. And Father Grumbler, who had no wish to go on, called out between his hops: 'Stop then, can't you? That is enough for to-day!'

But the switch paid no attention, and dealt out its blows as before, and MIGHT have been dealing them to this day, if the Holy Man had not heard their cries and come to the rescue. 'Into the bag, quick!' said he, and the switch obeyed.

'Now go and fetch me the cock and the basket,' and the woman went without a word, and placed them on the table.

'You have all got what you deserved,' continued the Holy Man, 'and I have no pity for any of you. I shall take my treasures home, and perhaps some day I may find a man who knows how to make the best of the chances that are given to him. But that will never be YOU,' he added, turning to Father Grumbler.

[From Contes Populaires.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

The Story of the Yara

Down in the south, where the sun shines so hotly that everything and everybody sleeps all day, and even the great forests seem silent, except early in the morning and late in the evening--down in this country there once lived a young man and a maiden. The girl had been born in the town, and had scarcely ever left it; but the young man was a native of another country, and had only come to the city near the great river because he could find no work to do where he was.

A few months after his arrival, when the days were cooler, and the people did not sleep so much as usual, a great feast was held a little way out of the town, and to this feast everyone flocked from thirty miles and more. Some walked and some rode, some came in beautiful golden coaches; but all had on splendid dresses of red or blue, while wreaths of flowers rested on their hair.

It was the first time that the youth had been present on such an occasion, and he stood silently aside watching the graceful dances and the pretty games played by the young people. And as he watched, he noticed one girl, dressed in white with scarlet pomegranates in her hair, who seemed to him lovelier than all the rest.

When the feast was over, and the young man returned home, his manner was so strange that it drew the attention of all his friends.

Through his work next day the youth continued to see the girl's face, throwing the ball to her companions, or threading her way between them as she danced. At night sleep fled from him, and after tossing for hours on his bed, he would get up and plunge into a deep pool that lay a little way in the forest.

This state of things went on for some weeks, then at last chance favoured him. One evening, as he was passing near the house where she lived, he saw her standing with her back to the wall, trying to beat off with her fan the attacks of a savage dog that was leaping at her throat. Alonzo, for such was his name, sprang forward, and with one blow of his fist stretched the creature dead upon the road. He then helped the frightened and half-fainting girl into the large cool verandah where her parents were sitting, and from that hour he was a welcome guest in the house, and it was not long before he was the promised husband of Julia.

Every day, when his work was done, he used to go up to the house, half hidden among flowering plants and brilliant creepers, where humming-birds darted from bush to bush, and parrots of all colours, red and green and grey, shrieked in chorus. There he would find the maiden waiting for him, and they would spend an hour or two under the stars, which looked so large and bright that you felt as if you could almost touch them.

'What did you do last night after you went home?' suddenly asked the girl one evening.

'Just the same as I always do,' answered he. 'It was too hot to sleep, so it was no use going to bed, and I walked straight of to the forest and bathed in one of those deep dark pools at the edge of the river. I have been there constantly for several months, but last night a strange thing happened. I was taking my last plunge, when I heard--sometimes from one side, and sometimes from another--the sound of a voice singing more sweetly than any nightingale, though I could not catch any words. I left the pool, and, dressing myself as fast as I could, I searched every bush and tree round the water, as I fancied that perhaps it was my friend who was playing a trick on me, but there was not a creature to be seen; and when I reached home I found my friend fast asleep.'

As Julia listened her face grew deadly white, and her whole body shivered as if with cold. From her childhood she had heard stories of the terrible beings that lived in the forests and were hidden under the banks of the rivers, and could only be kept off by powerful charms. Could the voice which had bewitched Alonzo have come from one of these? Perhaps, who knows, it might be the voice of the dreaded Yara herself, who sought young men on the eve of their marriage as her prey.

For a moment the girl sat choked with fear, as these thoughts rushed through her; then she said: 'Alonzo, will you promise something?'

'What is that?' asked he.

'It is something that has to do with our future happiness.'

'Oh! it is serious, then? Well, of course I promise. Now tell me!'

'I want you to promise,' she answered, lowering her voice to a whisper, 'never to bathe in those pools again.'

'But why not, queen of my soul; have I not gone there always, and nothing has harmed me, flower of my heart?'

'No; but perhaps something will. If you will not promise I shall go mad with fright. Promise me.'

'Why, what is the matter? You look so pale! Tell me why you are so frightened?'

'Did you not hear the song?' she asked, trembling.

'Suppose I did, how could that hurt me? It was the loveliest song I ever heard!'

'Yes, and after the song will come the apparition; and after that-- after that--'

'I don't understand. Well--after that?'

'After that--death.'

Alonzo stared at her. Had she really gone mad? Such talk was very unlike Julia; but before he could collect his senses the girl spoke again:

'That is the reason why I implore you never to go there again; at any rate till after we are married.'

'And what difference will our marriage make?'

'Oh, there will be no danger then; you can go to bathe as often as you like!'

'But tell me why you are so afraid?'

'Because the voice you heard--I know you will laugh, but it is quite true--it was the voice of the Yara.'

At these words Alonzo burst into a shout of laughter; but it sounded so harsh and loud that Julia shrank away shuddering. It seemed as if he could not stop himself, and the more he laughed the paler the poor girl became, murmuring to herself as she watched him:

'Oh, heaven! you have seen her! you have seen her! what shall I do?'

Faint as was her whisper, it reached the ears of Alonzo, who, though he still could not speak for laughing, shook his head.

'You may not know it, but it is true. Nobody who has not seen the Yara laughs like that.' And Julia flung herself on the ground weeping bitterly.

At this sight Alonzo became suddenly grave, and kneeling by her side, gently raised her up.

'Do not cry so, my angel,' he said, 'I will promise anything you please. Only let me see you smile again.'

With a great effort Julia checked her sobs, and rose to her feet.

'Thank you,' she answered. 'My heart grows lighter as you say that! I know you will try to keep your word and to stay away from the forest. But--the power of the Yara is very strong, and the sound of her voice is apt to make men forget everything else in the world. Oh, I have seen it, and more than one betrothed maiden lives alone, broken-hearted. If ever you should return to the pool where you first heard the voice, promise me that you will at least take this with you.' And opening a curiously carved box, she took out a sea-shell shot with many colours, and sang a song softly into it. 'The moment you hear the Yara's voice,' said she, 'put this to your ear, and you will hear my song instead. Perhaps--I do not know for certain--but perhaps, I may be stronger than the Yara.'

It was late that night when Alonzo returned home. The moon was shining on the distant river, which looked cool and inviting, and the trees of the forest seemed to stretch out their arms and beckon him near. But the young man steadily turned his face in the other direction, and went home to bed.

The struggle had been hard, but Alonzo had his reward next day in the joy and relief with which Julia greeted him. He assured her that having overcome the temptation once the danger was now over; but she, knowing better than he did the magic of the Yara's face and voice, did not fail to make him repeat his promise when he went away.

For three nights Alonzo kept his word, not because he believed in the Yara, for he thought that the tales about her were all nonsense, but because he could not bear the tears with which he knew that Julia would greet him, if he confessed that he had returned to the forest. But, in spite of this, the song rang in his ears, and daily grew louder.

On the fourth night the attraction of the forest grew so strong that neither the thought of Julia nor the promises he had made her could hold him back. At eleven o'clock he plunged into the cool darkness of the trees, and took the path that led straight to the river. Yet, for the first time, he found that Julia's warnings, though he had laughed at her at the moment, had remained in his memory, and he glanced at the bushes with a certain sense of fear which was quite new to him.

When he reached the river he paused and looked round for a moment to make sure that the strange feeling of some one watching him was fancy, and he was really alone. But the moon shone brightly on every tree, and nothing was to be seen but his own shadow; nothing was to be heard but the sound of the rippling stream.

He threw off his clothes, and was just about to dive in headlong, when something--he did not know what--suddenly caused him to look round. At the same instant the moon passed from behind a cloud, and its rays fell on a beautiful golden-haired woman standing half hidden by the ferns.

With one bound he caught up his mantle, and rushed headlong down the path he had come, fearing at each step to feel a hand laid on his shoulder. It was not till he had left the last trees behind him, and was standing in the open plain, that he dared to look round, and then he thought a figure in white was still standing there waving her arms to and fro. This was enough; he ran along the road harder than ever, and never paused till he was save in his own room.

With the earliest rays of dawn he went back to the forest to see whether he could find any traces of the Yara, but though he searched every clump of bushes, and looked up every tree, everything was empty, and the only voices he heard were those of parrots, which are so ugly that they only drive people away.

'I think I must be mad,' he said to himself, 'and have dreamt all that folly'; and going back to the city he began his daily work. But either that was harder than usual, or he must be ill, for he could not fix his mind upon it, and everybody he came across during the day inquired if anything had happened to give him that white, frightened look.

'I must be feverish,' he said to himself; 'after all, it is rather dangerous to take a cold bath when one is feeling so hot.' Yet he knew, while he said it, that he was counting the hours for night to come, that he might return to the forest.

In the evening he went as usual to the creeper-covered house. But he had better have stayed away, as his face was so pale and his manner so strange, that the poor girl saw that something terrible had occurred. Alonzo, however, refused to answer any of her questions, and all she could get was a promise to hear everything the next day.

On pretence of a violent headache, he left Julia much earlier than usual and hurried quickly home. Taking down a pistol, he loaded it and put it in his belt, and a little before midnight he stole out on the tips of his toes, so as to disturb nobody. Once outside he hastened down the road which led to the forest.

He did not stop till he had reached the river pool, when holding the pistol in his hand, he looked about him. At every little noise--the falling of a leaf, the rustle of an animal in the bushes, the cry of a night-bird--he sprang up and cocked his pistol in the direction of the sound. But though the moon still shone he saw nothing, and by and by a kind of dreamy state seemed to steal over him as he leant against a tree.

How long he remained in this condition he could not have told, but suddenly he awoke with a start, on hearing his name uttered softly.

'Who is that?' he cried, standing upright instantly; but only an echo answered him. Then his eyes grew fascinated with the dark waters of the pool close to his feet, and he looked at it as if he could never look away.

He gazed steadily into the depths for some minutes, when he became aware that down in the darkness was a bright spark, which got rapidly bigger and brighter. Again that feeling of awful fear took possession of him, and he tried to turn his eyes from the pool. But it was no use; something stronger than himself compelled him to keep them there.

At last the waters parted softly, and floating on the surface he saw the beautiful woman whom he had fled from only a few nights before. He turned to run, but his feet were glued to the spot.

She smiled at him and held out her arms, but as she did so there came over him the remembrance of Julia, as he had seen her a few hours earlier, and her warnings and fears for the very danger in which he now found himself.

Meanwhile the figure was always drawing nearer, nearer; but, with a violent effort, Alonzo shook off his stupor, and taking aim at her shoulder he pulled the trigger. The report awoke the sleeping echoes, and was repeated all through the forest, but the figure smiled still, and went on advancing. Again Alonzo fired, and a second time the bullet whistled through the air, and the figure advanced nearer. A moment more, and she would be at his side.

Then, his pistol being empty, he grasped the barrel with both hands, and stood ready to use it as a club should the Yara approach and closer. But now it seemed her turn to feel afraid, for she paused an instant while he pressed forward, still holding the pistol above his head, prepared to strike.

In his excitement he had forgotten the river, and it was not till the cold water touched his feet that he stood still by instinct. The Yara saw that he was wavering, and suffering herself to sway gently backwards and forwards on the surface of the river, she began to sing. The song floated through the trees, now far and now near; no one could tell whence it came, the whole air seemed full of it. Alonzo felt his senses going and his will failing. His arms dropped heavily to his side, but in falling struck against the sea shell, which, as he had promised Julia, he had always carried in his coat.

His dimmed mind was just clear enough to remember what she had said, and with trembling fingers, that were almost powerless to grasp, he drew it out. As he did so the song grew sweeter and more tender than before, but he shut his ears to it and bent his head over the shell. Out of its depths arose the voice of Julia singing to him as she had sung when she gave him the shell, and though the notes sounded faint at first, they swelled louder and louder till the mist which had gathered about him was blown away.

Then he raised his head, feeling that he had been through strange places, where he could never wander any more; and he held himself erect and strong, and looked about him. Nothing was to be seen but the shining of the river, and the dark shadows of the trees; nothing was to be heard but the hum of the insects, as they darted through the night.

[Adapted from Folklore Bresilien.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

The Cunning Hare

In a very cold country, far across the seas, where ice and snow cover the ground for many months in the year, there lived a little hare, who, as his father and mother were both dead, was brought up by his grandmother. As he was too young, and she was too old, to work, they were very poor, and often did not have enough to eat.

One day, when the little fellow was hungrier than usual, he asked his grandmother if he might go down to the river and catch a fish for their breakfast, as the thaw had come and the water was flowing freely again. She laughed at him for thinking that any fish would let itself be caught by a hare, especially such a young one; but as she had the rheumatism very badly, and could get no food herself, she let him go. 'If he does not catch a fish he may find something else,' she said to herself. So she told her grandson where to look for the net, and how he was to set it across the river; but just as he was starting, feeling himself quite a man, she called him back.

'After all, I don't know what is the use of your going, my boy! For even if you should catch a fish, I have no fire to cook it with.'

'Let me catch my fish, and I will soon make you a fire,' he answered gaily, for he was young, and knew nothing about the difficulties of fire-making.

It took him some time to haul the net through bushes and over fields, but at length he reached a pool in the river which he had often heard was swarming with fish, and here he set the net, as his grandmother had directed him.

He was so excited that he hardly slept all night, and at the very first streak of dawn he ran as fast as ever he could down to the river. His heart beat as quickly as if he had had dogs behind him, and he hardly dared to look, lest he should be disappointed. Would there be even one fish? And at this thought the pangs of hunger made him feel quite sick with fear. But he need not have been afraid; in every mesh of the net was a fine fat fish, and of course the net itself was so heavy that he could only lift one corner. He threw some of the fish back into the water, and buried some more in a hole under a stone, where he would be sure to find them. Then he rolled up the net with the rest, put it on his back and carried it home. The weight of the load caused his back to ache, and he was thankful to drop it outside their hut, while he rushed in, full of joy, to tell his grandmother. 'Be quick and clean them!' he said, 'and I will go to those people's tents on the other side of the water.'

The old woman stared at him in horror as she listened to his proposal. Other people had tried to steal fire before, and few indeed had come back with their lives; but as, contrary to all her expectations, he had managed to catch such a number of fish, she thought that perhaps there was some magic about him which she did not know of, and did not try to hinder him.

When the fish were all taken out, he fetched the net which he had laid out to dry, folded it up very small, and ran down to the river, hoping that he might find a place narrow enough for him to jump over; but he soon saw that it was too wide for even the best jumper in the world. For a few moments he stood there, wondering what was to be done, then there darted into his head some words of a spell which he had once heard a wizard use, while drinking from the river. He repeated them, as well as he could remember, and waited to see what would happen. In five minutes such a grunting and a puffing was heard, and columns of water rose into the air, though he could not tell what had made them. Then round the bend of the stream came fifteen huge whales, which he ordered to place themselves heads to tails, like stepping stones, so that he could jump from one to the other till he landed on the opposite shore. Directly he got there he told the whales that he did not need them any more, and sat down in the sand to rest.

Unluckily some children who were playing about caught sight of him, and one of them, stealing softly up behind him, laid tight hold of his ears. The hare, who had been watching the whales as they sailed down the river, gave a violent start, and struggled to get away; but the boy held on tight, and ran back home, as fast as he could go.

'Throw it in the pot,' said the old woman, as soon as he had told his story; 'put it in that basket, and as soon as the water boils in the pot we will hang it over the fire!'

'Better kill it first,' said the old man; and the hare listened, horribly frightened, but still looking secretly to see if there was no hole through which he could escape, if he had a chance of doing so. Yes, there was one, right in the top of the tent, so, shaking himself, as if with fright, he let the end of his net unroll itself a little.

'I wish that a spark of fire would fall on my net,' whispered he; and the next minute a great log fell forward into the midst of the tent, causing every one to spring backwards. The sparks were scattered in every direction, and one fell on the net, making a little blaze. In an instant the hare had leaped through the hole, and was racing towards the river, with men, women, and children after him. There was no time to call back the whales, so, holding the net tight in his mouth, he wished himself across the river. Then he jumped high into the air, and landed safe on the other side, and after turning round to be sure that there was no chance of anyone pursuing him, trotted happily home to his grandmother.

'Didn't I tell you I would bring you fire?' said he, holding up his net, which was now burning briskly.

'But how did you cross the water?' inquired the old woman.

'Oh, I just jumped!' said he. And his grandmother asked him no more questions, for she saw that he was wiser than she.

['Indian Folk Tales.' Bureau of Ethnology.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

The Turtle and His Bride

There was once a turtle who lived among a great many people of different kinds, in a large camp near a big river which was born right up amongst the snows, and flowed straight away south till it reached a sea where the water was always hot.

There were many other turtles in the camp, and this turtle was kind and pleasant to them all, but he did not care for any of them very much, and felt rather lonely.

At last he built himself a hut, and filled it with skins for seats, and made it as comfortable as any hut for miles round; and when it was quite finished he looked about among the young women to see which of them he should ask to be his wife.  It took him some time to make up his mind, for no turtle likes being hurried, but at length he found one girl who seemed prettier and more industrious than the rest, and one day he entered her home, and said: 'Will you marry me?'

The young woman was so surprised at this question that she dropped the beaded slipper she was making, and stared at the turtle. She felt inclined to laugh--the idea was so absurd; but she was kind-hearted and polite, so she looked as grave as she could, and answered:

'But how are you going to provide for a family? Why, when the camp moves, you will not even be able to keep up with the rest!'

'I can keep up with the best of them,' replied the turtle, tossing his head. But though he was very much offended he did not let the girl see it, and begged and, prayed her so hard to marry him that, at last, she consented, very unwillingly.

'You will have to wait till the spring, though,' she said; 'I must make a great many slippers and dresses for myself, as I shall not have much time afterwards.'

This did not please the turtle; but he knew it was no use talking, so all he answered was:

'I shall go to war and take some captives, and I shall be away several months. And when I return I shall expect you to be ready to marry me.'

So he went back to his hut, and at once set about his preparations. The first thing he did was to call all his relations together, and ask them if they would come with him and make war on the people of a neighbouring village. The turtles, who were tired of doing nothing, agreed at once, and next day the whole tribe left the camp. The girl was standing at the door of her hut as they passed, and laughed out loud--they moved so slowly. Her lover, who was marching at the head, grew very angry at this, and cried out:

'In four days from now you will be weeping instead of laughing, because there will be hundreds of miles between you and me.'

'In four days,' replied the girl--who only promised to marry him in order to get rid of him--'in four days you will hardly be out of sight.'

'Oh, I did not mean four days, but four YEARS,' answered the turtle, hastily; 'whatever happens I shall be back by then.'

The army marched on, till one day, when they felt as if they must have got half round the earth, though they were scarcely four miles from the camp, they found a large tree lying across their path. They looked at it with dismay, and the oldest among them put their heads together to see what was to be done.

'Can't we manage to get past by the top?' asked one.

'Why, it would take us YEARS,' exclaimed another. 'Just look at all those tall green branches, spreading in every direction. If once we got entangled in THEM, we should never get out again!'

'Well then, let us go round by the bottom,' said a third.

'How are we to do that, when the roots have made a deep hole, and above that is a high bank?' replied a fourth. 'No; the only way I can think of, is to burn a large hole in the trunk.' And this they did, but the trunk was very thick, and would not burn through.

'It is no use, we must give it up,' they agreed at last. 'After all, nobody need ever know! We have been away such a long while that we might easily have had all sorts of adventures.' And so the whole company turned homewards again.

They took even longer to go back than they had to come, for they were tired and footsore with their journey. When they drew near the camp they plucked up their courage, and began to sing a war-song. At this the villagers came flocking to see what spoils the turtles had won, but, as they approached, each turtle seized some one by the wrist, exclaiming: 'You are our spoils; you are our prisoners!'

'Now that I have got you I will keep you,' said the leader, who had happened to seize his betrothed.

Everybody was naturally very angry at this behaviour, and the girl most of all, and in her secret heart she determined to have her revenge. But, just at present, the turtles were too strong, so the prisoners had to put on their smartest slippers and their brightest clothes, and dance a war dance while the turtles sang. They danced so long that it seemed as if they would never stop, till the turtle who was leading the singing suddenly broke into a loud chant:

Whoever comes here, will die, will die!

At this all the dancers grew so frightened that they burst through the ring of their captors, and ran back to the village, the turtles following--very slowly. On the way the chief turtle met a man, who said to him:

'That woman who was to have been your wife has married another man!'

'Is that true?' said the turtle. 'Then I must see him.'

But as soon as the villager was out of sight the turtle stopped, and taking a bundle containing fringes and ornaments from his back, he hung them about him, so that they rattled as he walked. When he was quite close to the hut where the woman lived, he cried out:

'Here I am to claim the woman who promised to be my wife.'

'Oh, here is the turtle,' whispered the husband hurriedly; 'what is to be done now?'

'Leave that to me; I will manage him,' replied the wife, and at that moment the turtle came in, and seized her by the wrist. 'Come with me,' he said sternly.

'You broke your promise,' answered she. 'You said you would be back soon, and it is more than a year since you went! How was I to know that you were alive?'

At her words the husband took courage, and spoke hastily:

'Yes, you promised you would go to war and bring back some prisoners, and you have not done it.'

'I DID go, and made many prisoners,' retorted the turtle angrily, drawing out his knife. 'Look here, if she won't be MY wife, she sha'n't be YOURS. I will cut her in two; and you shall have one half, and I the other.'

'But half a woman is no use to me,' answered the man. 'If you want her so much you had better take her.' And the turtle, followed by his relations, carried her off to his own hut.

Now the woman saw she would gain nothing by being sulky, so she pretended to be very glad to have got rid of her husband; but all the while she was trying to invent a plan to deliver herself from the turtle. At length she remembered that one of her friends had a large iron pot, and when the turtle had gone to his room to put away his fringes, she ran over to her neighbour's and brought it back. Then she filled it with water and hung it over the fire to boil. It was just beginning to bubble and hiss when the turtle entered.

'What are you doing there?' asked he, for he was always afraid of things that he did not understand.

'Just warming some water,' she answered. 'Do you know how to swim?'

'Yes, of course I do. What a question! But what does it matter to you?' said the turtle, more suspicious than ever.

'Oh, I only thought that after your long journey you might like to wash. The roads are so muddy, after the winter's rains. I could rub your shell for you till it was bright and shining again.

'Well, I AM rather muddy. If one is fighting, you know, one cannot stop to pick one's way. I should certainly be more comfortable if my back was washed.'

The woman did not wait for him to change his mind. She caught him up by his shell and popped him straight into the pot, where he sank to the bottom, and died instantly.

The other turtles, who were standing at the door, saw their leader disappear, and felt it was their duty as soldiers to follow him; and, springing into the pot, died too. All but one young turtle, who, frightened at not seeing any of his friends come out again, went as fast as he could to a clump of bushes, and from there made his way to the river. His only thought was to get away as far as possible from that dreadful hut; so he let the river carry him where it was going itself, and at last, one day, he found himself in the warm sea, where, if he is not dead, you may meet him still.

[Bureau of Ethnology.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

How Geirald The Coward Was Punished

Once upon a time there lived a poor knight who had a great many children, and found it very hard to get enough for them to eat. One day he sent his eldest son, Rosald, a brave and honest youth, to the neighbouring town to do some business, and here Rosald met a young man named Geirald, with whom he made friends.

Now Geirald was the son of a rich man, who was proud of the boy, and had all his life allowed him to do whatever he fancied, and, luckily for the father, he was prudent and sensible, and did not waste money, as many other rich young men might have done. For some time he had set his heart on travelling into foreign countries, and after he had been talking for a little while to Rosald, he asked if his new friend would be his companion on his journey.

'There is nothing I should like better,' answered Rosald, shaking his head sorrowfully; 'but my father is very poor, and he could never give me the money.'

'Oh, if that is your only difficulty, it is all right,' cried Geirald. 'My father has more money than he knows what to do with, and he will give me as much as I want for both of us; only, there is one thing you must promise me, Rosald, that, supposing we have any adventures, you will let the honour and glory of them fall to me.'

'Yes, of course, that is only fair,' answered Rosald, who never cared about putting himself forward. 'But I cannot go without telling my parents. I am sure they will think me lucky to get such a chance.'

As soon as the business was finished, Rosald hastened home. His parents were delighted to hear of his good fortune, and his father gave him his own sword, which was growing rusty for want of use, while his mother saw that his leather jerkin was in order.

'Be sure you keep the promise you made to Geirald,' said she, as she bade him good-bye, 'and, come what may, see that you never betray him.'

Full of joy Rosald rode off, and the next day he and Geirald started off to seek adventures. To their disappointment their own land was so well governed that nothing out of the common was very likely to happen, but directly they crossed the border into another kingdom all seemed lawlessness and confusion.

They had not gone very far, when, riding across a mountain, they caught a glimpse of several armed men hiding amongst some trees in their path, and remembered suddenly some talk they had heard of a band of twelve robbers who lay in wait for rich travellers. The robbers were more like savage beasts than men, and lived somewhere at the top of the mountain in caves and holes in the ground. They were all called 'Hankur,' and were distinguished one from another by the name of a colour--blue, grey, red, and so on, except their chief, who was known as Hankur the Tall. All this and more rushed into the minds of the two young men as they saw the flash of their swords in the moonlight.

'It is impossible to fight them--they are twelve to two,' whispered Geirald, stopping his horse in the path. 'We had much better ride back and take the lower road. It would be stupid to throw away our lives like this.'

'Oh, we can't turn back,' answered Rosald, 'we should be ashamed to look anyone in the face again! And, besides, it is a grand opportunity to show what we are made of. Let us tie up our horses here, and climb up the rocks so that we can roll stones down on them.'

'Well, we might try that, and then we shall always have our horses,' said Geirald. So they went up the rocks silently and carefully.

The robbers were lying all ready, expecting every moment to see their victims coming round the corner a few yards away, when a shower of huge stones fell on their heads, killing half the band. The others sprang up the rock, but as they reached the top the sword of Rosald swung round, and one man after another rolled down into the valley. At last the chief managed to spring up, and, grasping Rosald by the waist, flung away his sword, and the two fought desperately, their bodies swaying always nearer the edge. It seemed as if Rosald, being the smaller of the two, MUST fall over, when, with his left hand, he drew the robber's sword out of its sheath and plunged it into his heart. Then he took from the dead man a beautiful ring set with a large stone, and put it on his own finger.

The fame of this wonderful deed soon spread through the country, and people would often stop Geirald's horse, and ask leave to see the robber's ring, which was said to have been stolen from the father of the reigning king. And Geirald showed them the ring with pride, and listened to their words of praise, and no one would ever have guessed anyone else had destroyed the robbers.

In a few days they left the kingdom and rode on to another, where they thought they would stop through the remainder of the winter, for Geirald liked to be comfortable, and did not care about travelling through ice and snow. But the king would only grant them leave to stop on condition that, before the winter was ended, they should give him some fresh proof of the courage of which he had heard so much. Rosald's heart was glad at the king's message, and as for Geirald, he felt that as long as Rosald was there all would go well. So they both bowed low and replied that it was the king's place to command and theirs to obey.

'Well, then,' said his Majesty, 'this is what I want you to do: In the north-east part of my kingdom there dwells a giant, who has an iron staff twenty yards long, and he is so quick in using it, that even fifty knights have no chance against him. The bravest and strongest young men of my court have fallen under the blows of that staff; but, as you overcame the twelve robbers so easily, I feel that I have reason to hope that you may be able to conquer the giant. In three days from this you will set out.'

'We will be ready, your Majesty,' answered Rosald; but Geirald remained silent.

'How can we possibly fight against a giant that has killed fifty knights?' cried Geirald, when they were outside the castle. 'The king only wants to get rid of us! He won't think about us for the next three days--that is one comfort--so we shall have plenty of time to cross the borders of the kingdom and be out of reach.'

'We mayn't be able to kill the giant, but we certainly can't run away till we have tried,' answered Rosald. 'Besides, think how glorious it will be if we DO manage to kill him! I know what sort of weapon I shall use. Come with me now, and I will see about it.' And, taking his friend by the arm, he led him into a shop where he bought a huge lump of solid iron, so big that they could hardly lift it between them. However, they just managed to carry it to a blacksmith's where Rosald directed that it should be beaten into a thick club, with a sharp spike at one end. When this was done to his liking he took it home under his arm.

Very early on the third morning the two young men started on their journey, and on the fourth day they reached the giant's cave before he was out of bed. Hearing the sound of footsteps, the giant got up and went to the entrance to see who was coming, and Rosald, expecting something of the sort, struck him such a blow on the forehead that he fell to the ground. Then, before he could rise to his feet again, Rosald drew out his sword and cut off his head.

'It was not so difficult after all, you see,' he said, turning to Geirald. And placing the giant's head in a leathern wallet which was slung over his back, they began their journey to the castle.

As they drew near the gates, Rosald took the head from the wallet and handed it to Geirald, whom he followed into the king's presence.

'The giant will trouble you no more,' said Geirald, holding out the head. And the king fell on his neck and kissed him, and cried joyfully that he was the 'bravest knight in all the world, and that a feast should be made for him and Rosald, and that the great deed should be proclaimed throughout the kingdom.' And Geirald's heart swelled with pride, and he almost forgot that it was Rosald and not he, who had slain the giant.

By-and-by a whisper went round that a beautiful lady who lived in the castle would be present at the feast, with twenty-four lovely maidens, her attendants. The lady was the queen of her own country, but as her father and mother had died when she was a little girl, she had been left in the care of this king who was her uncle.

She was now old enough to govern her own kingdom, but her subjects did not like being ruled by a woman, and said that she must find a husband to help her in managing her affairs. Prince after prince had offered himself, but the young queen would have nothing to say to any of them, and at last told her ministers that if she was to have a husband at all she must choose him for herself, as she would certainly not marry any of those whom they had selected for her. The ministers replied that in that case she had better manage her kingdom alone, and the queen, who knew nothing about business, got things into such a confusion that at last she threw them up altogether, and went off to her uncle.

Now when she heard how the two young men had slain the giant, her heart was filled with admiration of their courage, and she declared that if a feast was held she would certainly be present at it.

And so she was; and when the feast was over she asked the king, her guardian, if he would allow the two heroes who had killed the robbers and slain the giant to fight a tourney the next day with one of her pages. The king gladly gave his consent, and ordered the lists to be made ready, never doubting that two great champions would be eager for such a chance of adding to their fame. Little did he guess that Geirald had done all he could to persuade Rosald to steal secretly out of the castle during the night, 'for,' said he, 'I don't believe they are pages at all, but well-proved knights, and how can we, so young and untried, stand up against them?'

'The honour will be all the higher if we gain the day,' answered Rosald; but Geirald would listen to nothing, and only declared that he did not care about honour, and would rather be alive than have every honour in the world heaped upon him. Go he would, and as Rosald had sworn to give him his company, he must come with him.

Rosald was much grieved when he heard these words, but he knew that it was useless attempting to persuade Geirald, and turned his thoughts to forming some plan to prevent this disgraceful flight. Suddenly his face brightened. 'Let us change clothes,' he said, 'and I will do the fighting, while you shall get the glory. Nobody will ever know.' And to this Geirald readily consented.

Whether Geirald was right or not in thinking that the so-called page was really a well-proved knight, it is certain that Rosald's task was a very hard one. Three times they came together with a crash which made their horses reel; once Rosald knocked the helmet off his foe, and received in return such a blow that he staggered in his saddle. Shouts went up from the lookers-on, as first one and then the other seemed gaining the victory; but at length Rosald planted his spear in the armour which covered his adversary's breast and bore him steadily backward. 'Unhorsed! unhorsed!' cried the people; and Rosald then himself dismounted and helped his adversary to rise.

In the confusion that followed it was easy for Rosald to slip away and return Geirald his proper clothes. And in these, torn and dusty with the fight, Geirald answered the king's summons to come before him.

'You have done what I expected you to do,' said he, 'and now, choose your reward.'

'Grant me, sire, the hand of the queen, your niece,' replied the young man, bowing low, 'and I will defend her kingdom against all her enemies.'

'She could choose no better husband,' said the king, 'and if she consents I do.' And he turned towards the queen, who had not been present during the fight, but had just slipped into a seat by his right hand. Now the queen's eyes were very sharp, and it seemed to her that the man who stood before her, tall and handsome though he might be, was different in many slight ways, and in one in particular, from the man who had fought the tourney. How there could be any trickery she could not understand, and why the real victor should be willing to give up his prize to another was still stranger; but something in her heart warned her to be careful. She answered: 'You may be satisfied, uncle, but I am not. One more proof I must have; let the two young men now fight against each other. The man I marry must be the man who killed the robbers and the giant, and overcame my page.' Geirald's face grew pale as he heard these words. He knew there was no escape from him now, though he did not doubt for one moment that Rosald would keep his compact loyally to the last. But how would it be possible that even Rosald should deceive the watchful eyes of the king and his court, and still more those of the young queen whom he felt uneasily had suspected him from the first?

The tourney was fought, and in spite of Geirald's fears Rosald managed to hang back to make attacks which were never meant to succeed, and to allow strokes which he could easily have parried to attain their end. At length, after a great show of resistance, he fell heavily to the ground. And as he fell he knew that it was not alone the glory that was his rightfully which he gave up, but the hand of the queen that was more precious still.

But Geirald did not even wait to see if he was wounded; he went straight to the wall where the royal banner waved and claimed the reward which was now his.

The crowd of watchers turned towards the queen, expecting to see her stoop and give some token to the victor. Instead, to the surprise of everyone, she merely smiled gracefully, and said that before she bestowed her hand one more test must be imposed, but this should be the last. The final tourney should be fought; Geirald and Rosald should meet singly two knights of the king's court, and he who could unhorse his foe should be master of herself and of her kingdom. The combat was fixed to take place at ten o'clock the following day.

All night long Geirald walked about his room, not daring to face the fight that lay in front of him, and trying with all his might to discover some means of escaping it. All night long he moved restlessly from door to window; and when the trumpets sounded, and the combatants rode into the field, he alone was missing. The king sent messengers to see what had become of him, and he was found, trembling with fear, hiding under his bed. After that there was no need of any further proof. The combat was declared unnecessary, and the queen pronounced herself quite satisfied, and ready to accept Rosald as her husband.

'You forgot one thing,' she said, when they were alone. 'I recognized my father's ring which Hankur the Tall had stolen, on the finger of your right hand, and I knew that it was you and not Geirald who had slain the robber band. I was the page who fought you, and again I saw the ring on your finger, though it was absent from his when he stood before me to claim the prize. That was why I ordered the combat between you, though your faith to your word prevented my plan being successful, and I had to try another. The man who keeps his promise at all costs to himself is the man I can trust, both for myself and for my people.'

So they were married, and returned to their own kingdom, which they ruled well and happily. And many years after a poor beggar knocked at the palace gates and asked for money, for the sake of days gone by--and this was Geirald.

[From Neuislandischem Volksmarcher.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

Habogi

Once upon a time there lived two peasants who had three daughters, and, as generally happens, the youngest was the most beautiful and the best tempered, and when her sisters wanted to go out she was always ready to stay at home and do their work.

Years passed quickly with the whole family, and one day the parents suddenly perceived that all three girls were grown up, and that very soon they would be thinking of marriage.

'Have you decided what your husband's name is to be?' said the father, laughingly, to his eldest daughter, one evening when they were all sitting at the door of their cottage. 'You know that is a very important point!'

'Yes; I will never wed any man who is not called Sigmund,' answered she.

'Well, it is lucky for you that there are a great many Sigmunds in this part of the world,' replied her father, 'so that you can take your choice! And what do YOU say?' he added, turning to the second.

'Oh, I think that there is no name so beautiful as Sigurd,' cried she.

'Then you won't be an old maid either,' answered he. 'There are seven Sigurds in the next village alone! And you, Helga?'

Helga, who was still the prettiest of the three, looked up. She also had her favourite name, but, just as she was going to say it, she seemed to hear a voice whisper: 'Marry no one who is not called Habogi.'

The girl had never heard of such a name, and did not like it, so she determined to pay no attention; but as she opened her mouth to tell her father that her husband must be called Njal, she found herself answering instead: 'If I do marry it will be to no one except Habogi.'

'Who IS Habogi?' asked her father and sisters; 'We never heard of such a person.'

'All I can tell you is that he will be my husband, if ever I have one,' returned Helga; and that was all she would say.

Before very long the young men who lived in the neighbouring villages or on the sides of the mountains, had heard of this talk of the three girls, and Sigmunds and Sigurds in scores came to visit the little cottage. There were other young men too, who bore different names, though not one of them was called 'Habogi,' and these thought that they might perhaps gain the heart of the youngest. But though there was more than one 'Njal' amongst them, Helga's eyes seemed always turned another way.

At length the two elder sisters made their choice from out of the Sigurds and the Sigmunds, and it was decided that both weddings should take place at the same time. Invitations were sent out to the friends and relations, and when, on the morning of the great day, they were all assembled, a rough, coarse old peasant left the crowd and came up to the brides' father.

'My name is Habogi, and Helga must be my wife,' was all he said. And though Helga stood pale and trembling with surprise, she did not try to run away.

'I cannot talk of such things just now,' answered the father, who could not bear the thought of giving his favourite daughter to this horrible old man, and hoped, by putting it off, that something might happen. But the sisters, who had always been rather jealous of Helga, were secretly pleased that their bridegrooms should outshine hers.

When the feast was over, Habogi led up a beautiful horse from a field where he had left it to graze, and bade Helga jump up on its splendid saddle, all embroidered in scarlet and gold. 'You shall come back again,' said he; 'but now you must see the house that you are to live in.' And though Helga was very unwilling to go, something inside her forced her to obey.

The old man settled her comfortably, then sprang up in front of her as easily as if he had been a boy, and, shaking the reins, they were soon out of sight.

After some miles they rode through a meadow with grass so green that Helga's eyes felt quite dazzled; and feeding on the grass were a quantity of large fat sheep, with the curliest and whitest wool in the world.

'What lovely sheep! whose are they?' cried Helga.

'Your Habogi's,' answered he, 'all that you see belongs to him; but the finest sheep in the whole herd, which has little golden bells hanging between its horns, you shall have for yourself.'

This pleased Helga very much, for she had never had anything of her own; and she smiled quite happily as she thanked Habogi for his present.

They soon left the sheep behind them, and entered a large field with a river running through it, where a number of beautiful grey cows were standing by a gate waiting for a milk-maid to come and milk them.

'Oh, what lovely cows!' cried Helga again; 'I am sure their milk must be sweeter than any other cows. How I should like to have some! I wonder to whom they belong?'

'To your Habogi,' replied he; 'and some day you shall have as much milk as you like, but we cannot stop now. Do you see that big grey one, with the silver bells between her horns? That is to be yours, and you can have her milked every morning the moment you wake.'

And Helga's eyes shone, and though she did not say anything, she thought that she would learn to milk the cow herself.

A mile further on they came to a wide common, with short, springy turf, where horses of all colours, with skins of satin, were kicking up their heels in play. The sight of them so delighted Helga that she nearly sprang from her saddle with a shriek of joy.

'Whose are they?' Oh! whose are they?' she asked. 'How happy any man must be who is the master of such lovely creatures!'

'They are your Habogi's,' replied he, 'and the one which you think the most beautiful of all you shall have for yourself, and learn to ride him.'

At this Helga quite forgot the sheep and the cow.

'A horse of my own!' said she. 'Oh, stop one moment, and let me see which I will choose. The white one? No. The chestnut? No. I think, after all, I like the coal-black one best, with the little white star on his forehead. Oh, do stop, just for a minute.'

But Habogi would not stop or listen. 'When you are married you will have plenty of time to choose one,' was all he answered, and they rode on two or three miles further.

At length Habogi drew rein before a small house, very ugly and mean-looking, and that seemed on the point of tumbling to pieces.

'This is my house, and is to be yours,' said Habogi, as he jumped down and held out his arms to lift Helga from the horse. The girl's heart sank a little, as she thought that the man who possessed such wonderful sheep, and cows, and horses, might have built himself a prettier place to live in; but she did not say so. And, taking her arm, he led her up the steps.

But when she got inside, she stood quite bewildered at the beauty of all around her. None of her friends owned such things, not even the miller, who was the richest man she knew. There were carpets everywhere, thick and soft, and of deep rich colours; and the cushions were of silk, and made you sleepy even to look at them; and curious little figures in china were scattered about. Helga felt as if it would take her all her life to see everything properly, and it only seemed a second since she had entered the house, when Habogi came up to her.

'I must begin the preparations for our wedding at once,' he said; 'but my foster-brother will take you home, as I promised. In three days he will bring you back here, with your parents and sisters, and any guests you may invite, in your company. By that time the feast will be ready.'

Helga had so much to think about, that the ride home appeared very short. Her father and mother were delighted to see her, as they did not feel sure that so ugly and cross-looking a man as Habogi might not have played her some cruel trick. And after they had given her some supper they begged her to tell them all she had done. But Helga only told them that they should see for themselves on the third day, when they would come to her wedding.

It was very early in the morning when the party set out, and Helga's two sisters grew green with envy as they passed the flocks of sheep, and cows, and horses, and heard that the best of each was given to Helga herself; but when they caught sight of the poor little house which was to be her home their hearts grew light again.

'I should be ashamed of living in such a place,' whispered each to the other; and the eldest sister spoke of the carved stone over HER doorway, and the second boasted of the number of rooms SHE had. But the moment they went inside they were struck dumb with rage at the splendour of everything, and their faces grew white and cold with fury when they saw the dress which Habogi had prepared for his bride--a dress that glittered like sunbeams dancing upon ice.

'She SHALL not look so much finer than us,' they cried passionately to each other as soon as they were alone; and when night came they stole out of their rooms, and taking out the wedding-dress, they laid it in the ash-pit, and heaped ashes upon it. But Habogi, who knew a little magic, and had guessed what they would do, changed the ashes into roses, and cast a spell over the sisters, so that they could not leave the spot for a whole day, and every one who passed by mocked at them.

The next morning when they all awoke the ugly tumble-down house had disappeared, and in its place stood a splendid palace. The guests' eyes sought in vain for the bridegroom, but could only see a handsome young man, with a coat of blue velvet and silver and a gold crown upon his head.

'Who is that?' they asked Helga.

'That is my Habogi,' said she.

[From Neuislandischem Volksmarcher.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

How the Little Brother Set Free His Big Brothers

In a small hut, right in the middle of the forest, lived a man, his wife, three sons and a daughter. For some reason, all the animals seemed to have left that part of the country, and food grew very scarce; so, one morning, after a night of snow, when the tracks of beasts might be easily seen, the three boys started off to hunt.

They kept together for some time, till they reached a place where the path they had been following split into two, and one of the brothers called his dog and went to the left, while the others took the trail to the right. These had not gone far when their dogs scented a bear, and drove him out from the thicket. The bear ran across a clearing, and the elder brother managed to place an arrow right in his head.

They both took up the bear, and carried it towards home, meeting the third at the spot where they had parted from him. When they reached home they threw the bear down on the floor of the hut saying,

'Father, here is a bear which we killed; now we can have some dinner.'

But the father, who was in a bad temper, only said:

'When I was a young man we used to get two bears in one day.'

The sons were rather disappointed at hearing this, and though there was plenty of meat to last for two or three days, they started off early in the morning down the same trail that they had followed before. As they drew near the fork a bear suddenly ran out from behind a tree, and took the path on the right. The two elder boys and their dogs pursued him, and soon the second son, who was also a good shot, killed him instantly with an arrow. At the fork of the trail, on their way home, they met the youngest, who had taken the left-hand road, and had shot a bear for himself. But when they threw the two bears triumphantly on the floor of the hut their father hardly looked at them, and only said:

'When I was a young man I used to get three bears in one day.'

The next day they were luckier than before, and brought back three bears, on which their father told them that HE had always killed four. However, that did not prevent him from skinning the bears and cooking them in a way of his own, which he thought very good, and they all ate an excellent supper.

Now these bears were the servants of the great bear chief who lived in a high mountain a long way off. And every time a bear was killed his shadow returned to the house of the bear chief, with the marks of his wounds plainly to bee seen by the rest.

The chief was furious at the number of bears the hunters had killed, and determined that he would find some way of destroying them. So he called another of his servants, and said to him:

'Go to the thicket near the fork, where the boys killed your brothers, and directly they or the dogs see you return here as fast as ever you can. The mountain will open to let you in, and the hunters will follow you. Then I shall have them in my power, and be able to revenge myself.'

The servant bowed low, and started at once for the fork, where he hid himself in the bushes.

By-and-by the boys came in sight, but this time there were only two of them, as the youngest had stayed at home. The air was warm and damp, and the snow soft and slushy, and the elder brother's bowstring hung loose, while the bow of the younger caught in a tree and snapped in half. At that moment the dogs began to bark loudly, and the bear rushed out of the thicket and set off in the direction of the mountain. Without thinking that they had nothing to defend themselves with, should the bear turn and attack them, the boys gave chase. The bear, who knew quite well that he could not be shot, sometimes slackened his pace and let the dogs get quite close; and in this way the elder son reached the mountain without observing it, while his brother, who had hurt his foot, was still far behind.

As he ran up, the mountain opened to admit the bear, and the boy, who was close on his heels, rushed in after him, and did not know where he was till he saw bears sitting on every side of him, holding a council. The animal he had been chasing sank panting in their midst, and the boy, very much frightened, stood still, letting his bow fall to the ground.

'Why are you trying to kill all my servants?' asked the chief. 'Look round and see their shades, with arrows sticking in them. It was I who told the bear to-day how he was to lure you into my power. I shall take care that you shall not hurt my people any more, because you will become a bear yourself.'

At this moment the second brother came up--for the mountain had been left open on purpose to tempt him also--and cried out breathlessly: 'Don't you see that the bear is lying close to you? Why don't you shoot him?' And, without waiting for a reply, pressed forward to drive his arrow into the heart of the bear. But the elder one caught his raised arm, and whispered: 'Be quiet! can't you tell where you are?' Then the boy looked up and saw the angry bears about him. On the one side were the servants of the chief, and on the other the servants of the chief's sister, who was sorry for the two youths, and begged that their lives might be spared. The chief answered that he would not kill them, but only cast a spell over them, by which their heads and bodies should remain as they were, but their arms and legs should change into those of a bear, so that they would go on all fours for the rest of their lives. And, stooping over a spring of water, he dipped a handful of moss in it and rubbed it over the arms and legs of the boys. In an instant the transformation took place, and two creatures, neither beast nor human stood before the chief.

Now the bear chief of course knew that the boys' father would seek for his sons when they did not return home, so he sent another of his servants to the hiding-place at the fork of the trail to see what would happen. He had not waited long, when the father came in sight, stooping as he went to look for his sons' tracks in the snow. When he saw the marks of snow-shoes along the path on the right he was filled with joy, not knowing that the servant had made some fresh tracks on purpose to mislead him; and he hastened forward so fast that he fell headlong into a pit, where the bear was sitting. Before he could pick himself up the bear had quietly broken his neck, and, hiding the body under the snow, sat down to see if anyone else would pass that way.

Meanwhile the mother at home was wondering what had become of her two sons, and as the hours went on, and their father never returned, she made up her mind to go and look for him. The youngest boy begged her to let him undertake the search, but she would not hear of it, and told him he must stay at home and take care of his sister. So, slipping on her snow-shoes, she started on her way.

As no fresh snow had fallen, the trail was quite easy to find, and she walked straight on, till it led her up to the pit where the bear was waiting for her. He grasped her as she fell and broke her neck, after which he laid her in the snow beside her husband, and went back to tell the bear chief.

Hour after hour dragged heavily by in the forest hut, and at last the brother and sister felt quite sure that in some way or other all the rest of the family had perished. Day after day the boy climbed to the top of a tall tree near the house, and sat there till he was almost frozen, looking on all sides through the forest openings, hoping that he might see someone coming along. Very soon all the food in the house was eaten, and he knew he would have to go out and hunt for more. Besides, he wished to seek for his parents.

The little girl did not like being left alone in the hut, and cried bitterly; but her brother told her that there was no use sitting down quietly to starve, and that whether he found any game or not he would certainly be back before the following night. Then he cut himself some arrows, each from a different tree, and winged with the feathers of four different birds. He then made himself a bow, very light and strong, and got down his snow-shoes. All this took some time, and he could not start that day, but early next morning he called his little dog Redmouth, whom he kept in a box, and set out.

After he had followed the trail for a great distance he grew very tired, and sat upon the branch of a tree to rest. But Redmouth barked so furiously that the boy thought that perhaps his parents might have been killed under its branches, and stepping back, shot one of his arrows at the root of the tree. Whereupon a noise like thunder shook it from top to bottom, fire broke out, and in a few minutes a little heap of ashes lay in the place where it had stood.

Not knowing quite what to make of it all, the boy continued on the trail, and went down the right-hand fork till he came to the clump of bushes where the bears used to hide.

Now, as was plain by his being able to change the shape of the two brothers, the bear chief knew a good deal of magic, and he was quite aware that the little boy was following the trail, and he sent a very small but clever bear servant to wait for him in the bushes and to try to tempt him into the mountain. But somehow his spells could not have worked properly that day, as the bear chief did not know that Redmouth had gone with his master, or he would have been more careful. For the moment the dog ran round the bushes barking loudly, the little bear servant rushed out in a fright, and set out for the mountains as fast as he could.

The dog followed the bear, and the boy followed the dog, until the mountain, the house of the great bear chief, came in sight. But along the road the snow was so wet and heavy that the boy could hardly get along, and then the thong of his snow-shoes broke, and he had to stop and mend it, so that the bear and the dog got so far ahead that he could scarcely hear the barking. When the strap was firm again the boy spoke to his snow-shoes and said:

'Now you must go as fast as you can, or, if not, I shall lose the dog as well as the bear.' And the snow-shoes sang in answer that they would run like the wind.

As he came along, the bear chief's sister was looking out of the window, and took pity on this little brother, as she had on the two elder ones, and waited to see what the boy would do, when he found that the bear servant and the dog had already entered the mountain.

The little brother was certainly very much puzzled at not seeing anything of either of the animals, which had vanished suddenly out of his sight. He paused for an instant to think what he should do next, and while he did so he fancied he heard Redmouth's voice on the opposite side of the mountain. With great difficulty he scrambled over steep rocks, and forced a path through tangled thickets; but when he reached the other side the sound appeared to start from the place from which he had come. Then he had to go all the way back again, and at the very top, where he stopped to rest, the barking was directly beneath him, and he knew in an instant where he was and what had happened.

'Let my dog out at once, bear chief!' cried he. 'If you do not, I shall destroy your palace.' But the bear chief only laughed, and said nothing. The boy was very angry at his silence, and aiming one of his arrows at the bottom of the mountain, shot straight through it.

As the arrow touched the ground a rumbling was heard, and with a roar a fire broke out which seemed to split the whole mountain into pieces. The bear chief and all his servants were burnt up in the flames, but his sister and all that belonged to her were spared because she had tried to save the two elder boys from punishment.

As soon as the fire had burnt itself out the little hunter entered what was left of the mountain, and the first thing he saw was his two brothers--half bear, half boy.

'Oh, help us! help us!' cried they, standing on their hind legs as they spoke, and stretching out their fore-paws to him.

'But how am I to help you?' asked the little brother, almost weeping. 'I can kill people, and destroy trees and mountains, but I have no power over men.' And the two elder brothers came up and put their paws on his shoulders, and they all three wept together.

The heart of the bear chief's sister was moved when she saw their misery, and she came gently up behind, and whispered:

'Little boy, gather some moss from the spring over there, and let your brothers smell it.'

With a bound all three were at the spring, and as the youngest plucked a handful of wet moss, the two others sniffed at it with all their might. Then the bearskin fell away from them, and they stood upright once more.

'How can we thank you? how can we thank you?' they stammered, hardly able to speak; and fell at her feet in gratitude. But the bear's sister only smiled, and bade them go home and look after the little girl, who had no one else to protect her.

And this the boys did, and took such good care of their sister that, as she was very small, she soon forgot that she had ever had a father and mother.

[From the Bureau of Ethnology, U.S.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

The Sacred Milk of Koumongoe

Far way, in a very hot country, there once lived a man and woman who had two children, a son named Koane and a daughter called Thakane.

Early in the morning and late in the evenings the parents worked hard in the fields, resting, when the sun was high, under the shade of some tree. While they were absent the little girl kept house alone, for her brother always got up before the dawn, when the air was fresh and cool, and drove out the cattle to the sweetest patches of grass he could find.

One day, when Koane had slept later than usual, his father and mother went to their work before him, and there was only Thakane to be seen busy making the bread for supper.

'Thakane,' he said, 'I am thirsty. Give me a drink from the tree Koumongoe, which has the best milk in the world.'

'Oh, Koane,' cried his sister, 'you know that we are forbidden to touch that tree. What would father say when he came home? For he would be sure to know.'

'Nonsense,' replied Koane, 'there is so much milk in Koumongoe that he will never miss a little. If you won't give it to me, I sha'n't take the cattle out. They will just have to stay all day in the hut, and you know that they will starve.' And he turned from her in a rage, and sat down in the corner.

After a while Thakane said to him: 'It is getting hot, had you better drive out the cattle now?'

But Koane only answered sulkily: 'I told you I am not going to drive them out at all. If I have to do without milk, they shall do without grass.'

Thakane did not know what to do. She was afraid to disobey her parents, who would most likely beat her, yet the beasts would be sure to suffer if they were kept in, and she would perhaps be beaten for that too. So at last she took an axe and a tiny earthen bowl, she cut a very small hole in the side of Koumongoe, and out gushed enough milk to fill the bowl.

'Here is the milk you wanted,' said she, going up to Koane, who was still sulking in his corner.

'What is the use of that?' grumbled Koane; 'why, there is not enough to drown a fly. Go and get me three times as much!'

Trembling with fright, Thakane returned to the tree, and struck it a sharp blow with the axe. In an instant there poured forth such a stream of milk that it ran like a river into the hut.

'Koane! Koane!' cried she, 'come and help me to plug up the hole. There will be no milk left for our father and mother.' But Koane could not stop it any more than Thakane, and soon the milk was flowing through the hut downhill towards their parents in the fields below.

The man saw a white stream a long way off, and guessed what had happened.

'Wife, wife,' he called loudly to the woman, who was working at a little distance: 'Do you see Koumongoe running fast down the hill? That is some mischief of the children's, I am sure. I must go home and find out what is the matter.' And they both threw down their hoes and hurried to the side of Koumongoe.

Kneeling on the grass, the man and his wife made a cup of their hands and drank the milk from it. And no sooner had they done this, than Koumongoe flowed back again up the hill, and entered the hut.

'Thakane,' said the parents, severely, when they reached home panting from the heat of the sun, 'what have you been doing? Why did Koumongoe come to us in the fields instead of staying in the garden?'

'It was Koane's fault,' answered Thakane. 'He would not take the cattle to feed until he drank some of the milk from Koumongoe. So, as I did not know what else to do, I gave it to him.'

The father listened to Thakane's words, but made no answer. Instead, he went outside and brought in two sheepskins, which he stained red and sent for a blacksmith to forge some iron rings. The rings were then passed over Thakane's arms and legs and neck, and the skins fastened on her before and behind. When all was ready, the man sent for his servants and said:

'I am going to get rid of Thakane.'

'Get rid of your only daughter?' they answered, in surprise. 'But why?'

'Because she has eaten what she ought not to have eaten. She has touched the sacred tree which belongs to her mother and me alone.' And, turning his back, he called to Thakane to follow him, and they went down the road which led to the dwelling of an ogre.

They were passing along some fields where the corn was ripening, when a rabbit suddenly sprang out at their feet, and standing on its hind legs, it sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her,' replied the man, 'she is old enough to give you an answer.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without Koumongoe they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him the Koumongoe of my father.

And when the rabbit heard that, he cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom the ogre should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

But the father paid no heed to what the rabbit said, and only walked on the faster, bidding Thakane to keep close behind him. By-and-by they met with a troop of great deer, called elands, and they stopped when they saw Thakane and sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her, replied the man, 'she is old enough to give you an answer.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without Koumongoe they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him the Koumongoe of my father.

And the elands all cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom the ogre should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

By this time it was nearly dark, and the father said they could travel no further that night, and must go to sleep where they were. Thakane was thankful indeed when she heard this, for she was very tired, and found the two skins fastened round her almost too heavy to carry. So, in spite of her dread of the ogre, she slept till dawn, when her father woke her, and told her roughly that he was ready to continue their journey.

Crossing the plain, the girl and her father passed a herd of gazelles feeding. They lifted their heads, wondering who was out so early, and when they caught sight of Thakane, they sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her, replied the man, 'she is old enough to answer for herself.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without Koumongoe they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him the Koumongoe of my father.

And the gazelles all cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom the ogre should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

At last they arrived at the village where the ogre lived, and they went straight to his hut. He was nowhere to be seen, but in his place was his son Masilo, who was not an ogre at all, but a very polite young man. He ordered his servants to bring a pile of skins for Thakane to sit on, but told her father he must sit on the ground. Then, catching sight of the girl's face, which she had kept down, he was struck by its beauty, and put the same question that the rabbit, and the elands, and the gazelles had done.

Thakane answered him as before, and he instantly commanded that she should be taken to the hut of his mother, and placed under her care, while the man should be led to his father. Directly the ogre saw him he bade the servant throw him into the great pot which always stood ready on the fire, and in five minutes he was done to a turn. After that the servant returned to Masilo and related all that had happened.

Now Masilo had fallen in loved with Thakane the moment he saw her. At first he did not know what to make of this strange feeling, for all his life he had hated women, and had refused several brides whom his parents had chosen for him. However, they were so anxious that he should marry, that they willingly accepted Thakane as their daughter-in-law, though she did bring any marriage portion with her.

After some time a baby was born to her, and Thakane thought it was the most beautiful baby that ever was seen. But when her mother-in-law saw it was a girl, she wrung her hands and wept, saying:

'O miserable mother! Miserable child! Alas for you! why were you not a boy!'

Thakane, in great surprise, asked the meaning of her distress; and the old woman told her that it was the custom in that country that all the girls who were born should be given to the ogre to eat.

Then Thakane clasped the baby tightly in her arms, and cried:

'But it is not the customer in MY country! There, when children die, they are buried in the earth. No one shall take my baby from me.'

That night, when everyone in the hut was asleep, Thakane rose, and carrying her baby on her back, went down to a place where the river spread itself out into a large lake, with tall willows all round the bank. Here, hidden from everyone, she sat down on a stone and began to think what she should do to save her child.

Suddenly she heard a rustling among the willows, and an old woman appeared before her.

'What are you crying for, my dear?' said she.

And Thakane answered: 'I was crying for my baby--I cannot hide her for ever, and if the ogre sees her, he will eat her; and I would rather she was drowned than that.'

'What you say is true,' replied the old woman. 'Give me your child, and let me take care of it. And if you will fix a day to meet me here I will bring the baby.'

Then Thakane dried her eyes, and gladly accepted the old woman's offer. When she got home she told her husband she had thrown it in the river, and as he had watched her go in that direction he never thought of doubting what she said.

On the appointed day, Thakane slipped out when everybody was busy, and ran down the path that led to the lake. As soon as she got there, she crouched down among the willows, and sang softly:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father Masilo cast out!

And in a moment the old woman appeared holding the baby in her arms. Dilah had become so big and strong, that Thakane's heart was filled with joy and gratitude, and she stayed as long as she dared, playing with her baby. At last she felt she must return to the village, lest she should be missed, and the child was handed back to the old woman, who vanished with her into the lake.

Children grow up very quickly when they live under water, and in less time than anyone could suppose, Dilah had changed from a baby to a woman. Her mother came to visit her whenever she was able, and one day, when they were sitting talking together, they were spied out by a man who had come to cut willows to weave into baskets. He was so surprised to see how like the face of the girl was to Masilo, that he left his work and returned to the village.

'Masilo,' he said, as he entered the hut, 'I have just beheld your wife near the river with a girl who must be your daughter, she is so like you. We have been deceived, for we all thought she was dead.'

When he heard this, Masilo tried to look shocked because his wife had broken the law; but in his heart he was very glad.

'But what shall we do now?' asked he.

'Make sure for yourself that I am speaking the truth by hiding among the bushes the first time Thakane says she is going to bathe in the river, and waiting till the girl appears.'

For some days Thakane stayed quietly at home, and her husband began to think that the man had been mistaken; but at last she said to her husband: 'I am going to bathe in the river.'

'Well, you can go,' answered he. But he ran down quickly by another path, and got there first, and hid himself in the bushes. An instant later, Thakane arrived, and standing on the bank, she sang:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father Masilo cast out!

Then the old woman came out of the water, holding the girl, now tall and slender, by the hand. And as Masilo looked, he saw that she was indeed his daughter, and he wept for joy that she was not lying dead in the bottom of the lake. The old woman, however, seemed uneasy, and said to Thakane: 'I feel as if someone was watching us. I will not leave the girl to-day, but will take her back with me'; and sinking beneath the surface, she drew the girl after her. After they had gone, Thakane returned to the village, which Masilo had managed to reach before her.

All the rest of the day he sat in a corner weeping, and his mother who came in asked: 'Why are you weeping so bitterly, my son?'

'My head aches,' he answered; 'it aches very badly.' And his mother passed on, and left him alone.

In the evening he said to his wife: 'I have seen my daughter, in the place where you told me you had drowned her. Instead, she lives at the bottom of the lake, and has now grown into a young woman.'

'I don't know what you are talking about,' replied Thakane. 'I buried my child under the sand on the beach.'

Then Masilo implored her to give the child back to him; but she would not listen, and only answered: 'If I were to give her back you would only obey the laws of your country and take her to your father, the ogre, and she would be eaten.'

But Masilo promised that he would never let his father see her, and that now she was a woman no one would try to hurt her; so Thakane's heart melted, and she went down to the lake to consult the old woman.

'What am I to do?' she asked, when, after clapping her hands, the old woman appeared before her. 'Yesterday Masilo beheld Dilah, and ever since he has entreated me to give him back his daughter.'

'If I let her go he must pay me a thousand head of cattle in exchange,' replied the old woman. And Thakane carried her answer back to Masilo.

'Why, I would gladly give her two thousand!' cried he, 'for she has saved my daughter.' And he bade messengers hasten to all the neighbouring villages, and tell his people to send him at once all the cattle he possessed. When they were all assembled he chose a thousand of the finest bulls and cows, and drove them down to the river, followed by a great crowd wondering what would happen.

Then Thakane stepped forward in front of the cattle and sang:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father Masilo cast out!

And Dilah came from the waters holding out her hands to Masilo and Thakane, and in her place the cattle sank into the lake, and were driven by the old woman to the great city filled with people, which lies at the bottom.

[Contes Populaires des Bassoutos.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

The Wicked Wolverine

One day a wolverine was out walking on the hill-side, when, on turning a corner, he suddenly saw a large rock.

'Was that you I heard walking about just now?' he asked, for wolverines are cautious animals, and always like to know the reasons of things.

'No, certainly not,' answered the rock; 'I don't know how to walk.'

'But I SAW you walking,' continued the wolverine.

'I am afraid that you were not taught to speak the truth,' retorted the rock.

'You need not speak like that, for I have SEEN you walking,' replied the wolverine, 'though I am quite sure that you could never catch ME!' and he ran a little distance and then stopped to see if the rock was pursuing him; but, to his vexation, the rock was still in the same place. Then the wolverine went up close, and struck the rock a blow with his paw, saying: 'Well, will you catch me NOW?'

'I can't walk, but I can ROLL,' answered the rock.

And the wolverine laughed and said: 'Oh, that will do just as well'; and began to run down the side of the mountain.

At first he went quite slowly, 'just to give the rock a chance,' he thought to himself; but soon he quickened his pace, for he found that the rock was almost at his heels. But the faster the wolverine ran, the faster the rock rolled, and by-and-by the little creature began to get very tired, and was sorry he had not left the rock to itself. Thinking that if he could manage to put on a spurt he would reach the forest of great trees at the bottom of the mountain, where the rock could not come, he gathered up all his strength, and instead of running he leaped over sticks and stones, but, whatever he did, the rock was always close behind him. At length he grew so weary that he could not even see where he was going, and catching his foot in a branch he tripped and fell. The rock stopped at once, but there came a shriek from the wolverine:

'Get off, get off! can't you see that you are on my legs?'

'Why did you not leave me alone?' asked the rock. 'I did not want to move--I hate moving. But you WOULD have it, and I certainly sha'n't move now till I am forced to.'

'I will call my brothers,' answered the wolverine. 'There are many of them in the forest, and you will soon see that they are stronger than you.' And he called, and called, and called, till wolves and foxes and all sorts of other creatures all came running to see what was the matter.

'How DID you get under that rock?' asked they, making a ring round him; but they had to repeat their question several times before the wolverine would answer, for he, like many other persons, found it hard to confess that he had brought his troubles on himself.

'Well, I was dull, and wanted someone to play with me,' he said at last, in sulky voice, 'and I challenged the rock to catch me. Of course I thought I could run the fastest; but I tripped, and it rolled on me. It was just an accident.'

'It serves you right for being so silly,' said they; but they pushed and hauled at the rock for a long time without making it move an inch.

'You are no good at all,' cried the wolverine crossly, for it was suffering great pain, 'and if you cannot get me free, I shall see what my friends the lightning and thunder can do.' And he called loudly to the lightning to come and help him as quickly as possible.

In a few minutes a dark cloud came rolling up the sky, giving out such terrific claps of thunder that the wolves and the foxes and all the other creatures ran helter-skelter in all directions. But, frightened though they were, they did not forget to beg the lightning to take off the wolverine's coat and to free his legs, but to be careful not to hurt him. So the lightning disappeared into the cloud for a moment to gather up fresh strength, and then came rushing down, right upon the rock, which it sent flying in all directions, and took the wolverine's coat so neatly that, though it was torn into tiny shreds, the wolverine himself was quite unharmed.

'That was rather clumsy of you,' said he, standing up naked in his flesh. 'Surely you could have split the rock without tearing my coat to bits!' And he stooped down to pick up the pieces. It took him a long time, for there were a great many of them, but at last he had them all in his hand.

'I'll go to my sister the frog,' he thought to himself, 'and she will sew them together for me'; and he set off at once for the swamp in which his sister lived.

'Will you sew my coat together? I had an unlucky accident, and it is quite impossible to wear,' he said, when he found her.

'With pleasure,' she answered, for she had always been taught to be polite; and getting her needle and thread she began to fit the pieces. But though she was very good-natured, she was not very clever, and she got some of the bits wrong. When the wolverine, who was very particular about his clothes, came to put it on, he grew very angry.

'What a useless creature you are!' cried he. 'Do you expect me to go about in such a coat as that? Why it bulges all down the back, as if I had a hump, and it is so tight across the chest that I expect it to burst every time I breathe. I knew you were stupid, but I did not think you were as stupid as that.' And giving the poor frog a blow on her head, which knocked her straight into the water, he walked off in a rage to his younger sister the mouse.

'I tore my coat this morning,' he began, when he had found her sitting at the door of her house eating an apple. 'It was all in little bits, and I took it to our sister the frog to ask her to sew it for me. But just look at the way she has done it! You will have to take it to pieces and fit them together properly, and I hope I shall not have to complain again.' For as the wolverine was older than the mouse, he was accustomed to speak to her in this manner. However, the mouse was used to it and only answered: 'I think you had better stay here till it is done, and if there is any alteration needed I can make it.' So the wolverine sat down on a heap of dry ferns, and picking up the apple, he finished it without even asking the mouse's leave.

At last the coat was ready, and the wolverine put it on.

'Yes, it fits very well,' said he, 'and you have sewn it very neatly. When I pass this way again I will bring you a handful of corn, as a reward'; and he ran off as smart as ever, leaving the mouse quite grateful behind him.

He wandered about for many days, till he reached a place where food was very scarce, and for a whole week he went without any. He was growing desperate, when he suddenly came upon a bear that was lying asleep. 'Ah! here is food at last!' thought he; but how was he to kill the bear, who was so much bigger than himself? It was no use to try force, he must invent some cunning plan which would get her into his power. At last, after thinking hard, he decided upon something, and going up to the bear, he exclaimed: 'Is that you, my sister?'

The bear turned round and saw the wolverine, and murmuring to herself, so low that nobody could hear, 'I never heard before that I had a brother,' got up and ran quickly to a tree, up which she climbed. Now the wolverine was very angry when he saw his dinner vanishing in front of him, especially as HE could not climb trees like the bear, so he followed, and stood at the foot of the tree, shrieking as loud as he could, 'Come down, sister; our father has sent me to look for you! You were lost when you were a little girl and went out picking berries, and it was only the other day that we heard from a beaver where you were.' At these words, the bear came a little way down the tree, and the wolverine, seeing this, went on:

'Are you not fond of berries? I am! And I know a place where they grow so thick the ground is quite hidden. Why, look for yourself! That hillside is quite red with them!'

'I can't see so far,' answered the bear, now climbing down altogether. 'You must have wonderfully good eyes! I wish I had; but my sight is very short.'

'So was mine till my father smashed a pailful of cranberries, and rubbed my eyes with them,' replied the wolverine. 'But if you like to go and gather some of the berries I will do just as he did, and you will soon be able to see as far as me.'

It took the bear a long while to gather the berries, for she was slow about everything, and, besides, it made her back ache to stoop. But at last she returned with a sackful, and put them down beside the wolverine. 'That is splendid, sister!' cried the wolverine. 'Now lie flat on the ground with your head on this stone, while I smash them.'

The bear, who was very tired, was only too glad to do as she was bid, and stretched herself comfortably on the grass.

'I am ready now,' said the wolverine after a bit; 'just at first you will find that the berries make your eyes smart, but you must be careful not to move, or the juice will run out, and then it will have to be done all over again.'

So the bear promised to lie very still; but the moment the cranberries touched her eyes she sprang up with a roar.

'Oh, you mustn't mind a little pain,' said the wolverine, 'it will soon be over, and then you will see all sorts of things you have never dreamt of.' The bear sank down with a groan, and as her eyes were full of cranberry juice, which completely blinded her, the wolverine took up a sharp knife and stabbed her to the heart.

Then he took off the skin, and, stealing some fire from a tent, which his sharp eyes had perceived hidden behind a rock, he set about roasting the bear bit by bit. He thought the meat was the best he ever had tasted, and when dinner was done he made up his mind to try that same trick again, if ever he was hungry.

And very likely he did!

[Adapted from Bureau of Ethnology.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

The Husband of the Rat's Daughter

Once upon a time there lived in Japan a rat and his wife who came of an old and noble race, and had one daughter, the loveliest girl in all the rat world. Her parents were very proud of her, and spared no pains to teach her all she ought to know. There was not another young lady in the whole town who was as clever as she was in gnawing through the hardest wood, or who could drop from such a height on to a bed, or run away so fast if anyone was heard coming. Great attention, too, was paid to her personal appearance, and her skin shone like satin, while her teeth were as white as pearls, and beautifully pointed.

Of course, with all these advantages, her parents expected her to make a brilliant marriage, and, as she grew up, they began to look round for a suitable husband.

But here a difficulty arose. The father was a rat from the tip of his nose to the end of his tail, outside as well as in, and desired that his daughter should wed among her own people. She had no lack of lovers, but her father's secret hopes rested on a fine young rat, with moustaches which almost swept the ground, whose family was still nobler and more ancient than his own. Unluckily, the mother had other views for her precious child. She was one of those people who always despise their own family and surroundings, and take pleasure in thinking that they themselves are made of finer material than the rest of the world. 'HER daughter should never marry a mere rat,' she declared, holding her head high. 'With her beauty and talents she had a right to look for someone a little better than THAT.'

So she talked, as mothers will, to anyone that would listen to her. What the girl thought about the matter nobody knew or cared--it was not the fashion in the rat world.

Many were the quarrels which the old rat and his wife had upon the subject, and sometimes they bore on their faces certain marks which looked as if they had not kept to words only.

'Reach up to the stars is MY motto,' cried the lady one day, when she was in a greater passion than usual. 'My daughter's beauty places her higher than anything upon earth,' she cried; 'and I am certainly not going to accept a son-in-law who is beneath her.'

'Better offer her in marriage to the sun,' answered her husband impatiently. 'As far as I know there is nothing greater than he.'

'Well, I WAS thinking of it,' replied the wife, 'and as you are of the same mind, we will pay him a visit to-morrow.'

So the next morning, the two rats, having spent hours in making themselves smart, set out to see the sun, leading their daughter between them.

The journey took some time, but at length they came to the golden palace where the sun lived.

'Noble king,' began the mother, 'behold our daughter! She is so beautiful that she is above everything in the whole world. Naturally, we wish for a son-in-law who, on his side, is greater than all. Therefore we have come to you.'

'I feel very much flattered,' replied the sun, who was so busy that he had not the least wish to marry anybody. 'You do me great honour by your proposal. Only, in one point you are mistaken, and it would be wrong of me to take advantage of your ignorance. There is something greater than I am, and that is the cloud. Look!' And as he spoke a cloud spread itself over the sun's face, blotting out his rays.

'Oh, well, we will speak to the cloud,' said the mother. And turning to the cloud she repeated her proposal.

'Indeed I am unworthy of anything so charming,' answered the cloud; 'but you make a mistake again in what you say. There is one thing that is even more powerful than I, and that is the wind. Ah, here he comes, you can see for yourself.'

And she DID see, for catching up the cloud as he passed, he threw it on the other side of the sky. Then, tumbling father, mother and daughter down to the earth again, he paused for a moment beside them, his foot on an old wall.

When she had recovered her breath, the mother began her little speech once more.

'The wall is the proper husband for your daughter,' answered the wind, whose home consisted of a cave, which he only visited when he was not rushing about elsewhere; 'you can see for yourself that he is greater than I, for he has power to stop me in my flight.' And the mother, who did not trouble to conceal her wishes, turned at once to the wall.

Then something happened which was quite unexpected by everyone.

'I won't marry that ugly old wall, which is as old as my grandfather,' sobbed the girl, who had not uttered one word all this time. 'I would have married the sun, or the cloud, or the wind, because it was my duty, although I love the handsome young rat, and him only. But that horrid old wall--I would sooner die!'

And the wall, rather hurt in his feelings, declared that he had no claim to be the husband of so beautiful a girl.

'It is quite true,' he said, 'that I can stop the wind who can part the clouds who can cover the sun; but there is someone who can do more than all these, and that is the rat. It is the rat who passes through me, and can reduce me to powder, simply with his teeth. If, therefore, you want a son-in-law who is greater than the whole world, seek him among the rats.'

'Ah, what did I tell you?' cried the father. And his wife, though for the moment angry at being beaten, soon thought that a rat son-in-law was what she had always desired.

So all three returned happily home, and the wedding was celebrated three days after.

[Contes Populaires.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

The Mermaid and the Boy

Long, long ago, there lived a king who ruled over a country by the sea. When he had been married about a year, some of his subjects, inhabiting a distant group of islands, revolted against his laws, and it became needful for him to leave his wife and go in person to settle their disputes. The queen feared that some ill would come of it, and implored him to stay at home, but he told her that nobody could do his work for him, and the next morning the sails were spread, and the king started on his voyage.

The vessel had not gone very far when she ran upon a rock, and stuck so fast in a cleft that the strength of the whole crew could not get her off again. To make matters worse, the wind was rising too, and it was quite plain that in a few hours the ship would be dashed to pieces and everybody would be drowned, when suddenly the form of a mermaid was seen dancing on the waves which threatened every moment to overwhelm them.

'There is only one way to free yourselves,' she said to the king, bobbing up and down in the water as she spoke, 'and that is to give me your solemn word that you will deliver to me the first child that is born to you.'

The king hesitated at this proposal. He hoped that some day he might have children in his home, and the thought that he must yield up the heir to his crown was very bitter to him; but just then a huge wave broke with great force on the ship's side, and his men fell on their knees and entreated him to save them.

So he promised, and this time a wave lifted the vessel clean off the rocks, and she was in the open sea once more.

The affairs of the islands took longer to settle than the king had expected, and some months passed away before he returned to his palace. In his absence a son had been born to him, and so great was his joy that he quite forgot the mermaid and the price he had paid for the safety of his ship. But as the years went on, and the baby grew into a fine big boy, the remembrance of it came back, and one day he told the queen the whole story. From that moment the happiness of both their lives was ruined. Every night they went to bed wondering if they should find his room empty in the morning, and every day they kept him by their sides, expecting him to be snatched away before their very eyes.

At last the king felt that this state of things could not continue, and he said to his wife:

'After all, the most foolish thing in the world one can do is to keep the boy here in exactly the place in which the mermaid will seek him. Let us give him food and send him on his travels, and perhaps, if the mermaid ever blocs come to seek him, she may be content with some other child.' And the queen agreed that his plan seemed the wisest.

So the boy was called, and his father told him the story of the voyage, as he had told his mother before him. The prince listened eagerly, and was delighted to think that he was to go away all by himself to see the world, and was not in the least frightened; for though he was now sixteen, he had scarcely been allowed to walk alone beyond the palace gardens. He began busily to make his preparations, and took off his smart velvet coat, putting on instead one of green cloth, while he refused a beautiful bag which the queen offered him to hold his food, and slung a leather knapsack over his shoulders instead, just as he had seen other travellers do. Then he bade farewell to his parents and went his way.

All through the day he walked, watching with interest the strange birds and animals that darted across his path in the forest or peeped at him from behind a bush. But as evening drew on he became tired, and looked about as he walked for some place where he could sleep. At length he reached a soft mossy bank under a tree, and was just about to stretch himself out on it, when a fearful roar made him start and tremble all over. In another moment something passed swiftly through the air and a lion stood before him.

'What are you doing here?' asked the lion, his eyes glaring fiercely at the boy.

'I am flying from the mermaid,' the prince answered, in a quaking voice.

'Give me some food then,' said the lion, 'it is past my supper time, and I am very hungry.'

The boy was so thankful that the lion did not want to eat him, that he gladly picked up his knapsack which lay on the ground, and held out some bread and a flask of wine.

'I feel better now,' said the lion when he had done, 'so now I shall go to sleep on this nice soft moss, and if you like you can lie down beside me.' So the boy and the lion slept soundly side by side, till the sun rose.

'I must be off now,' remarked the lion, shaking the boy as he spoke; 'but cut off the tip of my ear, and keep it carefully, and if you are in any danger just wish yourself a lion and you will become one on the spot. One good turn deserves another, you know.'

The prince thanked him for his kindness, and did as he was bid, and the two then bade each other farewell.

'I wonder how it feels to be a lion,' thought the boy, after he had gone a little way; and he took out the tip of the ear from the breast of his jacket and wished with all his might. In an instant his head had swollen to several times its usual size, and his neck seemed very hot and heavy; and, somehow, his hands became paws, and his skin grew hairy and yellow. But what pleased him most was his long tail with a tuft at the end, which he lashed and switched proudly. 'I like being a lion very much,' he said to himself, and trotted gaily along the road.

After a while, however, he got tired of walking in this unaccustomed way--it made his back ache and his front paws felt sore. So he wished himself a boy again, and in the twinkling of an eye his tail disappeared and his head shrank, and the long thick mane became short and curly. Then he looked out for a sleeping place, and found some dry ferns, which he gathered and heaped up.

But before he had time to close his eyes there was a great noise in the trees near by, as if a big heavy body was crashing through them. The boy rose and turned his head, and saw a huge black bear coming towards him.

'What are you doing here?' cried the bear.

'I am running away from the mermaid,' answered the boy; but the bear took no interest in the mermaid, and only said: 'I am hungry; give me something to eat.'

The knapsack was lying on the ground among the fern, but the prince picked it up, and, unfastening the strap, took out his second flask of wine and another loaf of bread. 'We will have supper together,' he remarked politely; but the bear, who had never been taught manners, made no reply, and ate as fast as he could. When he had quite finished, he got up and stretched himself.

'You have got a comfortable-looking bed there,' he observed. 'I really think that, bad sleeper as I am, I might have a good night on it. I can manage to squeeze you in,' he added; 'you don't take up a great deal of room.' The boy was rather indignant at the bear's cool way of talking; but as he was too tired to gather more fern, they lay down side by side, and never stirred till sunrise next morning.

'I must go now,' said the bear, pulling the sleepy prince on to his feet; 'but first you shall cut off the tip of my ear, and when you are in any danger just wish yourself a bear and you will become one. One good turn deserves another, you know.' And the boy did as he was bid, and he and the bear bade each other farewell.

'I wonder how it feels to be a bear,' thought he to himself when he had walked a little way; and he took out the tip from the breast of his coat and wished hard that he might become a bear. The next moment his body stretched out and thick black fur covered him all over. As before, his hands were changed into paws, but when he tried to switch his tail he found to his disgust that it would not go any distance. 'Why it is hardly worth calling a tail!' said he. For the rest of the day he remained a bear and continued his journey, but as evening came on the bear-skin, which had been so useful when plunging through brambles in the forest, felt rather heavy, and he wished himself a boy again. He was too much exhausted to take the trouble of cutting any fern or seeking for moss, but just threw himself down under a tree, when exactly above his head he heard a great buzzing as a bumble-bee alighted on a honeysuckle branch. 'What are you doing here?' asked the bee in a cross voice; 'at your age you ought to be safe at home.'

'I am running away from the mermaid,' replied the boy; but the bee, like the lion and the bear, was one of those people who never listen to the answers to their questions, and only said: 'I am hungry. Give me something to eat.'

The boy took his last loaf and flask out of his knapsack and laid them on the ground, and they had supper together. 'Well, now I am going to sleep,' observed the bee when the last crumb was gone, 'but as you are not very big I can make room for you beside me,' and he curled up his wings, and tucked in his legs, and he and the prince both slept soundly till morning. Then the bee got up and carefully brushed every scrap of dust off his velvet coat and buzzed loudly in the boy's ear to waken him.

'Take a single hair from one of my wings,' said he, 'and if you are in danger just wish yourself a bee and you will become one. One good turn deserves another, so farewell, and thank you for your supper.' And the bee departed after the boy had pulled out the hair and wrapped it carefully in a leaf.

'It must feel quite different to be a bee from what it does to be a lion or bear,' thought the boy to himself when he had walked for an hour or two. 'I dare say I should get on a great deal faster,' so he pulled out his hair and wished himself a bee.

In a moment the strangest thing happened to him. All his limbs seemed to draw together, and his body to become very short and round; his head grew quite tiny, and instead of his white skin he was covered with the richest, softest velvet. Better than all, he had two lovely gauze wings which carried him the whole day without getting tired.

Late in the afternoon the boy fancied he saw a vast heap of stones a long way off, and he flew straight towards it. But when he reached the gates he saw that it was really a great town, so he wished himself back in his own shape and entered the city.

He found the palace doors wide open and went boldly into a sort of hall which was full of people, and where men and maids were gossiping together. He joined their talk and soon learned from them that the king had only one daughter who had such a hatred to men that she would never suffer one to enter her presence. Her father was in despair, and had had pictures painted of the handsomest princes of all the courts in the world, in the hope that she might fall in love with one of them; but it was no use; the princess would not even allow the pictures to be brought into her room.

'It is late,' remarked one of the women at last; 'I must go to my mistress.' And, turning to one of the lackeys, she bade him find a bed for the youth.

'It is not necessary,' answered the prince, 'this bench is good enough for me. I am used to nothing better.' And when the hall was empty he lay down for a few minutes. But as soon as everything was quiet in the palace he took out the hair and wished himself a bee, and in this shape he flew upstairs, past the guards, and through the keyhole into the princess's chamber. Then he turned himself into a man again.

At this dreadful sight the princess, who was broad awake, began to scream loudly. 'A man! a man!' cried she; but when the guards rushed in there was only a bumble-bee buzzing about the room. They looked under the bed, and behind the curtains, and into the cupboards, then came to the conclusion that the princess had had a bad dream, and bowed themselves out. The door had scarcely closed on them than the bee disappeared, and a handsome youth stood in his place.

'I knew a man was hidden somewhere,' cried the princess, and screamed more loudly than before. Her shrieks brought back the guards, but though they looked in all kinds of impossible places no man was to be seen, and so they told the princess.

'He was here a moment ago--I saw him with my own eyes,' and the guards dared not contradict her, though they shook their heads and whispered to each other that the princess had gone mad on this subject, and saw a man in every table and chair. And they made up their minds that--let her scream as loudly as she might--they would take no notice.

Now the princess saw clearly what they were thinking, and that in future her guards would give her no help, and would perhaps, besides, tell some stories about her to the king, who would shut her up in a lonely tower and prevent her walking in the gardens among her birds and flowers. So when, for the third time, she beheld the prince standing before her, she did not scream but sat up in bed gazing at him in silent terror.

'Do not be afraid,' he said, 'I shall not hurt you'; and he began to praise her gardens, of which he had heard the servants speak, and the birds and flowers which she loved, till the princess's anger softened, and she answered him with gentle words. Indeed, they soon became so friendly that she vowed she would marry no one else, and confided to him that in three days her father would be off to the wars, leaving his sword in her room. If any man could find it and bring it to him he would receive her hand as a reward. At this point a cock crew, and the youth jumped up hastily saying: 'Of course I shall ride with the king to the war, and if I do not return, take your violin every evening to the seashore and play on it, so that the very sea-kobolds who live at the bottom of the ocean may hear it and come to you.'

Just as the princess had foretold, in three days the king set out for the war with a large following, and among them was the young prince, who had presented himself at court as a young noble in search of adventures. They had left the city many miles behind them, when the king suddenly discovered that he had forgotten his sword, and though all his attendants instantly offered theirs, he declared that he could fight with none but his own.

'The first man who brings it to me from my daughter's room,' cried he, 'shall not only have her to wife, but after my death shall reign in my stead.'

At this the Red Knight, the young prince, and several more turned their horses to ride as fast as the wind back to the palace. But suddenly a better plan entered the prince's head, and, letting the others pass him, he took his precious parcel from his breast and wished himself a lion. Then on he bounded, uttering such dreadful roars that the horses were frightened and grew unmanageable, and he easily outstripped them, and soon reached the gates of the palace. Here he hastily changed himself into a bee, and flew straight into the princess's room, where he became a man again. She showed him where the sword hung concealed behind a curtain, and he took it down, saying as he did so: 'Be sure not to forget what you have promised to do.'

The princess made no reply, but smiled sweetly, and slipping a golden ring from her finger she broke it in two and held half out silently to the prince, while the other half she put in her own pocket. He kissed it, and ran down the stairs bearing the sword with him. Some way off he met the Red Knight and the rest, and the Red Knight at first tried to take the sword from him by force. But as the youth proved too strong for him, he gave it up, and resolved to wait for a better opportunity.

This soon came, for the day was hot and the prince was thirsty. Perceiving a little stream that ran into the sea, he turned aside, and, unbuckling the sword, flung himself on the ground for a long drink. Unluckily, the mermaid happened at that moment to be floating on the water not very far off, and knew he was the boy who had been given her before he was born. So she floated gently in to where he was lying, she seized him by the arm, and the waves closed over them both. Hardly had they disappeared, when the Red Knight stole cautiously up, and could hardly believe his eyes when he saw the king's sword on the bank. He wondered what had become of the youth, who an hour before had guarded his treasure so fiercely; but, after all, that was no affair of his! So, fastening the sword to his belt, he carried it to the king.

The war was soon over, and the king returned to his people, who welcomed him with shouts of joy. But when the princess from her window saw that her betrothed was not among the attendants riding behind her father, her heart sank, for she knew that some evil must have befallen him, and she feared the Red Knight. She had long ago learned how clever and how wicked he was, and something whispered to her that it was he who would gain the credit of having carried back the sword, and would claim her as his bride, though he had never even entered her chamber. And she could do nothing; for although the king loved her, he never let her stand in the way of his plans.

The poor princess was only too right, and everything came to pass exactly as she had foreseen it. The king told her that the Red Knight had won her fairly, and that the wedding would take place next day, and there would be a great feast after it.

In those days feasts were much longer and more splendid than they are now; and it was growing dark when the princess, tired out with all she had gone through, stole up to her own room for a little quiet. But the moon was shining so brightly over the sea that it seemed to draw her towards it, and taking her violin under her arm, she crept down to the shore.

'Listen! listen! said the mermaid to the prince, who was lying stretched on a bed of seaweeds at the bottom of the sea. 'Listen! that is your old love playing, for mermaids know everything that happens upon earth.'

'I hear nothing,' answered the youth, who did not look happy. 'Take me up higher, where the sounds can reach me.'

So the mermaid took him on her shoulders and bore him up midway to the surface. 'Can you hear now?' she asked.

'No,' answered the prince, 'I hear nothing but the water rushing; I must go higher still.'

Then the mermaid carried him to the very top. 'You must surely be able to hear now?' said she.

'Nothing but the water,' repeated the youth. So she took him right to the land.

'At any rate you can hear now?' she said again.

'The water is still rushing in my ears,' answered he; 'but wait a little, that will soon pass off.' And as he spoke he put his hand into his breast, and seizing the hair wished himself a bee, and flew straight into the pocket of the princess. The mermaid looked in vain for him, and coated all night upon the sea; but he never came back, and never more did he gladden her eyes. But the princess felt that something strange was about her, though she knew not what, and returned quickly to the palace, where the young man at once resumed his own shape. Oh, what joy filled her heart at the sight of him! But there was no time to be lost, and she led him right into the hall, where the king and his nobles were still sitting at the feast. 'Here is a man who boasts that he can do wonderful tricks,' said she, 'better even than the Red Knight's! That cannot be true, of course, but it might be well to give this impostor a lesson. He pretends, for instance, that he can turn himself into a lion; but that I do not believe. I know that you have studied the art of magic,' she went on, turning to the Red Knight, 'so suppose you just show him how it is done, and bring shame upon him.'

Now the Red Knight had never opened a book of magic in his life; but he was accustomed to think that he could do everything better than other people without any teaching at all. So he turned and twisted himself about, and bellowed and made faces; but he did not become a lion for all that.

'Well, perhaps it is very difficult to change into a lion. Make yourself a bear,' said the princess. But the Red Knight found it no easier to become a bear than a lion.

'Try a bee,' suggested she. 'I have always read that anyone who can do magic at all can do that.' And the old knight buzzed and hummed, but he remained a man and not a bee.

'Now it is your turn,' said the princess to the youth. 'Let us see if you can change yourself into a lion.' And in a moment such a fierce creature stood before them, that all the guests rushed out of the hall, treading each other underfoot in their fright. The lion sprang at the Red Knight, and would have torn him in pieces had not the princess held him back, and bidden him to change himself into a man again. And in a second a man took the place of the lion.

'Now become a bear,' said she; and a bear advanced panting and stretching out his arms to the Red Knight, who shrank behind the princess.

By this time some of the guests had regained their courage, and returned as far as the door, thinking that if it was safe for the princess perhaps it was safe for them. The king, who was braver than they, and felt it needful to set them a good example besides, had never left his seat, and when at a new command of the princess the bear once more turned into a man, he was silent from astonishment, and a suspicion of the truth began to dawn on him. 'Was it he who fetched the sword?' asked the king.

'Yes, it was,' answered the princess; and she told him the whole story, and how she had broken her gold ring and given him half of it. And the prince took out his half of the ring, and the princess took out hers, and they fitted exactly. Next day the Red Knight was hanged, as he richly deserved, and there was a new marriage feast for the prince and princess.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

Pivi and Kabo

When birds were men, and men were birds, Pivi and Kabo lived in an island far away, called New Claledonia. Pivi was a cheery little bird that chirps at sunset; Kabo was an ugly black fowl that croaks in the darkness. One day Pivi and Kabo thought that they would make slings, and practice slinging, as the people of the island still do. So they went to a banyan tree, and stripped the bark to make strings for their slings, and next they repaired to the river bank to find stones. Kabo stood on the bank of the river, and Pivi went into the water. The game was for Kabo to sling at Pivi, and for Pivi to dodge the stones, if he could. For some time he dodged them cleverly, but at last a stone from Kabo's sling hit poor Pivi on the leg and broke it. Down went Pivi into the stream, and floated along it, till he floated into a big hollow bamboo, which a woman used for washing her sweet potatoes.

'What is that in my bamboo?' said the woman. And she blew in at one end, and blew little Pivi out at the other, like a pea from a pea-shooter.

'Oh!' cried the woman, 'what a state you are in! What have you been doing?'

'It was Kabo who broke my leg at the slinging game,' said Pivi.

'Well, I am sorry for you,' said the woman; 'will you come with me, and do what I tell you?'

'I will!' said Pivi, for the woman was very kind and pretty. She took Pivi into a shed where she kept her fruit laid him on a bed of mats, and made him as comfortable as she could, and attended to his broken leg without cutting off the flesh round the bone, as these people usually do.

'You will be still, won't you, Pivi?' she said. 'If you hear a little noise you will pretend to be dead. It is the Black Ant who will come and creep from your feet up to your head. Say nothing, and keep quiet, won't you, Pivi?'

'Certainly, kind lady,' said Pivi, 'I will lie as still as can be.'

'Next will come the big Red Ant--you know him?'

'Yes, I know him, with his feet like a grasshopper's.'

'He will walk over your body up to your head. Then you must shake all your body. Do you understand, Pivi?'

'Yes, dear lady, I shall do just as you say.'

'Very good,' said the woman, going out and shutting the door.

Pivi lay still under his coverings, then a tiny noise was heard, and the Black Ant began to march over Pivi, who lay quite still. Then came the big Red Ant skipping along his body, and then Pivi shook himself all over. He jumped up quite well again, he ran to the river, he looked into the water and saw that he was changed from a bird into a fine young man!

'Oh, lady,' he cried, 'look at me now! I am changed into a man, and so handsome!'

'Will you obey me again?' said the woman.

'Always; whatever you command I will do it,' said Pivi, politely.

'Then climb up that cocoa-nut tree, with your legs only, not using your hands,' said the woman.

Now the natives can run up cocoa-nut trees like squirrels, some using only one hand; the girls can do that. But few can climb without using their hands at all.

'At the top of the tree you will find two cocoa-nuts. You must not throw them down, but carry them in your hands; and you must descend as you went up, using your legs only.'

'I shall try, at least,' said Pivi. And up he went, but it was very difficult, and down he came.

'Here are your cocoa-nuts,' he said, presenting them to the woman.

'Now, Pivi, put them in the shed where you lay, and when the sun sets to cool himself in the sea and rise again not so hot in the dawn you must go and take the nuts.'

All day Pivi played about in the river, as the natives do, throwing fruit and silvery showers of water at each other. When the sun set he went into the hut. But as he drew near he heard sweet voices talking and laughing within.

'What is that? People chattering in the hut! Perhaps they have taken my cocoa-nuts,' said Pivi to himself.

In he went, and there he found two pretty, laughing, teasing girls. He hunted for his cocoanuts, but none were there.

Down he ran to the river. 'Oh, lady, my nuts have been stolen!' he cried.

'Come with me, Pivi, and there will be nuts for you,' said the woman.

They went back to the hut, where the girls were laughing and playing.

'Nuts for you?' said the woman, 'there are two wives for you, Pivi, take them to your house.'

'Oh, good lady,' cried Pivi, 'how kind you are!'

So they were married and very happy, when in came cross old Kabo.

'Is this Pivi?' said he. 'Yes, it is--no, it isn't. It is not the same Pivi--but there is a kind of likeness. Tell me, are you Pivi?'

'Oh, yes!' said Pivi. 'But I am much better looking, and there are my two wives, are they not beautiful?'

'You are mocking me, Pivi! Your wives? How? Where did you get them? You, with wives!'

Then Pivi told Kabo about the kind woman, and all the wonderful things that had happened to him.

'Well, well!' said Kabo, 'but I want to be handsome too, and to have pretty young wives.'

'But how can we manage that?' asked Pivi.

'Oh, we shall do all the same things over again--play at slinging, and, this time, you shall break my leg, Pivi!'

'With all the pleasure in life,' said Pivi, who was always ready to oblige.

So they went slinging, and Pivi broke Kabo's leg, and Kabo fell into the river, and floated into the bamboo, and the woman blew him out, just as before. Then she picked up Kabo, and put him in the shed, and told him what to do when the Black Ant came, and what to do when the Red Ant came. But he didn't!

When the Black Ant came, he shook himself, and behold, he had a twisted leg, and a hump back, and was as black as the ant.

Then he ran to the woman.

'Look, what a figure I am!' he said; but she only told him to climb the tree, as she had told Pivi.

But Kabo climbed with both hands and feet, and he threw down the nuts, instead of carrying them down, and he put them in the hut. And when he went back for them there he found two horrid old black hags, wrangling, and scolding, and scratching! So back he went to Pivi with his two beautiful wives, and Pivi was very sorry, but what could he do? Nothing, but sit and cry.

So, one day, Kabo came and asked Pivi to sail in his canoe to a place where he knew of a great big shell-fish, enough to feed on for a week. Pivi went, and deep in the clear water they saw a monstrous shell-fish, like an oyster, as big as a rock, with the shell wide open.

'We shall catch it, and dry it, and kipper it,' said Pivi, 'and give a dinner to all our friends!'

'I shall dive for it, and break it off the rock,' said Kabo, 'and then you must help me to drag it up into the canoe.'

There the shell-fish lay and gaped, but Kabo, though he dived in, kept well out of the way of the beast.

Up he came, puffing and blowing: 'Oh, Pivi,' he cried, 'I cannot move it. Jump in and try yourself!'

Pivi dived, with his spear, and the shell-fish opened its shell wider yet, and sucked, and Pivi disappeared into its mouth, and the shell shut up with a snap!

Kabo laughed like a fiend, and then went home.

'Where is Pivi?' asked the two pretty girls. Kabo pretended to cry, and told how Pivi had been swallowed.

'But dry your tears, my darlings,' said Kabo, 'I will be your husband, and my wives shall be your slaves. Everything is for the best, in the best of all possible worlds.'

'No, no!' cried the girls, 'we love Pivi. We do not love anyone else. We shall stay at home, and weep for Pivi!'

'Wretched idiots!' cried Kabo; 'Pivi was a scoundrel who broke my leg, and knocked me into the river.'

Then a little cough was heard at the door, and Kabo trembled, for he knew it was the cough of Pivi!

'Ah, dear Pivi!' cried Kabo, rushing to the door. 'What joy! I was trying to console your dear wives.'

Pivi said not one word. He waved his hand, and five and twenty of his friends came trooping down the hill. They cut up Kabo into little pieces. Pivi turned round, and there was the good woman of the river.

'Pivi,' she said, 'how did you get out of the living tomb into which Kabo sent you?'

'I had my spear with me,' said Pivi. 'It was quite dry inside the shell, and I worked away at the fish with my spear, till he saw reason to open his shell, and out I came.' Then the good woman laughed; and Pivi and his two wives lived happy ever afterwards.

[Moncelon. Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie. Series iii. vol. ix., pp. 613-365.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

The Elf Maiden

Once upon a time two young men living in a small village fell in love with the same girl. During the winter, it was all night except for an hour or so about noon, when the darkness seemed a little less dark, and then they used to see which of them could tempt her out for a sleigh ride with the Northern Lights flashing above them, or which could persuade her to come to a dance in some neighbouring barn. But when the spring began, and the light grew longer, the hearts of the villagers leapt at the sight of the sun, and a day was fixed for the boats to be brought out, and the great nets to be spread in the bays of some islands that lay a few miles to the north. Everybody went on this expedition, and the two young men and the girl went with them.

They all sailed merrily across the sea chattering like a flock of magpies, or singing their favourite songs. And when they reached the shore, what an unpacking there was! For this was a noted fishing ground, and here they would live, in little wooden huts, till autumn and bad weather came round again.

The maiden and the two young men happened to share the same hut with some friends, and fished daily from the same boat. And as time went on, one of the youths remarked that the girl took less notice of him than she did of his companion. At first he tried to think that he was dreaming, and for a long while he kept his eyes shut very tight to what he did not want to see, but in spite of his efforts, the truth managed to wriggle through, and then the young man gave up trying to deceive himself, and set about finding some way to get the better of his rival.

The plan that he hit upon could not be carried out for some months; but the longer the young man thought of it, the more pleased he was with it, so he made no sign of his feelings, and waited patiently till the moment came. This was the very day that they were all going to leave the islands, and sail back to the mainland for the winter. In the bustle and hurry of departure, the cunning fisherman contrived that their boat should be the last to put off, and when everything was ready, and the sails about to be set, he suddenly called out:

'Oh, dear, what shall I do! I have left my best knife behind in the hut. Run, like a good fellow, and get it for me, while I raise the anchor and loosen the tiller.'

Not thinking any harm, the youth jumped back on shore and made his way up the steep hank. At the door of the hut he stopped and looked back, then started and gazed in horror. The head of the boat stood out to sea, and he was left alone on the island.

Yes, there was no doubt of it--he was quite alone; and he had nothing to help him except the knife which his comrade had purposely dropped on the ledge of the window. For some minutes he was too stunned by the treachery of his friend to think about anything at all, but after a while he shook himself awake, and determined that he would manage to keep alive somehow, if it were only to revenge himself.

So he put the knife in his pocket and went off to a part of the island which was not so bare as the rest, and had a small grove of trees. From one of these he cut himself a bow, which he strung with a piece of cord that had been left lying about the huts.

When this was ready the young man ran down to the shore and shot one or two sea-birds, which he plucked and cooked for supper.

In this way the months slipped by, and Christmas came round again. The evening before, the youth went down to the rocks and into the copse, collecting all the drift wood the sea had washed up or the gale had blown down, and he piled it up in a great stack outside the door, so that he might not have to fetch any all the next day. As soon as his task was done, he paused and looked out towards the mainland, thinking of Christmas Eve last year, and the merry dance they had had. The night was still and cold, and by the help of the Northern Lights he could almost sea across to the opposite coast, when, suddenly, he noticed a boat, which seemed steering straight for the island. At first he could hardly stand for joy, the chance of speaking to another man was so delightful; but as the boat drew near there was something, he could not tell what, that was different from the boats which he had been used to all his life, and when it touched the shore he saw that the people that filled it were beings of another world than ours. Then he hastily stepped behind the wood stack, and waited for what might happen next.

The strange folk one by one jumped on to the rocks, each bearing a load of something that they wanted. Among the women he remarked two young girls, more beautiful and better dressed than any of the rest, carrying between them two great baskets full of provisions. The young man peeped out cautiously to see what all this crowd could be doing inside the tiny hut, but in a moment he drew back again, as the girls returned, and looked about as if they wanted to find out what sort of a place the island was.

Their sharp eyes soon discovered the form of a man crouching behind the bundles of sticks, and at first they felt a little frightened, and started as if they would run away. But the youth remained so still, that they took courage and laughed gaily to each other. 'What a strange creature, let us try what he is made of,' said one, and she stooped down and gave him a pinch.

Now the young man had a pin sticking in the sleeve of his jacket, and the moment the girl's hand touched him she pricked it so sharply that the blood came. The girl screamed so loudly that the people all ran out of their huts to see what was the matter. But directly they caught sight of the man they turned and fled in the other direction, and picking up the goods they had brought with them scampered as fast as they could down to the shore. In an instant, boat, people, and goods had vanished completely.

In their hurry they had, however, forgotten two things: a bundle of keys which lay on the table, and the girl whom the pin had pricked, and who now stood pale and helpless beside the wood stack.

'You will have to make me your wife,' she said at last, 'for you have drawn my blood, and I belong to you.'

'Why not? I am quite willing,' answered he. 'But how do you suppose we can manage to live till summer comes round again?'

'Do not be anxious about that,' said the girl; 'if you will only marry me all will be well. I am very rich, and all my family are rich also.'

Then the young man gave her his promise to make her his wife, and the girl fulfilled her part of the bargain, and food was plentiful on the island all through the long winter months, though he never knew how it got there. And by-and-by it was spring once more, and time for the fisher-folk to sail from the mainland.

'Where are we to go now?' asked the girl, one day, when the sun seemed brighter and the wind softer than usual.

'I do not care where I go,' answered the young man; 'what do you think?'

The girl replied that she would like to go somewhere right at the other end of the island, and build a house, far away from the huts of the fishing-folk. And he consented, and that very day they set off in search of a sheltered spot on the banks of a stream, so that it would be easy to get water.

In a tiny bay, on the opposite side of the island they found the very thing, which seemed to have been made on purpose for them; and as they were tired with their long walk, they laid themselves down on a bank of moss among some birches and prepared to have a good night's rest, so as to be fresh for work next day. But before she went to sleep the girl turned to her husband, and said: 'If in your dreams you fancy that you hear strange noises, be sure you do not stir, or get up to see what it is.'

'Oh, it is not likely we shall hear any noises in such a quiet place,' answered he, and fell sound asleep.

Suddenly he was awakened by a great clatter about his ears, as if all the workmen in the world were sawing and hammering and building close to him. He was just going to spring up and go to see what it meant, when he luckily remembered his wife's words and lay still. But the time till morning seemed very long, and with the first ray of sun they both rose, and pushed aside the branches of the birch trees. There, in the very place they had chosen, stood a beautiful house--doors and windows, and everything all complete!

'Now you must fix on a spot for your cow-stalls,' said the girl, when they had breakfasted off wild cherries; 'and take care it is the proper size, neither too large nor too small.' And the husband did as he was bid, though he wondered what use a cow-house could be, as they had no cows to put in it. But as he was a little afraid of his wife, who knew so much more than he, he asked no questions.

This night also he was awakened by the same sounds as before, and in the morning they found, near the stream, the most beautiful cow-house that ever was seen, with stalls and milk-pails and stools all complete, indeed, everything that a cow-house could possibly want, except the cows. Then the girl bade him measure out the ground for a storehouse, and this, she said, might be as large as he pleased; and when the storehouse was ready she proposed that they should set off to pay her parents a visit.

The old people welcomed them heartily, and summoned their neighbours, for many miles round, to a great feast in their honour. In fact, for several weeks there was no work done on the farm at all; and at length the young man and his wife grew tired of so much play, and declared that they must return to their own home. But, before they started on the journey, the wife whispered to her husband: 'Take care to jump over the threshold as quick as you can, or it will be the worse for you.'

The young man listened to her words, and sprang over the threshold like an arrow from a bow; and it was well he did, for, no sooner was he on the other side, than his father-in-law threw a great hammer at him, which would have broken both his legs, if it had only touched them.

When they had gone some distance on the road home, the girl turned to her husband and said: 'Till you step inside the house, be sure you do not look back, whatever you may hear or see.'

And the husband promised, and for a while all was still; and he thought no more about the matter till he noticed at last that the nearer he drew to the house the louder grew the noise of the trampling of feet behind him. As he laid his hand upon the door he thought he was safe, and turned to look. There, sure enough, was a vast herd of cattle, which had been sent after him by his father-in-law when he found that his daughter had been cleverer than he. Half of the herd were already through the fence and cropping the grass on the banks of the stream, but half still remained outside and faded into nothing, even as he watched them.

However, enough cattle were left to make the young man rich, and he and his wife lived happily together, except that every now and then the girl vanished from his sight, and never told him where she had been. For a long time he kept silence about it; but one day, when he had been complaining of her absence, she said to him: 'Dear husband, I am bound to go, even against my will, and there is only one way to stop me. Drive a nail into the threshold, and then I can never pass in or out.'

And so he did.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

How Some Wild Animals Became Tame Ones

Once upon a time there lived a miller who was so rich that, when he was going to be married, he asked to the feast not only his own friends but also the wild animals who dwelt in the hills and woods round about. The chief of the bears, the wolves, the foxes, the horses, the cows, the goats, the sheep, and the reindeer, all received invitations; and as they were not accustomed to weddings they were greatly pleased and flattered, and sent back messages in the politest language that they would certainly be there.

The first to start on the morning of the wedding-day was the bear, who always liked to be punctual; and, besides, he had a long way to go, and his hair, being so thick and rough, needed a good brushing before it was fit to be seen at a party. However, he took care to awaken very early, and set off down the road with a light heart. Before he had walked very far he met a boy who came whistling along, hitting at the tops of the flowers with a stick.

'Where are you going?' said he, looking at the bear in surprise, for he was an old acquaintance, and not generally so smart.

'Oh, just to the miller's marriage,' answered the bear carelessly. 'Of course, I would much rather stay at home, but the miller was so anxious I should be there that I really could not refuse.'

'Don't go, don't go!' cried the boy. 'If you do you will never come back! You have got the most beautiful skin in the world--just the kind that everyone is wanting, and they will be sure to kill you and strip you of it.'

'I had not thought of that,' said the bear, whose face turned white, only nobody could see it. 'If you are certain that they would be so wicked--but perhaps you are jealous because nobody has invited you?'

'Oh, nonsense!' replied the boy angrily, 'do as you see. It is your skin, and not mine; I don't care what becomes of it!' And he walked quickly on with his head in the air.

The bear waited until he was out of sight, and then followed him slowly, for he felt in his heart that the boy's advice was good, though he was too proud to say so.

The boy soon grew tired of walking along the road, and turned off into the woods, where there were bushes he could jump and streams he could wade; but he had not gone far before he met the wolf.

'Where are you going?' asked he, for it was not the first time he had seen him.

'Oh, just to the miller's marriage,' answered the wolf, as the bear had done before him. 'It is rather tiresome, of course--weddings are always so stupid; but still one must be good-natured!'

'Don't go!' said the boy again. 'Your skin is so thick and warm, and winter is not far off now. They will kill you, and strip it from you.'

The wolf's jaw dropped in astonishment and terror. 'Do you really think that would happen?' he gasped.

'Yes, to be sure, I do,' answered the boy. 'But it is your affair, not mine. So good-morning,' and on he went. The wolf stood still for a few minutes, for he was trembling all over, and then crept quietly back to his cave.

Next the boy met the fox, whose lovely coat of silvery grey was shining in the sun.

'You look very fine!' said the boy, stopping to admire him, 'are you going to the miller's wedding too?'

'Yes,' answered the fox; 'it is a long journey to take for such a thing as that, but you know what the miller's friends are like--so dull and heavy! It is only kind to go and amuse them a little.'

'You poor fellow,' said the boy pityingly. 'Take my advice and stay at home. If you once enter the miller's gate his dogs will tear you in pieces.'

'Ah, well, such things have occurred, I know,' replied the fox gravely. And without saying any more he trotted off the way he had come.

His tail had scarcely disappeared, when a great noise of crashing branches was heard, and up bounded the horse, his black skin glistening like satin.

'Good-morning,' he called to the boy as he galloped past, 'I can't wait to talk to you now. I have promised the miller to be present at his wedding-feast, and they won't sit down till I come.'

'Stop! stop!' cried the boy after him, and there was something in his voice that made the horse pull up. 'What is the matter?' asked he.

'You don't know what you are doing,' said the boy. 'If once you go there you will never gallop through these woods any more. You are stronger than many men, but they will catch you and put ropes round you, and you will have to work and to serve them all the days of your life.'

The horse threw back his head at these words, and laughed scornfully.

'Yes, I am stronger than many men,' answered he, 'and all the ropes in the world would not hold me. Let them bind me as fast as they will, I can always break loose, and return to the forest and freedom.'

And with this proud speech he gave a whisk of his long tail, and galloped away faster than before.

But when he reached the miller's house everything happened as the boy had said. While he was looking at the guests and thinking how much handsomer and stronger he was than any of them, a rope was suddenly flung over his head, and he was thrown down and a bit thrust between his teeth. Then, in spite of his struggles, he was dragged to a stable, and shut up for several days without any food, till his spirit was broken and his coat had lost its gloss. After that he was harnessed to a plough, and had plenty of time to remember all he had lost through not listening to the counsel of the boy.

When the horse had turned a deaf ear to his words the boy wandered idly along, sometimes gathering wild strawberries from a bank, and sometimes plucking wild cherries from a tree, till he reached a clearing in the middle of the forest. Crossing this open space was a beautiful milk-white cow with a wreath of flowers round her neck.

'Good-morning,' she said pleasantly, as she came up to the place where the boy was standing.

'Good-morning,' he returned. 'Where are you going in such a hurry?'

'To the miller's wedding; I am rather late already, for the wreath took such a long time to make, so I can't stop.'

'Don't go,' said the boy earnestly;' when once they have tasted your milk they will never let you leave them, and you will have to serve them all the days of your life.'

'Oh, nonsense; what do you know about it?' answered the cow, who always thought she was wiser than other people. 'Why, I can run twice as fast as any of them! I should like to see anybody try to keep me against my will.' And, without even a polite bow, she went on her way, feeling very much offended.

But everything turned out just as the boy had said. The company had all heard of the fame of the cow's milk, and persuaded her to give them some, and then her doom was sealed. A crowd gathered round her, and held her horns so that she could not use them, and, like the horse, she was shut in the stable, and only let out in the mornings, when a long rope was tied round her head, and she was fastened to a stake in a grassy meadow.

And so it happened to the goat and to the sheep.

Last of all came the reindeer, looking as he always did, as if some serious business was on hand.

'Where are you going?' asked the boy, who by this time was tired of wild cherries, and was thinking of his dinner.

'I am invited to the wedding,' answered the reindeer, 'and the miller has begged me on no account to fail him.'

'O fool!' cried the boy, 'have you no sense at all? Don't you know that when you get there they will hold you fast, for neither beast nor bird is as strong or as swift as you?'

'That is exactly why I am quite safe,' replied the reindeer. 'I am so strong that no one can bind me, and so swift that not even an arrow can catch me. So, goodbye for the present, you will soon see me back.'

But none of the animals that went to the miller's wedding ever came back. And because they were self-willed and conceited, and would not listen to good advice, they and their children have been the servants of men to this very day.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

Fortune and the Wood-Cutter

Several hundreds of years ago there lived in a forest a wood-cutter and his wife and children. He was very poor, having only his axe to depend upon, and two mules to carry the wood he cut to the neighbouring town; but he worked hard, and was always out of bed by five o'clock, summer and winter.

This went on for twenty years, and though his sons were now grown up, and went with their father to the forest, everything seemed to go against them, and they remained as poor as ever. In the end the wood-cutter lost heart, and said to himself:

'What is the good of working like this if I never am a penny the richer at the end? I shall go to the forest no more! And perhaps, if I take to my bed, and do not run after Fortune, one day she may come to me.'

So the next morning he did not get up, and when six o'clock struck, his wife, who had been cleaning the house, went to see what was the matter.

'Are you ill?' she asked wonderingly, surprised at not finding him dressed. 'The cock has crowed ever so often. It is high time for you to get up.'

'Why should I get up?' asked the man, without moving.

'Why? to go to the forest, of course.'

'Yes; and when I have toiled all day I hardly earn enough to give us one meal.'

'But what can we do, my poor husband?' said she. 'It is just a trick of Fortune's, who would never smile upon us.'

'Well, I have had my fill of Fortune's tricks,' cried he. 'If she wants me she can find me here. But I have done with the wood for ever.'

'My dear husband, grief has driven you mad! Do you think Fortune will come to anybody who does not go after her? Dress yourself, and saddle the mules, and begin your work. Do you know that there is not a morsel of bread in the house?'

'I don't care if there isn't, and I am not going to the forest. It is no use your talking; nothing will make me change my mind.'

The distracted wife begged and implored in vain; her husband persisted in staying in bed, and at last, in despair, she left him and went back to her work.

An hour or two later a man from the nearest village knocked at her door, and when she opened it, he said to her: 'Good-morning, mother. I have got a job to do, and I want to know if your husband will lend me your mules, as I see he is not using them, and can lend me a hand himself?'

'He is upstairs; you had better ask him,' answered the woman. And the man went up, and repeated his request.

'I am sorry, neighbour, but I have sworn not to leave my bed, and nothing will make me break my vow.'

'Well, then, will you lend me your two mules? I will pay you something for them.'

'Certainly, neighbour. Take them and welcome.'

So the man left the house, and leading the mules from the stable, placed two sacks on their back, and drove them to a field where he had found a hidden treasure. He filled the sacks with the money, though he knew perfectly well that it belonged to the sultan, and was driving them quietly home again, when he saw two soldiers coming along the road. Now the man was aware that if he was caught he would be condemned to death, so he fled back into the forest. The mules, left to themselves, took the path that led to their master's stable.

The wood-cutter's wife was looking out of the window when the mules drew up before the door, so heavily laden that they almost sank under their burdens. She lost no time in calling her husband, who was still lying in bed.

'Quick! quick! get up as fast as you can. Our two mules have returned with sacks on their backs, so heavily laden with something or other that the poor beasts can hardly stand up.'

'Wife, I have told you a dozen times already that I am not going to get up. Why can't you leave me in peace?'

As she found she could get no help from her husband the woman took a large knife and cut the cords which bound the sacks on to the animals' backs. They fell at once to the ground, and out poured a rain of gold pieces, till the little court-yard shone like the sun.

'A treasure!' gasped the woman, as soon as she could speak from surprise. 'A treasure!' And she ran off to tell her husband.

'Get up! get up!' she cried. 'You were quite right not to go to the forest, and to await Fortune in your bed; she has come at last! Our mules have returned home laden with all the gold in the world, and it is now lying in the court. No one in the whole country can be as rich as we are!'

In an instant the wood-cutter was on his feet, and running to the court, where he paused dazzled by the glitter of the coins which lay around him.

'You see, my dear wife, that I was right,' he said at last. 'Fortune is so capricious, you can never count on her. Run after her, and she is sure to fly from you; stay still, and she is sure to come.'

[Traditions Populaires de l'Asie Mineure.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

The Enchanted Head

Once upon a time an old woman lived in a small cottage near the sea with her two daughters. They were very poor, and the girls seldom left the house, as they worked all day long making veils for the ladies to wear over their faces, and every morning, when the veils were finished, the other took them over the bridge and sold them in the city. Then she bought the food that they needed for the day, and returned home to do her share of veil-making.

One morning the old woman rose even earlier than usual, and set off for the city with her wares. She was just crossing the bridge when, suddenly, she knocked up against a human head, which she had never seen there before. The woman started back in horror; but what was her surprise when the head spoke, exactly as if it had a body joined on to it.

'Take me with you, good mother!' it said imploringly; 'take me with you back to your house.'

At the sound of these words the poor woman nearly went mad with terror. Have that horrible thing always at home? Never! never! And she turned and ran back as fast as she could, not knowing that the head was jumping, dancing, and rolling after her. But when she reached her own door it bounded in before her, and stopped in front of the fire, begging and praying to be allowed to stay.

All that day there was no food in the house, for the veils had not been sold, and they had no money to buy anything with. So they all sat silent at their work, inwardly cursing the head which was the cause of their misfortunes.

When evening came, and there was no sign of supper, the head spoke, for the first time that day:

'Good mother, does no one ever eat here? During all the hours I have spent in your house not a creature has touched anything.'

'No,' answered the old woman, 'we are not eating anything.'

'And why not, good mother?'

'Because we have no money to buy any food.'

'Is it your custom never to eat?'

'No, for every morning I go into the city to sell my veils, and with the few shillings I get for them I buy all we want. To-day I did not cross the bridge, so of course I had nothing for food.'

'Then I am the cause of your having gone hungry all day?' asked the head.

'Yes, you are,' answered the old woman.

'Well, then, I will give you money and plenty of it, if you will only do as I tell you. In an hour, as the clock strikes twelve, you must be on the bridge at the place where you met me. When you get there call out "Ahmed," three times, as loud as you can. Then a negro will appear, and you must say to him: "The head, your master, desires you to open the trunk, and to give me the green purse which you will find in it."'

'Very well, my lord,' said the old woman, 'I will set off at once for the bridge.' And wrapping her veil round her she went out.

Midnight was striking as she reached the spot where she had met the head so many hours before.

'Ahmed! Ahmed! Ahmed!' cried she, and immediately a huge negro, as tall as a giant, stood on the bridge before her.

'What do you want?' asked he.

'The head, your master, desires you to open the trunk, and to give me the green purse which you will find in it.'

'I will be back in a moment, good mother,' said he. And three minutes later he placed a purse full of sequins in the old woman's hand.

No one can imagine the joy of the whole family at the sight of all this wealth. The tiny, tumble-down cottage was rebuilt, the girls had new dresses, and their mother ceased selling veils. It was such a new thing to them to have money to spend, that they were not as careful as they might have been, and by-and-by there was not a single coin left in the purse. When this happened their hearts sank within them, and their faces fell.

'Have you spent your fortune?' asked the head from its corner, when it saw how sad they looked. 'Well, then, go at midnight, good mother, to the bridge, and call out "Mahomet!" three times, as loud as you can. A negro will appear in answer, and you must tell him to open the trunk, and to give you the red purse which he will find there.'

The old woman did not need twice telling, but set off at once for the bridge.

'Mahomet! Mahomet! Mahomet!' cried she, with all her might; and in an instant a negro, still larger than the last, stood before her.

'What do you want?' asked he.

'The head, your master, bids you open the trunk, and to give me the red purse which you will find in it.'

'Very well, good mother, I will do so,' answered the negro, and, the moment after he had vanished, he reappeared with the purse in his hand.

This time the money seemed so endless that the old woman built herself a new house, and filled it with the most beautiful things that were to be found in the shops. Her daughters were always wrapped in veils that looked as if they were woven out of sunbeams, and their dresses shone with precious stones. The neighbours wondered where all this sudden wealth had sprung from, but nobody knew about the head.

'Good mother,' said the head, one day, 'this morning you are to go to the city and ask the sultan to give me his daughter for my bride.'

'Do what?' asked the old woman in amazement. 'How can I tell the sultan that a head without a body wishes to become his son-in-law? They will think that I am mad, and I shall be hooted from the palace and stoned by the children.'

'Do as I bid you,' replied the head; 'it is my will.'

The old woman was afraid to say anything more, and, putting on her richest clothes, started for the palace. The sultan granted her an audience at once, and, in a trembling voice, she made her request.

'Are you mad, old woman?' said the sultan, staring at her.

'The wooer is powerful, O Sultan, and nothing is impossible to him.'

'Is that true?'

'It is, O Sultan; I swear it,' answered she.

'Then let him show his power by doing three things, and I will give him my daughter.'

'Command, O gracious prince,' said she.

'Do you see that hill in front of the palace?' asked the sultan.

'I see it,' answered she.

'Well, in forty days the man who has sent you must make that hill vanish, and plant a beautiful garden in its place. That is the first thing. Now go, and tell him what I say.'

So the old woman returned and told the head the sultan's first condition.

'It is well,' he replied; and said no more about it.

For thirty-nine days the head remained in its favourite corner. The old woman thought that the task set before was beyond his powers, and that no more would be heard about the sultan's daughter. But on the thirty-ninth evening after her visit to the palace, the head suddenly spoke.

'Good mother,' he said, 'you must go to-night to the bridge, and when you are there cry "Ali! Ali! Ali!" as loud as you can. A negro will appear before you, and you will tell him that he is to level the hill, and to make, in its place, the most beautiful garden that ever was seen.'

'I will go at once,' answered she.

It did not take her long to reach the bridge which led to the city, and she took up her position on the spot where she had first seen the head, and called loudly 'Ali! Ali! Ali.' In an instant a negro appeared before her, of such a huge size that the old woman was half frightened; but his voice was mild and gentle as he said: 'What is it that you want?'

'Your master bids you level the hill that stands in front of the sultan's palace and in its place to make the most beautiful garden in the world.'

'Tell my master he shall be obeyed,' replied Ali; 'it shall be done this moment.' And the old woman went home and gave Ali's message to the head.

Meanwhile the sultan was in his palace waiting till the fortieth day should dawn, and wondering that not one spadeful of earth should have been dug out of the hill.

'If that old woman has been playing me a trick,' thought he, 'I will hang her! And I will put up a gallows to-morrow on the hill itself.'

But when to-morrow came there was no hill, and when the sultan opened his eyes he could not imagine why the room was so much lighter than usual, and what was the reason of the sweet smell of flowers that filled the air.

'Can there be a fire?' he said to himself; 'the sun never came in at this window before. I must get up and see.' So he rose and looked out, and underneath him flowers from every part of the world were blooming, and creepers of every colour hung in chains from tree to tree.

Then he remembered. 'Certainly that old woman's son is a clever magician!' cried he; 'I never met anyone as clever as that. What shall I give him to do next? Let me think. Ah! I know.' And he sent for the old woman, who by the orders of the head, was waiting below.

'Your son has carried out my wishes very nicely,' he said. 'The garden is larger and better than that of any other king. But when I walk across it I shall need some place to rest on the other side. In forty days he must build me a palace, in which every room shall be filled with different furniture from a different country, and each more magnificent than any room that ever was seen.' And having said this he turned round and went away.

'Oh! he will never be able to do that,' thought she; 'it is much more difficult than the hill.' And she walked home slowly, with her head bent.

'Well, what am I to do next?' asked the head cheerfully. And the old woman told her story.

'Dear me! is that all? why it is child's play,' answered the head; and troubled no more about the palace for thirty-nine days. Then he told the old woman to go to the bridge and call for Hassan.

'What do you want, old woman?' asked Hassan, when he appeared, for he was not as polite as the others had been.

'Your master commands you to build the most magnificent palace that ever was seen,' replied she; 'and you are to place it on the borders of the new garden.'

'He shall be obeyed,' answered Hassan. And when the sultan woke he saw, in the distance, a palace built of soft blue marble, resting on slender pillars of pure gold.

'That old woman's son is certainly all-powerful,' cried he; 'what shall I bid him do now?' And after thinking some time he sent for the old woman, who was expecting the summons.

'The garden is wonderful, and the palace the finest in the world,' said he, 'so fine, that my servants would cut but a sorry figure in it. Let your son fill it with forty slaves whose beauty shall be unequalled, all exactly like each other, and of the same height.'

This time the king thought he had invented something totally impossible, and was quite pleased with himself for his cleverness.

Thirty-nine days passed, and at midnight on the night of the last the old woman was standing on the bridge.

'Bekir! Bekir! Bekir!' cried she. And a negro appeared, and inquired what she wanted.

'The head, your master, bids you find forty slaves of unequalled beauty, and of the same height, and place them in the sultan's palace on the other side of the garden.'

And when, on the morning of the fortieth day, the sultan went to the blue palace, and was received by the forty slaves, he nearly lost his wits from surprise.

'I will assuredly give my daughter to the old woman's son,' thought he. 'If I were to search all the world through I could never find a more powerful son-in-law.'

And when the old woman entered his presence he informed her that he was ready to fulfil his promise, and she was to bid her son appear at the palace without delay.

This command did not at all please the old woman, though, of course, she made no objections to the sultan.

'All has gone well so far,' she grumbled, when she told her story to the head,' but what do you suppose the sultan will say, when he sees his daughter's husband?'

'Never mind what he says! Put me on a silver dish and carry me to the palace.'

So it was done, though the old woman's heart beat as she laid down the dish with the head upon it.

At the sight before him the king flew into a violent rage.

'I will never marry my daughter to such a monster,' he cried. But the princess placed her head gently on his arm.

'You have given your word, my father, and you cannot break it,' said she.

'But, my child, it is impossible for you to marry such a being,' exclaimed the sultan.

'Yes, I will marry him. He had a beautiful head, and I love him already.'

So the marriage was celebrated, and great feasts were held in the palace, though the people wept tears to think of the sad fate of their beloved princess. But when the merry-making was done, and the young couple were alone, the head suddenly disappeared, or, rather, a body was added to it, and one of the handsomest young men that ever was seen stood before the princess.

'A wicked fairy enchanted me at my birth,' he said, 'and for the rest of the world I must always be a head only. But for you, and you only, I am a man like other men.'

'And that is all I care about,' said the princess.

[Traditions populaires de toutes les nations (Asie Mineure)].

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

The Sister of the Sun

A long time ago there lived a young prince whose favourite playfellow was the son of the gardener who lived in the grounds of the palace. The king would have preferred his choosing a friend from the pages who were brought up at court; but the prince would have nothing to say to them, and as he was a spoilt child, and allowed his way in all things, and the gardener's boy was quiet and well-behaved, he was suffered to be in the palace, morning, noon, and night.

The game the children loved the best was a match at archery, for the king had given them two bows exactly alike, and they would spend whole days in trying to see which could shoot the highest. This is always very dangerous, and it was a great wonder they did not put their eyes out; but somehow or other they managed to escape.

One morning, when the prince had done his lessons, he ran out to call his friend, and they both hurried off to the lawn which was their usual playground. They took their bows out of the little hut where their toys were kept, and began to see which could shoot the highest. At last they happened to let fly their arrows both together, and when they fell to earth again the tail feather of a golden hen was found sticking in one. Now the question began to arise whose was the lucky arrow, for they were both alike, and look as closely as you would you could see no difference between them. The prince declared that the arrow was his, and the gardener's boy was quite sure it was HIS--and on this occasion he was perfectly right; but, as they could not decide the matter, they went straight to the king.

When the king had heard the story, he decided that the feather belonged to his son; but the other boy would not listen to this and claimed the feather for himself. At length the king's patience gave way, and he said angrily:

'Very well; if you are so sure that the feather is yours, yours it shall be; only you will have to seek till you find a golden hen with a feather missing from her tail. And if you fail to find her your head will be the forfeit.'

The boy had need of all his courage to listen silently to the king's words. He had no idea where the golden hen might be, or even, if he discovered that, how he was to get to her. But there was nothing for it but to do the king's bidding, and he felt that the sooner he left the palace the better. So he went home and put some food into a bag, and then set forth, hoping that some accident might show him which path to take.

After walking for several hours he met a fox, who seemed inclined to be friendly, and the boy was so glad to have anyone to talk to that he sat down and entered into conversation.

'Where are you going?' asked the fox.

'I have got to find a golden hen who has lost a feather out of her tail,' answered the boy; 'but I don't know where she lives or how I shall catch her!'

'Oh, I can show you the way!' said the fox, who was really very good-natured. 'Far towards the east, in that direction, lives a beautiful maiden who is called "The Sister of the Sun." She has three golden hens in her house. Perhaps the feather belongs to one of them.'

The boy was delighted at this news, and they walked on all day together, the fox in front, and the boy behind. When evening came they lay down to sleep, and put the knapsack under their heads for a pillow.

Suddenly, about midnight, the fox gave a low whine, and drew nearer to his bedfellow. 'Cousin,' he whispered very low, 'there is someone coming who will take the knapsack away from me. Look over there!' And the boy, peeping through the bushes, saw a man.

'Oh, I don't think he will rob us!' said the boy; and when the man drew near, he told them his story, which so much interested the stranger that he asked leave to travel with them, as he might be of some use. So when the sun rose they set out again, the fox in front as before, the man and boy following.

After some hours they reached the castle of the Sister of the Sun, who kept the golden hens among her treasures. They halted before the gate and took counsel as to which of them should go in and see the lady herself.

'I think it would be best for me to enter and steal the hens,' said the fox; but this did not please the boy at all.

'No, it is my business, so it is right that I should go,' answered he.

'You will find it a very difficult matter to get hold of the hens,' replied the fox.

'Oh, nothing is likely to happen to me,' returned the boy.

'Well, go then,' said the fox, 'but be careful not to make any mistake. Steal only the hen which has the feather missing from her tail, and leave the others alone.'

The man listened, but did not interfere, and the boy entered the court of the palace.

He soon spied the three hens strutting proudly about, though they were really anxiously wondering if there were not some grains lying on the ground that they might be glad to eat. And as the last one passed by him, he saw she had one feather missing from her tail.

At this sight the youth darted forward and seized the hen by the neck so that she could not struggle. Then, tucking her comfortably under his arm, he made straight for the gate. Unluckily, just as he was about to go through it he looked back and caught a glimpse of wonderful splendours from an open door of the palace. 'After all, there is no hurry,' he said to himself; 'I may as well see something now I AM here,' and turned back, forgetting all about the hen, which escaped from under his arm, and ran to join her sisters.

He was so much fascinated by the sight of all the beautiful things which peeped through the door that he scarcely noticed that he had lost the prize he had won; and he did not remember there was such a thing as a hen in the world when he beheld the Sister of the Sun sleeping on a bed before him.

For some time he stood staring; then he came to himself with a start, and feeling that he had no business there, softly stole away, and was fortunate enough to recapture the hen, which he took with him to the gate. On the threshold he stopped again. 'Why should I not look at the Sister of the Sun?' he thought to himself; 'she is asleep, and will never know.' And he turned back for the second time and entered the chamber, while the hen wriggled herself free as before. When he had gazed his fill he went out into the courtyard and picked up his hen who was seeking for corn.

As he drew near the gate he paused. 'Why did I not give her a kiss?' he said to himself; 'I shall never kiss any woman so beautiful.' And he wrung his hands with regret, so that the hen fell to the ground and ran away.

'But I can do it still!' he cried with delight, and he rushed back to the chamber and kissed the sleeping maiden on the forehead. But, alas! when he came out again he found that the hen had grown so shy that she would not let him come near her. And, worse than that, her sisters began to cluck so loud that the Sister of the Sun was awakened by the noise. She jumped up in haste from her bed, and going to the door she said to the boy:

'You shall never, never, have my hen till you bring me back my sister who was carried off by a giant to his castle, which is a long way off.'

Slowly and sadly the youth left the palace and told his story to his friends, who were waiting outside the gate, how he had actually held the hen three times in his arms and had lost her.

'I knew that we should not get off so easily,' said the fox, shaking his head; 'but there is no more time to waste. Let us set off at once in search of the sister. Luckily, I know the way.'

They walked on for many days, till at length the fox, who, as usual, was going first, stopped suddenly.

'The giant's castle is not far now,' he said, 'but when we reach it you two must remain outside while I go and fetch the princess. Directly I bring her out you must both catch hold of her tight, and get away as fast as you can; while I return to the castle and talk to the giants--for there are many of them--so that they may not notice the escape of the princess.'

A few minutes later they arrived at the castle, and the fox, who had often been there before, slipped in without difficulty. There were several giants, both young and old, in the hall, and they were all dancing round the princess. As soon as they saw the fox they cried out: 'Come and dance too, old fox; it is a long time since we have seen you.'

So the fox stood up, and did his steps with the best of them; but after a while he stopped and said:

'I know a charming new dance that I should like to show you; but it can only be done by two people. If the princess will honour me for a few minutes, you will soon see how it is done.'

'Ah, that is delightful; we want something new,' answered they, and placed the princess between the outstretched arms of the fox. In one instant he had knocked over the great stand of lights that lighted the hall, and in the darkness had borne the princess to the gate. His comrades seized hold of her, as they had been bidden, and the fox was back again in the hall before anyone had missed him. He found the giants busy trying to kindle a fire and get some light; but after a bit someone cried out:

'Where is the princess?'

'Here, in my arms,' replied the fox. 'Don't be afraid; she is quite safe.' And he waited until he thought that his comrades had gained a good start, and put at least five or six mountains between themselves and the giants. Then he sprang through the door, calling, as he went: 'The maiden is here; take her if you can!'

At these words the giants understood that their prize had escaped, and they ran after the fox as fast as their great legs could carry them, thinking that they should soon come up with the fox, who they supposed had the princess on his back. The fox, on his side, was far too clever to choose the same path that his friends had taken, but would in and out of the forest, till at last even HE was tired out, and fell fast asleep under a tree. Indeed, he was so exhausted with his day's work that he never heard the approach of the giants, and their hands were already stretched out to seize his tail when his eyes opened, and with a tremendous bound he was once more beyond their reach. All the rest of the night the fox ran and ran; but when bright red spread over the east, he stopped and waited till the giants were close upon him. Then he turned, and said quietly: 'Look, there is the Sister of the Sun!'

The giants raised their eyes all at once, and were instantly turned into pillars of stone. The fox then made each pillar a low bow, and set off to join his friends.

He knew a great many short cuts across the hills, so it was not long before he came up with them, and all four travelled night and day till they reached the castle of the Sister of the Sun. What joy and feasting there was throughout the palace at the sight of the princess whom they had mourned as dead! and they could not make enough of the boy who had gone through such dangers in order to rescue her. The golden hen was given to him at once, and, more than that, the Sister of the Sun told him that, in a little time, when he was a few years older, she would herself pay a visit to his home and become his wife. The boy could hardly believe his ears when he heard what was in store for him, for his was the most beautiful princess in all the world; and however thick the darkness might be, it fled away at once from the light of a star on her forehead.

So the boy set forth on his journey home, with his friends for company; his heart full of gladness when he thought of the promise of the princess. But, one by one, his comrades dropped off at the places where they had first met him, and he was quite alone when he reached his native town and the gates of the palace. With the golden hen under his arm he presented himself before the king, and told his adventures, and how he was going to have for a wife a princess so wonderful and unlike all other princesses, that the star on her forehead could turn night into day. The king listened silently, and when the boy had done, he said quietly: 'If I find that your story is not true I will have you thrown into a cask of pitch.'

'It is true--every word of it,' answered the boy; and went on to tell that the day and even the hour were fixed when his bride was to come and seek him.

But as the time drew near, and nothing was heard of the princess, the youth became anxious and uneasy, especially when it came to his ears that the great cask was being filled with pitch, and that sticks were laid underneath to make a fire to boil it with. All day long the boy stood at the window, looking over the sea by which the princess must travel; but there were no signs of her, not even the tiniest white sail. And, as he stood, soldiers came and laid hands on him, and led him up to the cask, where a big fire was blazing, and the horrid black pitch boiling and bubbling over the sides. He looked and shuddered, but there was no escape; so he shut his eyes to avoid seeing.

The word was given for him to mount the steps which led to the top of the cask, when, suddenly, some men were seen running with all their might, crying as they went that a large ship with its sails spread was making straight for the city. No one knew what the ship was, or whence it came; but the king declared that he would not have the boy burned before its arrival, there would always be time enough for that.

At length the vessel was safe in port, and a whisper went through the watching crowd that on board was the Sister of the Sun, who had come to marry the young peasant as she had promised. In a few moments more she had landed, and desired to be shown the way to the cottage which her bridegroom had so often described to her; and whither he had been led back by the king's order at the first sign of the ship.

'Don't you know me?' asked the Sister of the Sun, bending over him where he lay, almost driven out of his senses with terror.

'No, no; I don't know you,' answered the youth, without raising his eyes.

'Kiss me,' said the Sister of the Sun; and the youth obeyed her, but still without looking up.

'Don't you know me NOW?' asked she.

'No, I don't know you--I don't know you,' he replied, with the manner of a man whom fear had driven mad.

At this the Sister of the Sun grew rather frightened, and beginning at the beginning, she told him the story of his meeting with her, and how she had come a long way in order to marry him. And just as she had finished in walked the king, to see if what the boy had said was really true. But hardly had he opened the door of the cottage when he was almost blinded by the light that filled it; and he remembered what he had been told about the star on the forehead of the princess. He staggered back as if he had been struck, then a curious feeling took hold of him, which he had never felt before, and falling on his knees before the Sister of the Sun, he implored her to give up all thought of the peasant boy, and to share his throne. But she laughed, and said she had a finer throne of her own, if she wanted to sit on it, and that she was free to please herself, and would have no husband but the boy whom she would never have seen except for the king himself.

'I shall marry him to-morrow,' ended she; and ordered the preparations to be set on foot at once.

When the next day came, however, the bridegroom's father informed the princess that, by the law of the land, the marriage must take place in the presence of the king; but he hoped his majesty would not long delay his arrival. An hour or two passed, and everyone was waiting and watching, when at last the sound of trumpets was heard and a grand procession was seen marching up the street. A chair covered with velvet had been made ready for the king, and he took his seat upon it, and, looking round upon the assembled company, he said:

'I have no wish to forbid this marriage; but, before I can allow it to be celebrated, the bridegroom must prove himself worthy of such a bride by fulfilling three tasks. And the first is that in a single day he must cut down every tree in an entire forest.

The youth stood aghast as the king's words. He had never cut down a tree in his life, and had not the least idea how to begin. And as for a whole forest--! But the princess saw what was passing in his mind, and whispered to him:

'Don't be afraid. In my ship you will find an axe, which you must carry off to the forest. When you have cut down one tree with it just say: "So let the forest fall," and in an instant all the trees will be on the ground. But pick up three chips of the tree you felled, and put them in your pocket.'

And the young man did exactly as he was bid, and soon returned with the three chips safe in his coat.

The following morning the princess declared that she had been thinking about the matter, and that, as she was not a subject of the king, she saw no reason why she should be bound by his laws; and she meant to be married that very day. But the bridegroom's father told her that it was all very well for her to talk like that, but it was quite different for his son, who would pay with his head for any disobedience to the king's commands. However, in consideration of what the youth had done the day before, he hoped his majesty's heart might be softened, especially as he had sent a message that they might expect him at once. With this the bridal pair had to be content, and be as patient as they could till the king's arrival.

He did not keep them long, but they saw by his face that nothing good awaited them.

'The marriage cannot take place,' he said shortly, 'till the youth has joined to their roots all the trees he cut down yesterday.'

This sounded much more difficult than what he had done before, and he turned in despair to the Sister of the Sun.

'It is all right,' she whispered encouragingly. 'Take this water and sprinkle it on one of the fallen trees, and say to it: "So let all the trees of the forest stand upright," and in a moment they will be erect again.'

And the young man did what he was told, and left the forest looking exactly as it had done before.

Now, surely, thought the princess, there was no longer any need to put off the wedding; and she gave orders that all should be ready for the following day. But again the old man interfered, and declared that without the king's permission no marriage could take place. For the third time his majesty was sent for, and for the third time he proclaimed that he could not give his consent until the bridegroom should have slain a serpent which dwelt in a broad river that flowed at the back of the castle. Everyone knew stories of this terrible serpent, though no one had actually seen it; but from time to time a child strayed from home and never came back, and then mothers would forbid the other children to go near the river, which had juicy fruits and lovely flowers growing along its banks.

So no wonder the youth trembled and turned pale when he heard what lay before him.

'You will succeed in this also,' whispered the Sister of the Sun, pressing his hand, 'for in my ship is a magic sword which will cut through everything. Go down to the river and unfasten a boat which lies moored there, and throw the chips into the water. When the serpent rears up its body you will cut off its three heads with one blow of your sword. Then take the tip of each tongue and go with it to-morrow morning into the king's kitchen. If the king himself should enter, just say to him: "Here are three gifts I offer you in return for the services you demanded of me!" and throw the tips of the serpent's tongues at him, and hasten to the ship as fast as your legs will carry you. But be sure you take great care never to look behind you.'

The young man did exactly what the princess had told him. The three chips which he flung into the river became a boat, and, as he steered across the stream, the serpent put up its head and hissed loudly. The youth had his sword ready, and in another second the three heads were bobbing on the water. Guiding his boat till he was beside them, he stooped down and snipped off the ends of the tongues, and then rowed back to the other bank. Next morning he carried them into the royal kitchen, and when the king entered, as was his custom, to see what he was going to have for dinner, the bridegroom flung them in his face, saying: 'Here is a gift for you in return for the services you asked of me.' And, opening the kitchen door, he fled to the ship. Unluckily he missed the way, and in his excitement ran backwards and forwards, without knowing whither he was going. At last, in despair, he looked round, and saw to his amazement that both the city and palace had vanished completely. Then he turned his eyes in the other direction, and, far, far away, he caught sight of the ship with her sails spread, and a fair wind behind her.

This dreadful spectacle seemed to take away his senses, and all day long he wandered about, without knowing where he was going, till, in the evening, he noticed some smoke from a little hut of turf near by. He went straight up to it and cried: 'O mother, let me come in for pity's sake!' The old woman who lived in the hut beckoned to him to enter, and hardly was he inside when he cried again: 'O mother, can you tell me anything of the Sister of the Sun?'

But the woman only shook her head. 'No, I know nothing of her,' said she.

The young man turned to leave the hut, but the old woman stopped him, and, giving him a letter, begged him to carry it to her next eldest sister, saying: 'If you should get tired on the way, take out the letter and rustle the paper.'

This advice surprised the young man a good deal, as he did not see how it could help him; but he did not answer, and went down the road without knowing where he was going. At length he grew so tired he could walk no more; then he remembered what the old woman had said. After he had rustled the leaves only once all fatigue disappeared, and he strode over the grass till he came to another little turf hut.

'Let me in, I pray you, dear mother,' cried he. And the door opened in front of him. 'Your sister has sent you this letter,' he said, and added quickly: 'O mother! can you tell me anything of the Sister of the Sun?'

'No, I know nothing of her,' answered she. But as he turned hopelessly away, she stopped him.

'If you happen to pass my eldest sister's house, will you give her this letter?' said she. 'And if you should get tired on the road, just take it out of your pocket and rustle the paper.'

So the young man put the letter in his pocket, and walked all day over the hills till he reached a little turf hut, exactly like the other two.

'Let me in, I pray you, dear mother,' cried he. And as he entered he added: 'Here is a letter from your sister and--can you tell me anything of the Sister of the Sun?'

'Yes, I can,' answered the old woman. 'She lives in the castle on the Banka. Her father lost a battle only a few days ago because you had stolen his sword from him, and the Sister of the Sun herself is almost dead of grief. But, when you see her, stick a pin into the palm of her hand, and suck the drops of blood that flow. Then she will grow calmer, and will know you again. Only, beware; for before you reach the castle on the Banka fearful things will happen.'

He thanked the old woman with tears of gladness for the good news she had given him, and continued his journey. But he had not gone very far when, at a turn of the road, he met with two brothers, who were quarrelling over a piece of cloth.

'My good men, what are you fighting about?' said he. 'That cloth does not look worth much!'

'Oh, it is ragged enough,' answered they, 'but it was left us by our father, and if any man wraps it round him no one can see him; and we each want it for our own.'

'Let me put it round me for a moment,' said the youth, 'and then I will tell you whose it ought to be!'

The brothers were pleased with this idea, and gave him the stuff; but the moment he had thrown it over his shoulder he disappeared as completely as if he had never been there at all.

Meanwhile the young man walked briskly along, till he came up with two other men, who were disputing over a table-cloth.

'What is the matter?' asked he, stopping in front of them.

'If this cloth is spread on a table,' answered they, 'the table is instantly covered with the most delicious food; and we each want to have it.'

'Let me try the table-cloth,' said the youth, 'and I will tell you whose it ought to be.'

The two men were quite pleased with this idea, and handed him the cloth. He then hastily threw the first piece of stuff round his shoulders and vanished from sight, leaving the two men grieving over their own folly.

The young man had not walked far before he saw two more men standing by the road-side, both grasping the same stout staff, and sometimes one seemed on the point of getting it, and sometimes the other.

'What are you quarrelling about? You could cut a dozen sticks from the wood each just as good as that!' said the young man. And as he spoke the fighters both stopped and looked at him.

'Ah! you may think so,' said one, 'but a blow from one end of this stick will kill a man, while a touch from the other end will bring him back to life. You won't easily find another stick like that!'

'No; that is true,' answered the young man. 'Let me just look at it, and I will tell you whose it ought to be.'

The men were pleased with the idea, and handed him the staff.

'It is very curious, certainly,' said he; 'but which end is it that restores people to life? After all, anyone can be killed by a blow from a stick if it is only hard enough!' But when he was shown the end he threw the stuff over his shoulders and vanished.

At last he saw another set of men, who were struggling for the possession of a pair of shoes.

'Why can't you leave that pair of old shoes alone?' said he. 'Why, you could not walk a yard in them!'

'Yes, they are old enough,' answered they; 'but whoever puts them on and wishes himself at a particular place, gets there without going.'

'That sounds very clever,' said the youth. 'Let me try them, and then I shall be able to tell you whose they ought to be.'

The idea pleased the men, and they handed him the shoes; but the moment they were on his feet he cried:

'I wish to be in the castle on the Banka!' And before he knew it, he was there, and found the Sister of the Sun dying of grief. He knelt down by her side, and pulling a pin he stuck it into the palm of her hand, so that a drop of blood gushed out. This he sucked, as he had been told to do by the old woman, and immediately the princess came to herself, and flung her arms round his neck. Then she told him all her story, and what had happened since the ship had sailed away without him. 'But the worst misfortune of all,' she added, 'was a battle which my father lost because you had vanished with his magic sword; and out of his whole army hardly one man was left.'

'Show me the battle-field,' said he. And she took him to a wild heath, where the dead were lying as they fell, waiting for burial. One by one he touched them with the end of his staff, till at length they all stood before him. Throughout the kingdom there was nothing but joy; and THIS time the wedding was REALLY celebrated. And the bridal pair lived happily in the castle on the Banka till they died.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

The Prince and the Three Fates

Once upon a time a little boy was born to a king who ruled over a great country through which ran a wide river. The king was nearly beside himself with joy, for he had always longed for a son to inherit his crown, and he sent messages to beg all the most powerful fairies to come and see this wonderful baby. In an hour or two, so many were gathered round the cradle, that the child seemed in danger of being smothered; but the king, who was watching the fairies eagerly, was disturbed to see them looking grave. 'Is there anything the matter?' he asked anxiously.

The fairies looked at him, and all shook their heads at once.

'He is a beautiful boy, and it is a great pity; but what IS to happen WILL happen,' said they. 'It is written in the books of fate that he must die, either by a crocodile, or a serpent, or by a dog. If we could save him we would; but that is beyond our power.'

And so saying they vanished.

For a time the king stood where he was, horror-stricken at what he had heard; but, being of a hopeful nature, he began at once to invent plans to save the prince from the dreadful doom that awaited him. He instantly sent for his master builder, and bade him construct a strong castle on the top of a mountain, which should be fitted with the most precious things from the king's own palace, and every kind of toy a child could wish to play with. And, besides, he gave the strictest orders that a guard should walk round the castle night and day.

For four or five years the baby lived in the castle alone with his nurses, taking his airings on the broad terraces, which were surrounded by walls, with a moat beneath them, and only a drawbridge to connect them with the outer world.

One day, when the prince was old enough to run quite fast by himself, he looked from the terrace across the moat, and saw a little soft fluffy ball of a dog jumping and playing on the other side. Now, of course, all dogs had been kept from him for fear that the fairies' prophecy should come true, and he had never even beheld one before. So he turned to the page who was walking behind him, and said:

'What is that funny little thing which is running so fast over there?'

'That is a dog, prince,' answered the page.

'Well, bring me one like it, and we will see which can run the faster.' And he watched the dog till it had disappeared round the corner.

The page was much puzzled to know what to do. He had strict orders to refuse the prince nothing; yet he remembered the prophecy, and felt that this was a serious matter. At last he thought he had better tell the king the whole story, and let him decide the question.

'Oh, get him a dog if he wants one,' said the king, 'he will only cry his heart out if he does not have it.' So a puppy was found, exactly like the other; they might have been twins, and perhaps they were.

Years went by, and the boy and the dog played together till the boy grew tall and strong. The time came at last when he sent a message to his father, saying:

'Why do you keep me shut up here, doing nothing? I know all about the prophecy that was made at my birth, but I would far rather be killed at once than live an idle, useless life here. So give me arms, and let me go, I pray you; me and my dog too.'

And again the king listened to his wishes, and he and his dog were carried in a ship to the other side of the river, which was so broad here it might almost have been the sea. A black horse was waiting for him, tied to a tree, and he mounted and rode away wherever his fancy took him, the dog always at his heels. Never was any prince so happy as he, and he rode and rode till at length he came to a king's palace.

The king who lived in it did not care about looking after his country, and seeing that his people lived cheerful and contented lives. He spent his whole time in making riddles, and inventing plans which he had much better have let alone. At the period when the young prince reached the kingdom he had just completed a wonderful house for his only child, a daughter. It had seventy windows, each seventy feet from the ground, and he had sent the royal herald round the borders of the neighbouring kingdoms to proclaim that whoever could climb up the walls to the window of the princess should win her for his wife.

The fame of the princess's beauty had spread far and wide, and there was no lack of princes who wished to try their fortune. Very funny the palace must have looked each morning, with the dabs of different colour on the white marble as the princes were climbing up the walls. But though some managed to get further than others, nobody was anywhere near the top.

They had already been spending several days in this manner when the young prince arrived, and as he was pleasant to look upon, and civil to talk to, they welcomed him to the house, which had been given to them, and saw that his bath was properly perfumed after his long journey. 'Where do you come from?' they said at last. 'And whose son are you?'

But the young prince had reasons for keeping his own secret, and he answered:

'My father was master of the horse to the king of my country, and after my mother died he married another wife. At first all went well, but as soon as she had babies of her own she hated me, and I fled, lest she should do me harm.'

The hearts of the other young men were touched as soon as they heard this story, and they did everything they could think of to make him forget his past sorrows.

'What are you doing here?' said the youth, one day.

'We spend our whole time climbing up the walls of the palace, trying to reach the windows of the princess,' answered the young men; 'but, as yet, no one has reached within ten feet of them.'

'Oh, let me try too,' cried the prince; 'but to-morrow I will wait and see what you do before I begin.

So the next day he stood where he could watch the young men go up, and he noted the places on the wall that seemed most difficult, and made up his mind that when his turn came he would go up some other way.

Day after day he was to be seen watching the wooers, till, one morning, he felt that he knew the plan of the walls by heart, and took his place by the side of the others. Thanks to what he had learned from the failure of the rest, he managed to grasp one little rough projection after another, till at last, to the envy of his friends, he stood on the sill of the princess's window. Looking up from below, they saw a white hand stretched forth to draw him in.

Then one of the young men ran straight to the king's palace, and said: 'The wall has been climbed, and the prize is won!'

'By whom?' cried the king, starting up from his throne; 'which of the princes may I claim as my son-in-law?'

'The youth who succeeded in climbing to the princess's window is not a prince at all,' answered the young man. 'He is the son of the master of the horse to the great king who dwells across the river, and he fled from his own country to escape from the hatred of his stepmother.'

At this news the king was very angry, for it had never entered his head that anyone BUT a prince would seek to woo his daughter.

'Let him go back to the land whence he came,' he shouted in wrath; 'does he expect me to give my daughter to an exile?' And he began to smash the drinking vessels in his fury; indeed, he quite frightened the young man, who ran hastily home to his friends, and told the youth what the king had said.

Now the princess, who was leaning from her window, heard his words and bade the messenger go back to the king her father and tell him that she had sworn a vow never to eat or drink again if the youth was taken from her. The king was more angry than ever when he received this message, and ordered his guards to go at once to the palace and put the successful wooer to death; but the princess threw herself between him and his murderers.

'Lay a finger on him, and I shall be dead before sunset,' said she; and as they saw that she meant it, they left the palace, and carried the tale to her father.

By this time the king's anger was dying away, and he began to consider what his people would think of him if he broke the promise he had publicly given. So he ordered the princess to be brought before him, and the young man also, and when they entered the throne room he was so pleased with the noble air of the victor that his wrath quite melted away, and he ran to him and embraced him.

'Tell me who you are?' he asked, when he had recovered himself a little, 'for I will never believe that you have not royal blood in your veins.'

But the prince still had his reasons for being silent, and only told the same story. However, the king had taken such a fancy to the youth that he said no more, and the marriage took place the following day, and great herds of cattle and a large estate were given to the young couple.

After a little while the prince said to his wife: 'My life is in the hands of three creatures--a crocodile, a serpent, and a dog.'

'Ah, how rash you are!' cried the princess, throwing her arms round his neck. 'If you know that, how can you have that horrid beast about you? I will give orders to have him killed at once.'

But the prince would not listen to her.

'Kill my dear little dog, who had been my playfellow since he was a puppy?' exclaimed he. 'Oh, never would I allow that.' And all that the princess could get from him was that he would always wear a sword, and have somebody with him when he left the palace.

When the prince and princess had been married a few months, the prince heard that his stepmother was dead, and his father was old and ill, and longing to have his eldest son by his side again. The young man could not remain deaf to such a message, and he took a tender farewell of his wife, and set out on his journey home. It was a long way, and he was forced to rest often on the road, and so it happened that, one night, when he was sleeping in a city on the banks of the great river, a huge crocodile came silently up and made its way along a passage to the prince's room. Fortunately one of his guards woke up as it was trying to steal past them, and shut the crocodile up in a large hall, where a giant watched over it, never leaving the spot except during the night, when the crocodile slept. And this went on for more than a month.

Now, when the prince found that he was not likely to leave his father's kingdom again, he sent for his wife, and bade the messenger tell her that he would await her coming in the town on the banks of the great river. This was the reason why he delayed his journey so long, and narrowly escaped being eaten by the crocodile. During the weeks that followed the prince amused himself as best he could, though he counted the minutes to the arrival of the princess, and when she did come, he at once prepared to start for the court. That very night, however, while he was asleep, the princess noticed something strange in one of the corners of the room. It was a dark patch, and seemed, as she looked, to grow longer and longer, and to be moving slowly towards the cushions on which the prince was lying. She shrank in terror, but, slight as was the noise, the thing heard it, and raised its head to listen. Then she saw it was the long flat head of a serpent, and the recollection of the prophecy rushed into her mind. Without waking her husband, she glided out of bed, and taking up a heavy bowl of milk which stood on a table, laid it on the floor in the path of the serpent--for she knew that no serpent in the world can resist milk. She held her breath as the snake drew near, and watched it throw up its head again as if it was smelling something nice, while its forky tongue darted out greedily. At length its eyes fell upon the milk, and in an instant it was lapping it so fast that it was a wonder the creature did not choke, for it never took its head from the bowl as long as a drop was left in it. After that it dropped on the ground and slept heavily. This was what the princess had been waiting for, and catching up her husband's sword, she severed the snake's head from its body.

The morning after this adventure the prince and princess set out for the king's palace, but found when they reached it, that he was already dead. They gave him a magnificent burial, and then the prince had to examine the new laws which had been made in his absence, and do a great deal of business besides, till he grew quite ill from fatigue, and was obliged to go away to one of his palaces on the banks of the river, in order to rest. Here he soon got better, and began to hunt, and to shoot wild duck with his bow; and wherever he went, his dog, now grown very old, went with him.

One morning the prince and his dog were out as usual, and in chasing their game they drew near the bank of the river. The prince was running at full speed after his dog when he almost fell over something that looked like a log of wood, which was lying in his path. To his surprise a voice spoke to him, and he saw that the thing which he had taken for a branch was really a crocodile.

'You cannot escape from me,' it was saying, when he had gathered his senses again. 'I am your fate, and wherever you go, and whatever you do, you will always find me before you. There is only one means of shaking off my power. If you can dig a pit in the dry sand which will remain full of water, my spell will be broken. If not death will come to you speedily. I give you this one chance. Now go.'

The young man walked sadly away, and when he reached the palace he shut himself into his room, and for the rest of the day refused to see anyone, not even his wife. At sunset, however, as no sound could be heard through the door, the princess grew quite frightened, and made such a noise that the prince was forced to draw back the bolt and let her come in. 'How pale you look,' she cried, 'has anything hurt you? Tell me, I pray you, what is the matter, for perhaps I can help!'

So the prince told her the whole story, and of the impossible task given him by the crocodile.

'How can a sand hole remain full of water?' asked he. 'Of course, it will all run through. The crocodile called it a "chance"; but he might as well have dragged me into the river at once. He said truly that I cannot escape him.'

'Oh, if that is all,' cried the princess, 'I can set you free myself, for my fairy godmother taught me to know the use of plants and in the desert not far from here there grows a little four-leaved herb which will keep the water in the pit for a whole year. I will go in search of it at dawn, and you can begin to dig the hole as soon as you like.

To comfort her husband, the princess had spoken lightly and gaily; but she knew very well she had no light task before her. Still, she was full of courage and energy, and determined that, one way or another, her husband should be saved.

It was still starlight when she left the palace on a snow-white donkey, and rode away from the river straight to the west. For some time she could see nothing before her but a flat waste of sand, which became hotter and hotter as the sun rose higher and higher. Then a dreadful thirst seized her and the donkey, but there was no stream to quench it, and if there had been she would hardly have had time to stop, for she still had far to go, and must be back before evening, or else the crocodile might declare that the prince had not fulfilled his conditions. So she spoke cheering words to her donkey, who brayed in reply, and the two pushed steadily on.

Oh! how glad they both were when they caught sight of a tall rock in the distance. They forgot that they were thirsty, and that the sun was hot; and the ground seemed to fly under their feet, till the donkey stopped of its own accord in the cool shadow. But though the donkey might rest the princess could not, for the plant, as she knew, grew on the very top of the rock, and a wide chasm ran round the foot of it. Luckily she had brought a rope with her, and making a noose at one end, she flung it across with all her might. The first time it slid back slowly into the ditch, and she had to draw it up, and throw it again, but at length the noose caught on something, the princess could not see what, and had to trust her whole weight to this little bridge, which might snap and let her fall deep down among the rocks. And in that case her death was as certain as that of the prince.

But nothing so dreadful happened. The princess got safely to the other side, and then became the worst part of her task. As fast as she put her foot on a ledge of the rock the stone broke away from under her, and left her in the same place as before. Meanwhile the hours were passing, and it was nearly noon.

The heart of the poor princess was filled with despair, but she would not give up the struggle. She looked round till she saw a small stone above her which seemed rather stronger than the rest, and by only poising her foot lightly on those that lay between, she managed by a great effort to reach it. In this way, with torn and bleeding hands, she gained the top; but here such a violent wind was blowing that she was almost blinded with dust, and was obliged to throw herself on the ground, and feel about after the precious herb.

For a few terrible moments she thought that the rock was bare, and that her journey had been to no purpose. Feel where she would, there was nothing but grit and stones, when, suddenly, her fingers touched something soft in a crevice. It was a plant, that was clear; but was it the right one? See she could not, for the wind was blowing more fiercely than ever, so she lay where she was and counted the leaves. One, two, three--yes! yes! there were four! And plucking a leaf she held it safe in her hand while she turned, almost stunned by the wind, to go down the rock.

When once she was safely over the side all became still in a moment, and she slid down the rock so fast that it was only a wonder that she did not land in the chasm. However, by good luck, she stopped quite close to her rope bridge and was soon across it. The donkey brayed joyfully at the sight of her, and set off home at his best speed, never seeming to know that the earth under his feet was nearly as hot as the sun above him.

On the bank of the great river he halted, and the princess rushed up to where the prince was standing by the pit he had digged in the dry sand, with a huge water pot beside it. A little way off the crocodile lay blinking in the sun, with his sharp teeth and whity-yellow jaws wide open.

At a signal from the princess the prince poured the water in the hole, and the moment it reached the brim the princess flung in the four-leaved plant. Would the charm work, or would the water trickle away slowly through the sand, and the prince fall a victim to that horrible monster? For half an hour they stood with their eyes rooted to the spot, but the hole remained as full as at the beginning, with the little green leaf floating on the top. Then the prince turned with a shout of triumph, and the crocodile sulkily plunged into the river.

The prince had escape for ever the second of his three fates!

He stood there looking after the crocodile, and rejoicing that he was free, when he was startled by a wild duck which flew past them, seeking shelter among the rushes that bordered the edge of the stream. In another instant his dog dashed by in hot pursuit, and knocked heavily against his master's legs. The prince staggered, lost his balance and fell backwards into the river, where the mud and the rushes caught him and held him fast. He shrieked for help to his wife, who came running; and luckily brought her rope with her. The poor old dog was drowned, but the prince was pulled to shore. 'My wife,' he said, 'has been stronger than my fate.'

[Adapted from Les Contes Populaires de l'Egypte Ancienne.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

The Fox and the Lapp

Once upon a time a fox lay peeping out of his hole, watching the road that ran by at a little distance, and hoping to see something that might amuse him, for he was feeling very dull and rather cross. For a long while he watched in vain; everything seemed asleep, and not even a bird stirred overhead. The fox grew crosser than ever, and he was just turning away in disgust from his place when he heard the sound of feet coming over the snow. He crouched eagerly down at the edge of the road and said to himself: 'I wonder what would happen if I were to pretend to be dead! This is a man driving a reindeer sledge, I know the tinkling of the harness. And at any rate I shall have an adventure, and that is always something!'

So he stretched himself out by the side of the road, carefully choosing a spot where the driver could not help seeing him, yet where the reindeer would not tread on him; and all fell out just as he had expected. The sledge-driver pulled up sharply, as his eyes lighted on the beautiful animal lying stiffly beside him, and jumping out he threw the fox into the bottom of the sledge, where the goods he was carrying were bound tightly together by ropes. The fox did not move a muscle though his bones were sore from the fall, and the driver got back to his seat again and drove on merrily.

But before they had gone very far, the fox, who was near the edge, contrived to slip over, and when the Laplander saw him stretched out on the snow he pulled up his reindeer and put the fox into one of the other sledges that was fastened behind, for it was market-day at the nearest town, and the man had much to sell.

They drove on a little further, when some noise in the forest made the man turn his head, just in time to see the fox fall with a heavy thump on to the frozen snow. 'That beast is bewitched!' he said to himself, and then he threw the fox into the last sledge of all, which had a cargo of fishes. This was exactly what the cunning creature wanted, and he wriggled gently to the front and bit the cord which tied the sledge to the one before it so that it remained standing in the middle of the road.

Now there were so many sledges that the Lapp did not notice for a long while that one was missing; indeed, he would have entered the town without knowing if snow had not suddenly begun to fall. Then he got down to secure more firmly the cloths that kept his goods dry, and going to the end of the long row, discovered that the sledge containing the fish and the fox was missing. He quickly unharnessed one of his reindeer and rode back along the way he had come, to find the sledge standing safe in the middle of the road; but as the fox had bitten off the cord close to the noose there was no means of moving it away.

The fox meanwhile was enjoying himself mightily. As soon as he had loosened the sledge, he had taken his favourite fish from among the piles neatly arranged for sale, and had trotted off to the forest with it in his mouth. By-and-by he met a bear, who stopped and said: 'Where did you find that fish, Mr. Fox?'

'Oh, not far off,' answered he; 'I just stuck my tail in the stream close by the place where the elves dwell, and the fish hung on to it of itself.'

'Dear me,' snarled the bear, who was hungry and not in a good temper, 'if the fish hung on to your tail, I suppose he will hang on to mine.'

'Yes, certainly, grandfather,' replied the fox, 'if you have patience to suffer what I suffered.'

'Of course I can,' replied the bear, 'what nonsense you talk! Show me the way.'

So the fox led him to the bank of a stream, which, being in a warm place, had only lightly frozen in places, and was at this moment glittering in the spring sunshine.

'The elves bathe here,' he said, 'and if you put in your tail the fish will catch hold of it. But it is no use being in a hurry, or you will spoil everything.'

Then he trotted off, but only went out of sight of the bear, who stood still on the bank with his tail deep in the water. Soon the sun set and it grew very cold and the ice formed rapidly, and the bear's tail was fixed as tight as if a vice had held it; and when the fox saw that everything had happened just as he had planned it, he called out loudly:

'Be quick, good people, and come with your bows and spears. A bear has been fishing in your brook!'

And in a moment the whole place was full of little creatures each one with a tiny bow and a spear hardly big enough for a baby; but both arrows and spears could sting, as the bear knew very well, and in his fright he gave such a tug to his tail that it broke short off, and he rolled away into the forest as fast as his legs could carry him. At this sight the fox held his sides for laughing, and then scampered away in another direction. By-and-by he came to a fir tree, and crept into a hole under the root. After that he did something very strange.

Taking one of his hind feet between his two front paws, he said softly:

'What would you do, my foot, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would run so quickly that he should not catch you.'

'What would you do, mine ear, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would listen so hard that I should hear all his plans.'

'What would you do, my nose, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would smell so sharply that I should know from afar that he was coming.'

'What would you do, my tail, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would steer you so straight a course that you would soon be beyond his reach. Let us be off; I feel as if danger was near.'

But the fox was comfortable where he was, and did not hurry himself to take his tail's advice. And before very long he found he was too late, for the bear had come round by another path, and guessing where his enemy was began to scratch at the roots of the tree. The fox made himself as small as he could, but a scrap of his tail peeped out, and the bear seized it and held it tight. Then the fox dug his claws into the ground, but he was not strong enough to pull against the bear, and slowly he was dragged forth and his body flung over the bear's neck. In this manner they set out down the road, the fox's tail being always in the bear's mouth.

After they had gone some way, they passed a tree-stump, on which a bright coloured woodpecker was tapping.

'Ah! those were better times when I used to paint all the birds such gay colours,' sighed the fox.

'What are you saying, old fellow?' asked the bear.

'I? Oh, I was saying nothing,' answered the fox drearily. 'Just carry me to your cave and eat me up as quick as you can.'

The bear was silent, and thought of his supper; and the two continued their journey till they reached another tree with a woodpecker tapping on it.

'Ah! those were better times when I used to paint all the birds such gay colours,' said the fox again to himself.

'Couldn't you paint me too?' asked the bear suddenly.

But the fox shook his head; for he was always acting, even if no one was there to see him do it.

'You bear pain so badly,' he replied, in a thoughtful voice, 'and you are impatient besides, and could never put up with all that is necessary. Why, you would first have to dig a pit, and then twist ropes of willow, and drive in posts and fill the hole with pitch, and, last of all, set it on fire. Oh, no; you would never be able to do all that.'

'It does not matter a straw how hard the work is,' answered the bear eagerly, 'I will do it every bit.' And as he spoke he began tearing up the earth so fast that soon a deep pit was ready, deep enough to hold him.  'That is all right,' said the fox at last, 'I see I was mistaken in you. Now sit here, and I will bind you.' So the bear sat down on the edge of the pit, and the fox sprang on his back, which he crossed with the willow ropes, and then set fire to the pitch. It burnt up in an instant, and caught the bands of willow and the bear's rough hair; but he did not stir, for he thought that the fox was rubbing the bright colours into his skin, and that he would soon be as beautiful as a whole meadow of flowers. But when the fire grew hotter still he moved uneasily from one foot to the other, saying, imploringly: 'It is getting rather warm, old man.' But all the answer he got was: 'I thought you would never be able to suffer pain like those little birds.'  The bear did not like being told that he was not as brave as a bird, so he set his teeth and resolved to endure anything sooner than speak again; but by this time the last willow band had burned through, and with a push the fox sent his victim tumbling into the grass, and ran off to hide himself in the forest. After a while he stole cautiously and found, as he expected, nothing left but a few charred bones. These he picked up and put in a bag, which he slung over his back.

By-and-by he met a Lapp driving his team of reindeer along the road, and as he drew near, the fox rattled the bones gaily.

'That sounds like silver or gold,' thought the man to himself. And he said politely to the fox:

'Good-day, friend! What have you got in your bag that makes such a strange sound?'

'All the wealth my father left me,' answered the fox. 'Do you feel inclined to bargain?'

'Well, I don't mind,' replied the Lapp, who was a prudent man, and did not wish the fox to think him too eager; 'but show me first what money you have got.'

'Ah, but I can't do that,' answered the fox, 'my bag is sealed up. But if you will give me those three reindeer, you shall take it as it is, with all its contents.'

The Lapp did not quite like it, but the fox spoke with such an air that his doubts melted away. He nodded, and stretched out his hand; the fox put the bag into it, and unharnassed the reindeer he had chosen.

'Oh, I forgot!' he exclaimed, turning round, as he was about to drive them in the opposite direction, 'you must be sure not to open the bag until you have gone at least five miles, right on the other side of those hills out there. If you do, you will find that all the gold and silver has changed into a parcel of charred bones.' Then he whipped up his reindeer, and was soon out of sight.

For some time the Lapp was satisfied with hearing the bones rattle, and thinking to himself what a good bargain he had made, and of all the things he would buy with the money. But, after a bit, this amusement ceased to content him, and besides, what was the use of planning when you did not know for certain how rich you were? Perhaps there might be a great deal of silver and only a little gold in the bag; or a great deal of gold, and only a little silver. Who could tell? He would not, of course, take the money out to count it, for that might bring him bad luck. But there could be no harm in just one peep! So he slowly broke the seal, and untied the strings, and, behold, a heap of burnt bones lay before him! In a minute he knew he had been tricked, and flinging the bag to the ground in a rage, he ran after the fox as fast as his snow-shoes would carry him.

Now the fox had guessed exactly what would happen, and was on the look out. Directly he saw the little speck coming towards him, he wished that the man's snow-shoes might break, and that very instant the Lapp's shoes snapped in two. The Lapp did now know that this was the fox's work, but he had to stop and fetch one of his other reindeer, which he mounted, and set off again in pursuit of his enemy. The fox soon heard him coming, and this time he wished that the reindeer might fall and break its leg. And so it did; and the man felt it was a hopeless chase, and that he was no match for the fox.

So the fox drove on in peace till he reached the cave where all his stores were kept, and then he began to wonder whom he could get to help him kill his reindeer, for though he could steal reindeer he was too small to kill them. 'After all, it will be quite easy,' thought he, and he bade a squirrel, who was watching him on a tree close by, take a message to all the robber beasts of the forest, and in less than half an hour a great crashing of branches was heard, and bears, wolves, snakes, mice, frogs, and other creatures came pressing up to the cave.

When they heard why they had been summoned, they declared themselves ready each one to do his part. The bear took his crossbow from his neck and shot the reindeer in the chin; and, from that day to this, every reindeer has a mark in that same spot, which is always known as the bear's arrow. The wolf shot him in the thigh, and the sign of his arrow still remains; and so with the mouse and the viper and all the rest, even the frog; and at the last the reindeer all died. And the fox did nothing, but looked on.

'I really must go down to the brook and wash myself,' said he (though he was perfectly clean), and he went under the bank and hid himself behind a stone. From there he set up the most frightful shrieks, so that the animals fled away in all directions. Only the mouse and the ermine remained where they were, for they thought that they were much too small to be noticed.

The fox continued his shrieks till he felt sure that the animals must have got to a safe distance; then he crawled out of his hiding-place and went to the bodies of the reindeer, which he now had all to himself. He gathered a bundle of sticks for a fire, and was just preparing to cook a steak, when his enemy, the Lapp, came up, panting with haste and excitement.

'What are you doing there?' cried he; 'why did you palm off those bones on me? And why, when you had got the reindeer, did you kill them?'

'Dear brother,' answered the fox with a sob, 'do not blame me for this misfortune. It is my comrades who have slain them in spite of my prayers.'

The man made no reply, for the white fur of the ermine, who was crouching with the mouse behind some stones, had just caught his eye. He hastily seized the iron hook which hung over the fire and flung it at the little creature; but the ermine was too quick for him, and the hook only touched the top of its tail, and that has remained black to this day. As for the mouse, the Lapp threw a half-burnt stick after him, and though it was not enough to hurt him, his beautiful white skin was smeared all over with it, and all the washing in the world would not make him clean again. And the man would have been wiser if he had let the ermine and the mouse alone, for when he turned round again he found he was alone.

Directly the fox noticed that his enemy's attention had wandered from himself he watched his chance, and stole softly away till he had reached a clump of thick bushes, when he ran as fast as he could, till he reached a river, where a man was mending his boat.

'Oh, I wish, I wish, I had a boat to mend too!' he cried, sitting up on his hind-legs and looking into the man's face.

'Stop your silly chatter!' answered the man crossly, 'or I will give you a bath in the river.'

'Oh, I wish, I do wish, I had a boat to mend,' cried the fox again, as if he had not heard. And the man grew angry and seized him by the tail, and threw him far out in the stream close to the edge of an island; which was just what the fox wanted. He easily scrambled up, and sitting on the top, he called: 'Hasten, hasten, O fishes, and carry me to the other side!' And the fishes left the stones where they had been sleeping, and the pools where they had been feeding, and hurried to see who could get to the island first.

'I have won,' shouted the pike. 'Jump on my back, dear fox, and you will find yourself in a trice on the opposite shore.'

'No, thank you,' answered the fox, 'your back is much too weak for me. I should break it.'

'Try mine,' said the eel, who had wriggled to the front.

'No, thank you,' replied the fox again, 'I should slip over your head and be drowned.'

'You won't slip on MY back,' said the perch, coming forward.

'No; but you are really TOO rough,' returned the fox.

'Well, you can have no fault to find with ME,' put in the trout.

'Good gracious! are YOU here?' exclaimed the fox. 'But I'm afraid to trust myself to you either.'

At this moment a fine salmon swam slowly up.

'Ah, yes, you are the person I want,' said the fox; 'but come near, so that I may get on your back, without wetting my feet.'

So the salmon swam close under the island, and when he was touching it the fox seized him in his claws and drew him out of the water, and put him on a spit, while he kindled a fire to cook him by. When everything was ready, and the water in the pot was getting hot, he popped him in, and waited till he thought the salmon was nearly boiled. But as he stooped down the water gave a sudden fizzle, and splashed into the fox's eyes, blinding him. He started backwards with a cry of pain, and sat still for some minutes, rocking himself to and fro. When he was a little better he rose and walked down a road till he met a grouse, who stopped and asked what was the matter.

'Have you a pair of eyes anywhere about you?' asked the fox politely.

'No, I am afraid I haven't,' answered the grouse, and passed on.

A little while after the fox heard the buzzing of an early bee, whom a gleam of sun had tempted out.

'Do you happen to have an extra pair of eyes anywhere?' asked the fox.

'I am sorry to say I have only those I am using,' replied the bee. And the fox went on till he nearly fell over an asp who was gliding across the road.

'I should be SO glad if you would tell me where I could get a pair of eyes,' said the fox. 'I suppose you don't happen to have any you could lend me?'

'Well, if you only want them for a short time, perhaps I could manage,' answered the asp; 'but I can't do without them for long.'

'Oh, it is only for a very short time that I need them,' said the fox; 'I have a pair of my own just behind that hill, and when I find them I will bring yours back to you. Perhaps you will keep these till them.' So he took the eyes out of his own head and popped them into the head of the asp, and put the asp's eyes in their place. As he was running off he cried over his shoulder: 'As long as the world lasts the asps' eyes will go down in the heads of foxes from generation to generation.'

And so it has been; and if you look at the eyes of an asp you will see that they are all burnt; and though thousands and thousands of years have gone by since the fox was going about playing tricks upon everybody he met, the asp still bears the traces of the day when the sly creature cooked the salmon.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

Kisa the Cat

Once upon a time there lived a queen who had a beautiful cat, the colour of smoke, with china-blue eyes, which she was very fond of. The cat was constantly with her, and ran after her wherever she went, and even sat up proudly by her side when she drove out in her fine glass coach.

'Oh, pussy,' said the queen one day, 'you are happier than I am! For you have a dear kitten just like yourself, and I have nobody to play with but you.'

'Don't cry,' answered the cat, laying her paw on her mistress's arm. 'Crying never does any good. I will see what can be done.'

The cat was as good as her word. As soon as she returned from her drive she trotted off to the forest to consult a fairy who dwelt there, and very soon after the queen had a little girl, who seemed made out of snow and sunbeams. The queen was delighted, and soon the baby began to take notice of the kitten as she jumped about the room, and would not go to sleep at all unless the kitten lay curled up beside her.

Two or three months went by, and though the baby was still a baby, the kitten was fast becoming a cat, and one evening when, as usual, the nurse came to look for her, to put her in the baby's cot, she was nowhere to be found. What a hunt there was for that kitten, to be sure! The servants, each anxious to find her, as the queen was certain to reward the lucky man, searched in the most impossible places. Boxes were opened that would hardly have held the kitten's paw; books were taken from bookshelves, lest the kitten should have got behind them, drawers were pulled out, for perhaps the kitten might have got shut in. But it was all no use. The kitten had plainly run away, and nobody could tell if it would ever choose to come back.

Years passed away, and one day, when the princess was playing ball in the garden, she happened to throw her ball farther than usual, and it fell into a clump of rose-bushes. The princess of course ran after it at once, and she was stooping down to feel if it was hidden in the long grass, when she heard a voice calling her: 'Ingibjorg! Ingibjorg!' it said, 'have you forgotten me? I am Kisa, your sister!'

'But I never HAD a sister,' answered Ingibjorg, very much puzzled; for she knew nothing of what had taken place so long ago.

'Don't you remember how I always slept in your cot beside you, and how you cried till I came? But girls have no memories at all! Why, I could find my way straight up to that cot this moment, if I was once inside the palace.'

'Why did you go away then?' asked the princess. But before Kisa could answer, Ingibjorg's attendants arrived breathless on the scene, and were so horrified at the sight of a strange cat, that Kisa plunged into the bushes and went back to the forest.

The princess was very much vexed with her ladies-in-waiting for frightening away her old playfellow, and told the queen who came to her room every evening to bid her good-night.

'Yes, it is quite true what Kisa said,' answered the queen; 'I should have liked to see her again. Perhaps, some day, she will return, and then you must bring her to me.'

Next morning it was very hot, and the princess declared that she must go and play in the forest, where it was always cool, under the big shady trees. As usual, her attendants let her do anything she pleased, and sitting down on a mossy bank where a little stream tinkled by, soon fell sound asleep. The princess saw with delight that they would pay no heed to her, and wandered on and on, expecting every moment to see some fairies dancing round a ring, or some little brown elves peeping at her from behind a tree. But, alas! she met none of these; instead, a horrible giant came out of his cave and ordered her to follow him. The princess felt much afraid, as he was so big and ugly, and began to be sorry that she had not stayed within reach of help; but as there was no use in disobeying the giant, she walked meekly behind.

They went a long way, and Ingibjorg grew very tired, and at length began to cry.

'I don't like girls who make horrid noises,' said the giant, turning round. 'But if you WANT to cry, I will give you something to cry for.' And drawing an axe from his belt, he cut off both her feet, which he picked up and put in his pocket. Then he went away.

Poor Ingibjorg lay on the grass in terrible pain, and wondering if she should stay there till she died, as no one would know where to look for her. How long it was since she had set out in the morning she could not tell--it seemed years to her, of course; but the sun was still high in the heavens when she heard the sound of wheels, and then, with a great effort, for her throat was parched with fright and pain, she gave a shout.

'I am coming!' was the answer; and in another moment a cart made its way through the trees, driven by Kisa, who used her tail as a whip to urge the horse to go faster. Directly Kisa saw Ingibjorg lying there, she jumped quickly down, and lifting the girl carefully in her two front paws, laid her upon some soft hay, and drove back to her own little hut.

In the corner of the room was a pile of cushions, and these Kisa arranged as a bed. Ingibjorg, who by this time was nearly fainting from all she had gone through, drank greedily some milk, and then sank back on the cushions while Kisa fetched some dried herbs from a cupboard, soaked them in warm water and tied them on the bleeding legs. The pain vanished at once, and Ingibjorg looked up and smiled at Kisa.

'You will go to sleep now,' said the cat, 'and you will not mind if I leave you for a little while. I will lock the door, and no one can hurt you.' But before she had finished the princess was asleep. Then Kisa got into the cart, which was standing at the door, and catching up the reins, drove straight to the giant's cave.

Leaving her cart behind some trees, Kisa crept gently up to the open door, and, crouching down, listened to what the giant was telling his wife, who was at supper with him.

'The first day that I can spare I shall just go back and kill her,' he said; 'it would never do for people in the forest to know that a mere girl can defy me!' And he and his wife were so busy calling Ingibjorg all sorts of names for her bad behaviour, that they never noticed Kisa stealing into a dark corner, and upsetting a whole bag of salt into the great pot before the fire.

'Dear me, how thirsty I am!' cried the giant by-and-by.

'So am I,' answered the wife. 'I do wish I had not taken that last spoonful of broth; I am sure something was wrong with it.'

'If I don't get some water I shall die,' went on the giant. And rushing out of the cave, followed by his wife, he ran down the path which led to the river.

Then Kisa entered the hut, and lost no time in searching every hole till she came upon some grass, under which Ingibjorg's feet were hidden, and putting them in her cart, drove back again to her own hut.

Ingibjorg was thankful to see her, for she had lain, too frightened to sleep, trembling at every noise.

'Oh, is it you?' she cried joyfully, as Kisa turned the key. And the cat came in, holding up the two neat little feet in their silver slippers.

'In two minutes they shall be as tight as they ever were!' said Kisa. And taking some strings of the magic grass which the giant had carelessly heaped on them, she bound the feet on to the legs above.

'Of course you won't be able to walk for some time; you must not expect THAT,' she continued. 'But if you are very good, perhaps, in about a week, I may carry you home again.'

And so she did; and when the cat drove the cart up to the palace gate, lashing the horse furiously with her tail, and the king and queen saw their lost daughter sitting beside her, they declared that no reward could be too great for the person who had brought her out of the giant's hands.

'We will talk about that by-and-by,' said the cat, as she made her best bow, and turned her horse's head.

The princess was very unhappy when Kisa left her without even bidding her farewell. She would neither eat nor drink, nor take any notice of all the beautiful dresses her parents bought for her.

'She will die, unless we can make her laugh,' one whispered to the other. 'Is there anything in the world that we have left untried?'

'Nothing except marriage,' answered the king. And he invited all the handsomest young men he could think of to the palace, and bade the princess choose a husband from among them.

It took her some time to decide which she admired the most, but at last she fixed upon a young prince, whose eyes were like the pools in the forest, and his hair of bright gold. The king and the queen were greatly pleased, as the young man was the son of a neighbouring king, and they gave orders that a splendid feast should be got ready.

When the marriage was over, Kisa suddenly stood before them, and Ingibjorg rushed forward and clasped her in her arms.

'I have come to claim my reward,' said the cat. 'Let me sleep for this night at the foot of your bed.'

'Is that ALL?' asked Ingibjorg, much disappointed.

'It is enough,' answered the cat. And when the morning dawned, it was no cat that lay upon the bed, but a beautiful princess.

'My mother and I were both enchanted by a spiteful fairy,' said she, 'we could not free ourselves till we had done some kindly deed that had never been wrought before. My mother died without ever finding a chance of doing anything new, but I took advantage of the evil act of the giant to make you as whole as ever.'

Then they were all more delighted than before, and the princess lived in the court until she, too, married, and went away to govern one of her own.

[Adapted from Neuislandischen Volksmarchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

The Lion and the Cat

Far away on the other side of the world there lived, long ago, a lion and his younger brother, the wild cat, who were so fond of each other that they shared the same hut. The lion was much the bigger and stronger of the two--indeed, he was much bigger and stronger than any of the beasts that dwelt in the forest; and, besides, he could jump father and run faster than all the rest. If strength and swiftness could gain him a dinner he was sure never to be without one, but when it came to cunning, both the grizzly bear and the serpent could get the better of him, and he was forced to call in the help of the wild cat.

Now the young wild cat had a lovely golden ball, so beautiful that you could hardly look at it except through a piece of smoked glass, and he kept it hidden in the thick fur muff that went round his neck. A very large old animal, since dead, had given it to him when he was hardly more than a baby, and had told him never to part with it, for as long as he kept it no harm could ever come near him.

In general the wild cat did not need to use his ball, for the lion was fond of hunting, and could kill all the food that they needed; but now and then his life would have been in danger had it not been for the golden ball.

One day the two brothers started to hunt at daybreak, but as the cat could not run nearly as fast as the lion, he had quite a long start. At least he THOUGHT it was a long one, but in a very few bounds and springs the lion reached his side.

'There is a bear sitting on that tree,' he whispered softly. 'He is only waiting for us to pass, to drop down on my back.'

'Ah, you are so big that he does not see I am behind you,' answered the wild cat. And, touching the ball, he just said: 'Bear, die!' And the bear tumbled dead out of the tree, and rolled over just in front of them.

For some time they trotted on without any adventures, till just as they were about to cross a strip of long grass on the edge of the forest, the lion's quick ears detected a faint rustling noise.

'That is a snake,' he cried, stopping short, for he was much more afraid of snakes than of bears.

'Oh, it is all right,' answered the cat. 'Snake, die!' And the snake died, and the two brothers skinned it. They then folded the skin up into a very small parcel, and the cat tucked it into his mane, for snakes' skins can do all sorts of wonderful things, if you are lucky enough to have one of them.

All this time they had had no dinner, for the snake's flesh was not nice, and the lion did not like eating bear--perhaps because he never felt sure that the bear was REALLY dead, and would not jump up alive when his enemy went near him. Most people are afraid of SOME thing, and bears and serpents were the only creatures that caused the lion's heart to tremble. So the two brothers set off again and soon reached the side of a hill where some fine deer were grazing.

'Kill one of those deer for your own dinner,' said the boy-brother, 'but catch me another alive. I want him.'

The lion at once sprang towards them with a loud roar, but the deer bounded away, and they were all three soon lost to sight. The cat waited for a long while, but finding that the lion did not return, went back to the house where they lived.

It was quite dark when the lion came home, where his brother was sitting curled up in one corner.

'Did you catch the deer for me?' asked the boy-brother, springing up.

'Well, no,' replied the man-brother. 'The fact is, that I did not get up to them till we had run half way across the world and left the wind far behind us. Think what a trouble it would have been to drag it here! So--I just ate them both.'

The cat said nothing, but he did not feel that he loved his big brother. He had thought a great deal about that deer, and had meant to get on his back to ride him as a horse, and go to see all the wonderful places the lion talked to him about when he was in a good temper. The more he thought of it the more sulky he grew, and in the morning, when the lion said that it was time for them to start to hunt, the cat told him that he might kill the bear and snake by himself, as HE had a headache, and would rather stay at home. The little fellow knew quite well that the lion would not dare to go out without him and his ball for fear of meeting a bear or a snake.

The quarrel went on, and for many days neither of the brothers spoke to each other, and what made them still more cross was, that they could get very little to eat, and we know that people are often cross when they are hungry. At last it occurred to the lion that if he could only steal the magic ball he could kill bears and snakes for himself, and then the cat might be as sulky as he liked for anything that it would matter. But how was the stealing to be done? The cat had the ball hung round his neck day and night, and he was such a light sleeper that it was useless to think of taking it while he slept. No! the only thing was to get him to lend it of his own accord, and after some days the lion (who was not at all clever) hit upon a plan that he thought would do.

'Dear me, how dull it is here!' said the lion one afternoon, when the rain was pouring down in such torrents that, however sharp your eyes or your nose might be, you could not spy a single bird or beast among the bushes. 'Dear me, how dull, how dreadfully dull I am. Couldn't we have a game of catch with that golden ball of yours?'

'I don't care about playing catch, it does not amuse me,' answered the cat, who was as cross as ever; for no cat, even to this day, ever forgets an injury done to him.

'Well, then, lend me the ball for a little, and I will play by myself,' replied the lion, stretching out a paw as he spoke.

'You can't play in the rain, and if you did, you would only lose it in the bushes,' said the cat.

'Oh, no, I won't; I will play in here. Don't be so ill-natured.' And with a very bad grace the cat untied the string and threw the golden ball into the lion's lap, and composed himself to sleep again.

For a long while the lion tossed it up and down gaily, feeling that, however sound asleep the boy-brother might LOOK, he was sure to have one eye open; but gradually he began to edge closer to the opening, and at last gave such a toss that the ball went up high into the air, and he could not see what became of it.

'Oh, how stupid of me!' he cried, as the cat sprang up angrily, 'let us go at once and search for it. It can't really have fallen very far.' But though they searched that day and the next, and the next after that, they never found it, because it never came down.

After the loss of his ball the cat refused to live with the lion any longer, but wandered away to the north, always hoping he might meet with his ball again. But months passed, and years passed, and though he travelled over hundreds of miles, he never saw any traces of it.

At length, when he was getting quite old, he came to a place unlike any that he had ever seen before, where a big river rolled right to the foot of some high mountains. The ground all about the river bank was damp and marshy, and as no cat likes to wet its feet, this one climbed a tree that rose high above the water, and thought sadly of his lost ball, which would have helped him out of this horrible place. Suddenly he saw a beautiful ball, for all the world like his own, dangling from a branch of the tree he was on. He longed to get at it; but was the branch strong enough to bear his weight? It was no use, after all he had done, getting drowned in the water. However, it could do no harm, if he was to go a little way; he could always manage to get back somehow.

So he stretched himself at full length upon the branch, and wriggled his body cautiously along. To his delight it seemed thick and stout. Another movement, and, by stretching out his paw, he would be able to draw the string towards him, when the branch gave a loud crack, and the cat made haste to wriggle himself back the way he had come.

But when cats make up their minds to do anything they generally DO it; and this cat began to look about to see if there was really no way of getting at his ball. Yes! there was, and it was much surer than the other, though rather more difficult. Above the bough where the ball was hung was another bough much thicker, which he knew could not break with his weight; and by holding on tight to this with all his four paws, he could just manage to touch the ball with his tail. He would thus be able to whisk the ball to and fro till, by-and-by, the string would become quite loose, and it would fall to the ground. It might take some time, but the lion's little brother was patient, like most cats.

Well, it all happened just as the cat intended it should, and when the ball dropped on the ground the cat ran down the tree like lightning, and, picking it up, tucked it away in the snake's skin round his neck. Then he began jumping along the shore of the Big Water from one place to another, trying to find a boat, or even a log of wood, that would take him across. But there was nothing; only, on the other side, he saw two girls cooking, and though he shouted to them at the top of his voice, they were too far off to hear what he said. And, what was worse, the ball suddenly fell out of its snake's skin bag right into the river.

Now, it is not at all an uncommon thing for balls to tumble into rivers, but in that case they generally either fall to the bottom and stay there, or else bob about on the top of the water close to where they first touched it. But this ball, instead of doing either of these things, went straight across to the other side, and there one of the girls saw it when she stooped to dip some water into her pail.

'Oh! what a lovely ball!' cried she, and tried to catch it in her pail; but the ball always kept bobbing just out of her reach.

'Come and help me!' she called to her sister, and after a long while they had the ball safe inside the pail. They were delighted with their new toy, and one or the other held it in her hand till bedtime came, and then it was a long time before they could make up their minds where it would be safest for the night. At last they locked it in a cupboard in one corner of their room, and as there was no hole anywhere the ball could not possibly get out. After that they went to sleep.

In the morning the first thing they both did was to run to the cupboard and unlock it, but when the door opened they started back, for, instead of the ball, there stood a handsome young man.

'Ladies,' he said, 'how can I thank you for what you have done for me? Long, long ago, I was enchanted by a wicked fairy, and condemned to keep the shape of a ball till I should meet with two maidens, who would take me to their own home. But where was I to meet them? For hundreds of years I have lived in the depths of the forest, where nothing but wild beasts ever came, and it was only when the lion threw me into the sky that I was able to fall to earth near this river. Where there is a river, sooner or later people will come; so, hanging myself on a tree, I watched and waited. For a moment I lost heart when I fell once more into the hands of my old master the wild cat, but my hopes rose again as I saw he was making for the river bank opposite where you were standing. That was my chance, and I took it. And now, ladies, I have only to say that, if ever I can do anything to help you, go to the top of that high mountain and knock three times at the iron door at the north side, and I will come to you.'

So, with a low bow, he vanished from before them, leaving the maidens weeping at having lost in one moment both the ball and the prince.

[Adapted from North American Indian Legends.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

Which was the Foolishest?

In a little village that stood on a wide plain, where you could see the sun from the moment he rose to the moment he set, there lived two couples side by side. The men, who worked under the same master, were quite good friends, but the wives were always quarrelling, and the subject they quarrelled most about was--which of the two had the stupidest husband.

Unlike most women--who think that anything that belongs to them must be better than what belongs to anyone else--each thought her husband the more foolish of the two.

'You should just see what he does!' one said to her neighbour. 'He puts on the baby's frock upside down, and, one day, I found him trying to feed her with boiling soup, and her mouth was scalded for days after. Then he picks up stones in the road and sows them instead of potatoes, and one day he wanted to go into the garden from the top window, because he declared it was a shorter way than through the door.'

'That is bad enough, of course,' answered the other; 'but it is really NOTHING to what I have to endure every day from MY husband. If, when I am busy, I ask him to go and feed the poultry, he is certain to give them some poisonous stuff instead of their proper food, and when I visit the yard next I find them all dead. Once he even took my best bonnet, when I had gone away to my sick mother, and when I came back I found he had given it to the hen to lay her eggs in. And you know yourself that, only last week, when I sent him to buy a cask of butter, he returned driving a hundred and fifty ducks which someone had induced him to take, and not one of them would lay.'

'Yes, I am afraid he IS trying,' replied the first; 'but let us put them to the proof, and see which of them is the most foolish.'

So, about the time that she expected her husband home from work, she got out her spinning-wheel, and sat busily turning it, taking care not even to look up from her work when the man came in. For some minutes he stood with his mouth open watching her, and as she still remained silent, he said at last:

'Have you gone mad, wife, that you sit spinning without anything on the wheel?'

'YOU may think that there is nothing on it,' answered she, 'but I can assure you that there is a large skein of wool, so fine that nobody can see it, which will be woven into a coat for you.'

'Dear me!' he replied, 'what a clever wife I have got! If you had not told me I should never have known that there was any wool on the wheel at all. But now I really do seem to see something.'

The woman smiled and was silent, and after spinning busily for an hour more, she got up from her stoop, and began to weave as fast as she could. At last she got up, and said to her husband: 'I am too tired to finish it to-night, so I shall go to bed, and to-morrow I shall only have the cutting and stitching to do.'

So the next morning she got up early, and after she had cleaned her house, and fed her chickens, and put everything in its place again, she bent over the kitchen table, and the sound of her big scissors might be heard snip! snap! as far as the garden. Her husband could not see anything to snip at; but then he was so stupid that was not surprising!

After the cutting came the sewing. The woman patted and pinned and fixed and joined, and then, turning to the man, she said:

'Now it is ready for you to try on.' And she made him take off his coat, and stand up in front of her, and once more she patted an pinned and fixed and joined, and was very careful in smoothing out every wrinkle.

'It does not feel very warm,' observed the man at last, when he had borne all this patiently for a long time.

'That is because it is so fine,' answered she; 'you do not want it to be as thick as the rough clothes you wear every day.'

He DID, but was ashamed to say so, and only answered: 'Well, I am sure it must be beautiful since you say so, and I shall be smarter than anyone in the whole village. "What a splendid coat!" they will exclaim when they see me. But it is not everybody who has a wife as clever as mine.'

Meanwhile the other wife was not idle. As soon as her husband entered she looked at him with such a look of terror that the poor man was quite frightened.

'Why do you stare at me so? Is there anything the matter?' asked he.

'Oh! go to bed at once,' she cried; 'you must be very ill indeed to look like that!'

The man was rather surprised at first, as he felt particularly well that evening; but the moment his wife spoke he became quite certain that he had something dreadful the matter with him, and grew quite pale.

'I dare say it would be the best place for me,' he answered, trembling; and he suffered his wife to take him upstairs, and to help him off with his clothes.

'If you sleep well during the might there MAY be a chance for you,' said she, shaking her head, as she tucked him up warmly; 'but if not--' And of course the poor man never closed an eye till the sun rose.

'How do you feel this morning?' asked the woman, coming in on tip-toe when her house-work was finished.

'Oh, bad; very bad indeed,' answered he; 'I have not slept for a moment. Can you think of nothing to make me better?'

'I will try everything that is possible,' said the wife, who did not in the least wish her husband to die, but was determined to show that he was more foolish that the other man. 'I will get some dried herbs and make you a drink, but I am very much afraid that it is too late. Why did you not tell me before?'

'I thought perhaps the pain would go off in a day or two; and, besides, I did not want to make you unhappy,' answered the man, who was by this time quite sure he had been suffering tortures, and had borne them like a hero. 'Of course, if I had had any idea how ill I really was, I should have spoken at once.'

'Well, well, I will see what can be done,' said the wife, 'but talking is not good for you. Lie still, and keep yourself warm.'

All that day the man lay in bed, and whenever his wife entered the room and asked him, with a shake of the head, how he felt, he always replied that he was getting worse. At last, in the evening, she burst into tears, and when he inquired what was the matter, she sobbed out:

'Oh, my poor, poor husband, are you really dead? I must go to-morrow and order your coffin.'

Now, when the man heard this, a cold shiver ran through his body, and all at once he knew that he was as well as he had ever been in his life.

'Oh, no, no!' he cried, 'I feel quite recovered! Indeed, I think I shall go out to work.'

'You will do no such thing,' replied his wife. 'Just keep quite quiet, for before the sun rises you will be a dead man.'

The man was very frightened at her words, and lay absolutely still while the undertaker came and measured him for his coffin; and his wife gave orders to the gravedigger about his grave. That evening the coffin was sent home, and in the morning at nine o'clock the woman put him on a long flannel garment, and called to the undertaker's men to fasten down the lid and carry him to the grave, where all their friends were waiting them. Just as the body was being placed in the ground the other woman's husband came running up, dressed, as far as anyone could see, in no clothes at all. Everybody burst into shouts of laughter at the sight of him, and the men laid down the coffin and laughed too, till their sides nearly split. The dead man was so astonished at this behaviour, that he peeped out of a little window in the side of the coffin, and cried out:

'I should laugh as loudly as any of you, if I were not a dead man.'

When they heard the voice coming from the coffin the other people suddenly stopped laughing, and stood as if they had been turned into stone. Then they rushed with one accord to the coffin, and lifted the lid so that the man could step out amongst them.

'Were you really not dead after all?' asked they. 'And if not, why did you let yourself be buried?'

At this the wives both confessed that they had each wished to prove that her husband was stupider than the other. But the villagers declared that they could not decide which was the most foolish--the man who allowed himself to be persuaded that he was wearing fine clothes when he was dressed in nothing, or the man who let himself be buried when he was alive and well.

So the women quarrelled just as much as they did before, and no one ever knew whose husband was the most foolish.

[Adapted from the Neuislandische Volksmarchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

Asmund and Signy

Long, long ago, in the days when fairies, witches, giants and ogres still visited the earth, there lived a king who reigned over a great and beautiful country. He was married to a wife whom he dearly loved, and had two most promising children--a son called Asmund, and a daughter who was named Signy.

The king and queen were very anxious to bring their children up well, and the young prince and princess were taught everything likely to make them clever and accomplished. They lived at home in their father's palace, and he spared no pains to make their lives happy.

Prince Asmund dearly loved all outdoor sports and an open-air life, and from his earliest childhood he had longed to live entirely in the forest close by. After many arguments and entreaties he succeeded in persuading the king to give him two great oak trees for his very own.

'Now,' said he to his sister, 'I will have the trees hollowed out, and then I will make rooms in them and furnish them so that I shall be able to live out in the forest.'

'Oh, Asmund!' exclaimed Signy, 'what a delightful idea! Do let me come too, and live in one of your trees. I will bring all my pretty things and ornaments, and the trees are so near home we shall be quite safe in them.'

Asmund, who was extremely fond of his sister, readily consented, and they had a very happy time together, carrying over all their pet treasures, and Signy's jewels and other ornaments, and arranging them in the pretty little rooms inside the trees.

Unfortunately sadder days were to come. A war with another country broke out, and the king had to lead his army against their enemy. During his absence the queen fell ill, and after lingering for some time she died, to the great grief of her children. They made up their minds to live altogether for a time in their trees, and for this purpose they had provisions enough stored up inside to last them a year.

Now, I must tell you, in another country a long way off, there reigned a king who had an only son named Ring. Prince Ring had heard so much about the beauty and goodness of Princess Signy that he determined to marry her if possible. So he begged his father to let him have a ship for the voyage, set sail with a favourable wind, and after a time landed in the country where Signy lived.

The prince lost no time in setting out for the royal palace, and on his way there he met such a wonderfully lovely woman that he felt he had never seen such beauty in all his life. He stopped her and at once asked who she was.

'I am Signy, the king's daughter,' was the reply.

Then the prince inquired why she was wandering about all by herself, and she told him that since her mother's death she was so sad that whilst her father was away she preferred being alone.

Ring was quite deceived by her, and never guessed that she was not Princess Signy at all, but a strong, gigantic, wicked witch bent on deceiving him under a beautiful shape. He confided to her that he had travelled all the way from his own country for her sake, having fallen in love with the accounts he had heard of her beauty, and he then and there asked her to be his wife.

The witch listened to all he said and, much pleased, ended by accepting his offer; but she begged him to return to his ship for a little while as she wished to go some way further into the forest, promising to join him later on.

Prince Ring did as she wished and went back to his ship to wait, whilst she walked on into the forest till she reached the two oak trees.

Here she resumed her own gigantic shape, tore up the trees by their roots, threw one of them over her back and clasped the other to her breast, carried them down to the shore and waded out with them to the ship.

She took care not to be noticed as she reached the ship, and directly she got on board she once more changed to her former lovely appearance and told the prince that her luggage was now all on board, and that they need wait for nothing more.

The prince gave orders to set sail at once, and after a fine voyage landed in his own country, where his parents and his only sister received him with the greatest joy and affection.

The false Signy was also very kindly welcomed. A beautiful house was got ready for her, and Prince Ring had the two oaks planted in the garden just in front of her windows so that she might have the pleasure of seeing them constantly. He often went to visit the witch, whom he believed to be Princess Signy, and one day he asked: 'Don't you think we might be married before long?'

'Yes,' said she, quite pleased, 'I am quite ready to marry you whenever you like.'

'Then,' replied Ring, 'let us decide on this day fortnight. And see, I have brought you some stuff to make your wedding-dress of.' So saying he gave her a large piece of the most beautiful brocade, all woven over with gold threads, and embroidered with pearls and other jewels.

The prince had hardly left her before the witch resumed her proper shape and tore about the room, raging and storming and flinging the beautiful silk on the floor.

'What was SHE to do with such things?' she roared. 'SHE did not know how to sew or make clothes, and she was sure to die of starvation into the bargain if her brother Ironhead did not come soon and bring her some raw meat and bones, for she really could eat nothing else.'

As she was raving and roaring in this frantic manner part of the floor suddenly opened and a huge giant rose up carrying a great chest in his arms. The witch was enchanted at this sight, and eagerly helped her brother to set down and open the chest, which was full of the ghastly food she had been longing for. The horrid pair set to and greedily devoured it all, and when the chest was quite empty the giant put it on his shoulder and disappeared as he had come, without leaving any trace of his visit.

But his sister did not keep quiet for long, and tore and pulled at the rich brocade as if she wanted to destroy it, stamping about and shouting angrily.

Now, all this time Prince Asmund and his sister sat in their trees just outside the window and saw all that was going on.

'Dear Signy,' said Asmund, 'do try to get hold of that piece of brocade and make the clothes yourself, for really we shall have no rest day or night with such a noise.'

'I will try,' said Signy; 'it won't be an easy matter, but it's worth while taking some trouble to have a little peace.'

So she watched for an opportunity and managed to carry off the brocade the first time the witch left her room. Then she set to work, cutting out and sewing as best she could, and by the end of six days she had turned it into an elegant robe with a long train and a mantle. When it was finished she climbed to the top of her tree and contrived to throw the clothes on to a table through the open window.

How delighted the witch was when she found the clothes all finished! The next time Prince Ring came to see her she gave them to him, and he paid her many compliments on her skilful work, after which he took leave of her in the most friendly manner. But he had scarcely left the house when the witch began to rage as furiously as ever, and never stopped till her brother Ironhead appeared.

When Asmund saw all these wild doings from his tree he felt he could no longer keep silence. He went to Prince Ring and said: 'Do come with me and see the strange things that are happening in the new princess's room.'

The prince was not a little surprised, but he consented to hide himself with Asmund behind the panelling of the room, from where they could see all that went on through a little slit. The witch was raving and roaring as usual, and said to her brother:

'Once I am married to the king's son I shall be better off than now. I shall take care to have all that pack of courtiers put to death, and then I shall send for all my relations to come and live here instead. I fancy the giants will enjoy themselves very much with me and my husband.'

When Prince Ring heard this he fell into such a rage that he ordered the house to be set on fire, and it was burnt to the ground, with the witch and her brother in it.

Asmund then told the prince about the two oak trees and took him to see them. The prince was quite astonished at them and at all their contents, but still more so at the extreme beauty of Signy. He fell in love with her at once, and entreated her to marry him, which, after a time, she consented to do. Asmund, on his side, asked for the hand of Prince Ring's sister, which was gladly granted him, and the double wedding was celebrated with great rejoicings.

After this Prince Asmund and his bride returned to his country to live with the king his father. The two couples often met, and lived happily for many, many years. And that is the end of the story.

[From Islandische Mahrchen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

Rubezahl

Over all the vast under-world the mountain Gnome Rubezahl was lord; and busy enough the care of his dominions kept him. There were the endless treasure chambers to be gone through, and the hosts of gnomes to be kept to their tasks. Some built strong barriers to hold back the fiery vapours to change dull stones to precious metal, or were hard at work filling every cranny of the rocks with diamonds and rubies; for Rubezahl loved all pretty things. Sometimes the fancy would take him to leave those gloomy regions, and come out upon the green earth for a while, and bask in the sunshine and hear the birds sing. And as gnomes live many hundreds of years he saw strange things. For, the first time he came up, the great hills were covered with thick forests, in which wild animals roamed, and Rubezahl watched the fierce fights between bear and bison, or chased the grey wolves, or amused himself by rolling great rocks down into the desolate valleys, to hear the thunder of their fall echoing among the hills. But the next time he ventured above ground, what was his surprise to find everything changed! The dark woods were hewn down, and in their place appeared blossoming orchards surrounding cosy-looking thatched cottages; for every chimney the blue smoke curled peacefully into the air, sheep and oxen fed in the flowery meadows, while from the shade of the hedges came the music of the shepherd's pipe. The strangeness and pleasantness of the sight so delighted the gnome that he never thought of resenting the intrusion of these unexpected guests, who, without saying 'by your leave' or 'with your leave,' had made themselves so very much at home upon is hills; nor did he wish to interfere with their doings, but left them in quiet possession of their homes, as a good householder leaves in peace the swallows who have built their nests under his eaves. He was indeed greatly minded to make friends with this being called 'man,' so, taking the form of an old field labourer, he entered the service of a farmer. Under his care all the crops flourished exceedingly, but the master proved to be wasteful and ungrateful, and Rubezahl soon left him, and went to be shepherd to his next neighbour. He tended the flock so diligently, and knew so well where to lead the sheep to the sweetest pastures, and where among the hills to look for any who strayed away, that they too prospered under his care, and not one was lost or torn by wolves; but this new master was a hard man, and begrudged him his well-earned wages. So he ran away and went to serve the judge. Here he upheld the law with might and main, and was a terror to thieves and evildoers; but the judge was a bad man, who took bribes, and despised the law. Rubezahl would not be the tool of an unjust man, and so he told his master, who thereupon ordered him to be thrown in prison. Of course that did not trouble the gnome at all, he simply got out through the keyhole, and went away down to his underground palace, very much disappointed by his first experience of mankind. But, as time went on, he forgot the disagreeable things that had happened to him, and thought he would take another look at the upper world.

So he stole into the valley, keeping himself carefully hidden in copse or hedgerow, and very soon met with an adventure; for, peeping through a screen of leaves, he saw before him a green lawn where stood a charming maiden, fresh as the spring, and beautiful to look upon. Around her upon the grass lay her young companions, as if they had thrown themselves down to rest after some merry game. Beyond them flowed a little brook, into which a waterfall leapt from a high rock, filling the air with its pleasant sound, and making a coolness even in the sultry noontide. The sight of the maiden so pleased the gnome that, for the first time, he wished himself a mortal; and, longing for a better view of the gay company, he changed himself into a raven and perched upon an oaktree which overhung the brook. But he soon found that this was not at all a good plan. He could only see with a raven's eyes, and feel as a raven feels; and a nest of field-mice at the foot of the tree interested him far more than the sport of the maidens. When he understood this he flew down again in a great hurry into the thicket, and took the form of a handsome young man--that was the best way--and he fell in love with the girl then and there. The fair maiden was the daughter of the king of the country, and she often wandered in the forest with her play fellows gathering the wild flowers and fruits, till the midday heat drove the merry band to the shady lawn by the brook to rest, or to bathe in the cool waters. On this particular morning the fancy took them to wander off again into the wood. This was Master Rubezahl's opportunity. Stepping out of his hiding-place he stood in the midst of the little lawn, weaving his magic spells, till slowly all about him changed, and when the maidens returned at noon to their favourite resting-place they stood lost in amazement, and almost fancied that they must be dreaming. The red rocks had become white marble and alabaster; the stream that murmured and struggled before in its rocky bed, flowed in silence now in its smooth channel, from which a clear fountain leapt, to fall again in showers of diamond drops, now on this side now on that, as the wandering breeze scattered it.

Daisies and forget-me-nots fringed its brink, while tall hedges of roses and jasmine ringed it round, making the sweetest and daintiest bower imaginable. To the right and left of the waterfall opened out a wonderful grotto, its walls and arches glittering with many-coloured rock-crystals, while in every niche were spread out strange fruits and sweetmeats, the very sight of which made the princess long to taste them. She hesitated a while, however, scarcely able to believe her eyes, and not knowing if she should enter the enchanted spot or fly from it. But at length curiosity prevailed, and she and her companions explored to their heart's content, and tasted and examined everything, running hither and thither in high glee, and calling merrily to each other.

At last, when they were quite weary, the princess cried out suddenly that nothing would content her but to bathe in the marble pool, which certainly did look very inviting; and they all went gaily to this new amusement. The princess was ready first, but scarcely had she slipped over the rim of the pool when down--down--down she sank, and vanished in its depths before her frightened playmates could seize her by so much as a lock of her floating golden hair!

Loudly did they weep and wail, running about the brink of the pool, which looked so shallow and so clear, but which had swallowed up their princess before their eyes. They even sprang into the water and tried to dive after her, but in vain; they only floated like corks in the enchanted pool, and could not keep under water for a second.

They saw at last that there was nothing for it but to carry to the king the sad tidings of his beloved daughter's disappearance. And what great weeping and lamentation there was in the palace when the dreadful news was told! The king tore his robes, dashed his golden crown from his head, and hid his face in his purple mantle for grief and anguish at the loss of the princess. After the first outburst of wailing, however, he took heart and hurried off to see for himself the scene of this strange adventure, thinking, as people will in sorrow, that there might be some mistake after all. But when he reached the spot, behold, all was changed again! The glittering grotto described to him by the maidens had completely vanished, and so had the marble bath, the bower of jasmine; instead, all was a tangle of flowers, as it had been of old. The king was so much perplexed that he threatened the princess's playfellows with all sorts of punishments if they would not confess something about her disappearance; but as they only repeated the same story he presently put down the whole affair to the work of some sprite or goblin, and tried to console himself for his loss by ordering a grand hunt; for kings cannot bear to be troubled about anything long.

Meanwhile the princess was not at all unhappy in the palace of her elfish lover.

When the water-nymphs, who were hiding in readiness, had caught her and dragged her out of the sight of her terrified maidens, she herself had not had time to be frightened. They swam with her quickly by strange underground ways to a palace so splendid that her father's seemed but a poor cottage in comparison with it, and when she recovered from her astonishment she found herself seated upon a couch, wrapped in a wonderful robe of satin fastened with a silken girdle, while beside her knelt a young man who whispered the sweetest speeches imaginable in her ear. The gnome, for he it was, told her all about himself and his great underground kingdom, and presently led her through the many rooms and halls of the palace, and showed her the rare and wonderful things displayed in them till she was fairly dazzled at the sight of so much splendour. On three sides of the castle lay a lovely garden with masses of gay, sweet flowers, and velvet lawns all cool and shady, which pleased the eye of the princess. The fruit trees were hung with golden and rosy apples, and nightingales sang in every bush, as the gnome and the princess wandered in the leafy alleys, sometimes gazing at the moon, sometimes pausing to gather the rarest flowers for her adornment. And all the time he was thinking to himself that never, during the hundreds of years he had lived, had he seen so charming a maiden. But the princess felt no such happiness; in spite of all the magic delights around her she was sad, though she tried to seem content for fear of displeasing the gnome. However, he soon perceived her melancholy, and in a thousand ways strove to dispel the cloud, but in vain. At last he said to himself: 'Men are sociable creatures, like bees or ants. Doubtless this lovely mortal is pining for company. Who is there I can find for her to talk to?'

Thereupon he hastened into the nearest filed and dug up a dozen or so of different roots--carrots, turnips, and radishes--and laying them carefully in an elegant basket brought them to the princess, who sat pensive in the shade of the rose-bower.

'Loveliest daughter of earth,' said the gnome, 'banish all sorrow; no more shall you be lonely in my dwelling. In this basket is all you need to make this spot delightful to you. Take this little many-coloured wand, and with a touch give to each root the form you desire to see.'

With this he left her, and the princess, without an instant's delay, opened the basket, and touching a turnip, cried eagerly: 'Brunhilda, my dear Brunhilda! come to me quickly!' And sure enough there was Brunhilda, joyfully hugging and kissing her beloved princess, and chattering as gaily as in the old days.

This sudden appearance was so delightful that the princess could hardly believe her own eyes, and was quite beside herself with the joy of having her dear playfellow with her once more. Hand in hand they wandered about the enchanted garden, and gathered the golden apples from the trees, and when they were tired of this amusement the princess led her friend through all the wonderful rooms of the palace, until at last they came to the one in which were kept all the marvellous dresses and ornaments the gnome had given to his hoped-for bride. There they found so much to amuse them that the hours passed like minutes. Veils, girdles, and necklaces were tried on and admired, the imitation Brunhilda knew so well how to behave herself, and showed so much taste that nobody would ever have suspected that she was nothing but a turnip after all. The gnome, who had secretly been keeping an eye upon them, was very pleased with himself for having so well understood the heart of a woman; and the princess seemed to him even more charming than before. She did not forget to touch the rest of the roots with her magic wand, and soon had all her maidens about her, and even, as she had two tiny radishes to spare, her favourite cat, and her little dog whose name was Beni.

And now all went cheerfully in the castle. The princess gave to each of the maidens her task, and never was mistress better served. For a whole week she enjoyed the delight of her pleasant company undisturbed. They all sang, they danced, they played from morning to night; only the princess noticed that day by day the fresh young faces of her maidens grew pale and wan, and the mirror in the great marble hall showed her that she alone still kept her rosy bloom, while Brunhilda and the rest faded visibly. They assured her that all was well with them; but, nevertheless, they continued to waste away, and day by day it became harder to them to take part in the games of the princess, till at last, one fine morning, when the princess started from bed and hastened out to join her gay playfellows, she shuddered and started back at the sight of a group of shrivelled crones, with bent backs and trembling limbs, who supported their tottering steps with staves and crutches, and coughed dismally. A little nearer to the hearth lay the once frolicsome Beni, with all four feet stretched stiffly out, while the sleek cat seemed too weak to raise his head from his velvet cushion.

The horrified princess fled to the door to escape from the sight of this mournful company, and called loudly for the gnome, who appeared at once, humbly anxious to do her bidding.

'Malicious Sprite,' she cried, 'why do you begrudge me my playmates --the greatest delight of my lonely hours? Isn't this solitary life in such a desert bad enough without your turning the castle into a hospital for the aged? Give my maidens back their youth and health this very minute, or I will never love you!'

'Sweetest and fairest of damsels,' cried the gnome, 'do not be angry; everything that is in my power I will do--but do not ask the impossible. So long as the sap was fresh in the roots the magic staff could keep them in the forms you desired, but as the sap dried up they withered away. But never trouble yourself about that, dearest one, a basket of fresh turnips will soon set matters right, and you can speedily call up again every form you wish to see. The great green patch in the garden will prove you with a more lively company.'

So saying the gnome took himself off. And the princess with her magic wand touched the wrinkled old women, and left them the withered roots they really were, to be thrown upon the rubbish heap; and with light feet skipped off across to the meadow to take possession of the freshly filled basket. But to her surprise she could not find it anywhere. Up and down the garden she searched, spying into every corner, but not a sign of it was to be found. By the trellis of grape vines she met the gnome, who was so much embarrassed at the sight of her that she became aware of his confusion while he was still quite a long way off.

'You are trying to tease me,' she cried, as soon as she saw him. 'Where have you hidden the basket? I have been looking for it at least an hour.'

'Dear queen of my heart,' answered he, 'I pray you to forgive my carelessness. I promised more than I could perform. I have sought all over the land for the roots you desire; but they are gathered in, and lie drying in musty cellars, and the fields are bare and desolate, for below in the valley winter reigns, only here in your presence spring is held fast, and wherever your foot is set the gay flowers bloom. Have patience for a little, and then without fail you shall have your puppets to play with.'

Almost before the gnome had finished, the disappointed princess turned away, and marched off to her own apartments, without deigning to answer him.

The gnome, however, set off above ground as speedily as possible, and disguising himself as a farmer, bought an ass in the nearest market-town, and brought it back loaded with sacks of turnip, carrot, and radish seed. With this he sowed a great field, and sent a vast army of his goblins to watch and tend it, and to bring up the fiery rivers from the heart of the earth near enough to warm and encourage the sprouting seeds. Thus fostered they grew and flourished marvellously, and promised a goodly crop.

The princess wandered about the field day by day, no other plants or fruits in all her wonderful garden pleased her as much as these roots; but still her eyes were full of discontent. And, best of all, she loved to while away the hours in a shady fir-wood, seated upon the bank of a little stream, into which she would cast the flowers she had gathered and watch them float away.

The gnome tried hard by every means in his power to please the princess and win her love, but little did he guess the real reason of his lack of success. He imagined that she was too young and inexperienced to care for him; but that was a mistake, for the truth was that another image already filled her heart. The young Prince Ratibor, whose lands joined her father's, had won the heart of the princess; and the lovers had been looking forward to the coming of their wedding-day when the bride's mysterious disappearance took place. The sad news drove Ratibor distracted, and as the days went on, and nothing could be heard of the princess, he forsook his castle and the society of men, and spent his days in the wild forests, roaming about and crying her name aloud to the trees and rocks. Meanwhile, the maiden, in her gorgeous prison, sighed in secret over her grief, not wishing to arouse the gnome's suspicions. In her own mind she was wondering if by any means she might escape from her captivity, and at last she hit upon a plan.

By this time spring once more reigned in the valley, and the gnome sent the fires back to their places in the deeps of the earth, for the roots which they had kept warm through all the cruel winter hand now come to their full size. Day by day the princess pulled up some of them, and made experiments with them, conjuring up now this longed-for person, and now that, just for the pleasure of seeing them as they appeared; but she really had another purpose in view.

One day she changed a tiny turnip into a bee, and sent him off to bring her some news of her lover.

'Fly, dear little bee, towards the east,' said she, 'to my beloved Ratibor, and softly hum into his ear that I love him only, but that I am a captive in the gnome's palace under the mountains. Do not forget a single word of my greeting, and bring me back a message from my beloved.'

So the bee spread his shining wings and flew away to do as he was bidden; but before he was out of sight a greedy swallow made a snatch at him, and to the great grief of the princess her messenger was eaten up then and there.

After that, by the power of the wonderful wand she summoned a cricket, and taught him this greeting:

'Hop, little cricket, to Ratibor, and chirp in his ear that I love him only, but that I am held captive by the gnome in his palace under the mountains.'

So the cricket hopped off gaily, determined to do his best to deliver his message; but, alas! a long-legged stork who was prancing along the same road caught him in her cruel beak, and before he could say a word he had disappeared down her throat.

These two unlucky ventures did not prevent the princess from trying once more.

This time she changed the turnip into a magpie.

'Flutter from tree to tree, chattering bird,' said she, 'till you come to Ratibor, my love. Tell him that I am a captive, and bid him come with horses and men, the third day from this, to the hill that rises from the Thorny Valley.'

The magpie listened, hopped awhile from branch to branch, and then darted away, the princess watching him anxiously as far as she could see.

Now Prince Ratibor was still spending his life in wandering about the woods, and not even the beauty of the spring could soothe his grief.

One day, as he sat in the shade of an oak tree, dreaming of his lost princess, and sometimes crying her name aloud, he seemed to hear another voice reply to his, and, starting up, he gazed around him, but he could see no one, and he had just made up his mind that he must be mistaken, when the same voice called again, and, looking up sharply, he saw a magpie which hopped to and fro among the twigs. Then Ratibor heard with surprise that the bird was indeed calling him by name.

'Poor chatterpie,' said he; 'who taught you to say that name, which belongs to an unlucky mortal who wishes the earth would open and swallow up him and his memory for ever?'

Thereupon he caught up a great stone, and would have hurled it at the magpie, if it had not at that moment uttered the name of the princess.

This was so unexpected that the prince's arm fell helplessly to his side at the sound, and he stood motionless.

But the magpie in the tree, who, like all the rest of his family, was not happy unless he could be for ever chattering, began to repeat the message the princess had taught him; and as soon as he understood it, Prince Ratibor's heart was filed with joy. All his gloom and misery vanished in a moment, and he anxiously questioned the welcome messenger as to the fate of the princess.

But the magpie knew no more than the lesson he had learnt, so he soon fluttered away; while the prince hurried back to his castle to gather together a troop of horsemen, full of courage for whatever might befall.

The princess meanwhile was craftily pursuing her plan of escape. She left off treating the gnome with coldness and indifference; indeed, there was a look in her eyes which encouraged him to hope that she might some day return his love, and the idea pleased him mightily. The next day, as soon as the sun rose, she made her appearance decked as a bride, in the wonderful robes and jewels which the fond gnome had prepared for her. Her golden hair was braided and crowned with myrtle blossoms, and her flowing veil sparkled with gems. In these magnificent garments she went to meet the gnome upon the great terrace.

'Loveliest of maidens,' he stammered, bowing low before her, 'let me gaze into your dear eyes, and read in them that you will no longer refuse my love, but will make me the happiest being the sun shines upon.'

So saying he would have drawn aside her veil; but the princess only held it more closely about her.

'Your constancy has overcome me,' she said; 'I can no longer oppose your wishes. But believe my words, and suffer this veil still to hide my blushes and tears.'

'Why tears, beloved one?' cried the gnome anxiously; 'every tear of yours falls upon my heart like a drop of molten gold. Greatly as I desire your love, I do not ask a sacrifice.'

'Ah!' cried the false princess, 'why do you misunderstand my tears? My heart answers to your tenderness, and yet I am fearful. A wife cannot always charm, and though YOU will never alter, the beauty of mortals is as a flower that fades. How can I be sure that you will always be as loving and charming as you are now?'

'Ask some proof, sweetheart,' said he. 'Put my obedience and my patience to some test by which you can judge of my unalterable love.'

'Be it so,' answered the crafty maiden. 'Then give me just one proof of your goodness. Go! count the turnips in yonder meadow. My wedding feast must not lack guests. They shall provide me with bride-maidens too. But beware lest you deceive me, and do not miss a single one. That shall be the test of your truth towards me.'

Unwilling as the gnome was to lose sight of his beautiful bride for a moment, he obeyed her commands without delay, and hurried off to begin his task. He skipped along among the turnips as nimble as a grasshopper, and had soon counted them all; but, to be quite certain that he had made no mistake, he thought he would just run over them again. This time, to his great annoyance, the number was different; so he reckoned them for the third time, but now the number was not the same as either of the previous ones! And this was hardly to be wondered at, as his mind was full of the princess's pretty looks and words.

As for the maiden, no sooner was her deluded lover fairly out of sight than she began to prepare for flight. She had a fine fresh turnip hidden close at hand, which she changed into a spirited horse, all saddled and bridled, and, springing upon its back, she galloped away over hill and dale till she reached the Thorny Valley, and flung herself into the arms of her beloved Prince Ratibor.

Meanwhile the toiling gnome went through his task over and over again till his back ached and his head swam, and he could no longer put two and two together; but as he felt tolerably certain of the exact number of turnips in the field, big and little together, he hurried back eager to prove to his beloved one what a delightful and submissive husband he would be. He felt very well satisfied with himself as he crossed the mossy lawn to the place where he had left her; but, alas! she was no longer there.

He searched every thicket and path, he looked behind every tree, and gazed into every pond, but without success; then he hastened into the palace and rushed from room to room, peering into every hole and corner and calling her by name; but only echo answered in the marble halls--there was neither voice nor footstep.

Then he began to perceive that something was amiss, and, throwing off the mortal form that encumbered him, he flew out of the palace, and soared high into the air, and saw the fugitive princess in the far distance just as the swift horse carried her across the boundary of his dominions.

Furiously did the enraged gnome fling two great clouds together, and hurl a thunderbolt after the flying maiden, splintering the rocky barriers which had stood a thousand years. But his fury was vain, the thunderclouds melted away into a soft mist, and the gnome, after flying about for a while in despair, bewailing to the four winds his unhappy fate, went sorrowfully back to the palace, and stole once more through every room, with many sighs and lamentations. He passed through the gardens which for him had lost their charm, and the sight of the princess's footprints on the golden sand of the pathway renewed his grief. All was lonely, empty, sorrowful; and the forsaken gnome resolved that he would have no more dealings with such false creatures as he had found men to be.

Thereupon he stamped three times upon the earth, and the magic palace, with all its treasures, vanished away into the nothingness out of which he had called it; and the gnome fled once more to the depths of his underground kingdom.

While all this was happening, Prince Ratibor was hurrying away with his prize to a place of safety. With great pomp and triumph he restored the lovely princess to her father, and was then and there married to her, and took her back with him to his own castle.

But long after she was dead, and her children too, the villagers would tell the tale of her imprisonment underground, as they sat carving wood in the winter nights.

[Volksmahrchen der Deutschen.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

Story of the King Who Would Be Stronger Than Fate

Once upon a time, far away in the east country, there lived a king who loved hunting so much that, when once there was a deer in sight, he was careless of his own safety. Indeed, he often became quite separated from his nobles and attendants, and in fact was particularly fond of lonely adventures. Another of his favourite amusements was to give out that he was not well, and could not be seen; and then, with the knowledge only of his faithful Grand Wazeer, to disguise himself as a pedlar, load a donkey with cheap wares, and travel about. In this way he found out what the common people said about him, and how his judges and governors fulfilled their duties.

One day his queen presented him with a baby daughter as beautiful as the dawn, and the king himself was so happy and delighted that, for a whole week, he forgot to hunt, and spent the time in public and private rejoicing.

Not long afterwards, however, he went out after some deer which were to be found in a far corner of his forests. In the course of the beat his dogs disturbed a beautiful snow-white stag, and directly he saw it the king determined that he would have it at any cost. So he put the spurs to his horse, and followed it as hard as he could gallop. Of course all his attendants followed at the best speed that they could manage; but the king was so splendidly mounted, and the stag was so swift, that, at the end of an hour, the king found that only his favourite hound and himself were in the chase; all the rest were far, far behind and out of sight.

Nothing daunted, however, he went on and on, till he perceived that he was entering a valley with great rocky mountains on all sides, and that his horse was getting very tired and trembled at every stride. Worse than all evening was already drawing on, and the sun would soon set. In vain had he sent arrow after arrow at the beautiful stag. Every shot fell short, or went wide of the mark; and at last, just as darkness was setting in, he lost sight altogether of the beast. By this time his horse could hardly move from fatigue, his hound staggered panting along beside him, he was far away amongst mountains where he had never been before, and had quite missed his way, and not a human creature or dwelling was in sight.

All this was very discouraging, but the king would not have minded if he had not lost that beautiful stag. That troubled him a good deal, but he never worried over what he could not help, so he got down from his horse, slipped his arm through the bridle, and led the animal along the rough path in hopes of discovering some shepherd's hut, or, at least, a cave or shelter under some rock, where he might pass the night.

Presently he heard the sound of rushing water, and made towards it. He toiled over a steep rocky shoulder of a hill, and there, just below him, was a stream dashing down a precipitous glen, and, almost beneath his feet, twinkling and flickering from the level of the torrent, was a dim light as of a lamp. Towards this light the king with his horse and hound made his way, sliding and stumbling down a steep, stony path. At the bottom the king found a narrow grassy ledge by the brink of the stream, across which the light from a rude lantern in the mount of a cave shed a broad beam of uncertain light. At the edge of the stream sat an old hermit with a long white beard, who neither spoke nor moved as the king approached, but sat throwing into the stream dry leaves which lay scattered about the ground near him.

'Peace be upon you,' said the king, giving the usual country salutation.

'And upon you peace,' answered the hermit; but still he never looked up, nor stopped what he was doing.

For a minute or two the king stood watching him. He noticed that the hermit threw two leaves in at a time, and watched them attentively. Sometimes both were carried rapidly down by the stream; sometimes only one leaf was carried off, and the other, after whirling slowly round and round on the edge of the current, would come circling back on an eddy to the hermit's feet. At other times both leaves were held in the backward eddy, and failed to reach the main current of the noisy stream.

'What are you doing?' asked the king at last, and the hermit replied that he was reading the fates of men; every one's fate, he said, was settled from the beginning, and, whatever it were, there was no escape from it. The king laughed.  'I care little,' he said, 'what my fate may be; but I should be curious to know the fate of my little daughter.'

'I cannot say,' answered the hermit.

'Do you not know, then?' demanded the king.

'I might know,' returned the hermit, 'but it is not always wisdom to know much.'

But the king was not content with this reply, and began to press the old man to say what he knew, which for a long time he would not do. At last, however, the king urged him so greatly that he said:

'The king's daughter will marry the son of a poor slave-girl called Puruna, who belongs to the king of the land of the north. There is no escaping from Fate.'

The king was wild with anger at hearing these words, but he was also very tired; so he only laughed, and answered that he hoped there would be a way out of THAT fate anyhow. Then he asked if the hermit could shelter him and his beasts for the night, and the hermit said 'Yes'; so, very soon the king had watered and tethered his horse, and, after a supper of bread and parched peas, lay down in the cave, with the hound at his feet, and tried to go to sleep. But instead of sleeping he only lay awake and thought of the hermit's prophecy; and the more he thought of it the angrier he felt, until he gnashed his teeth and declared that it should never, never come true.

Morning came, and the king got up, pale and sulky, and, after learning from the hermit which path to take, was soon mounted and found his way home without much difficulty. Directly he reached his palace he wrote a letter to the king of the land of the north, begging him, as a favour, to sell him his slave girl Puruna and her son, and saying that, if he consented, he would send a messenger to receive them at the river which divided the kingdoms.

For five days he awaited the reply, and hardly slept or ate, but was as cross as could be all the time. On the fifth day his messenger returned with a letter to say that the king of the land of the north would not sell, but he would give, the king the slave girl and her son. The king was overjoyed. He sent for his Grand Wazeer and told him that he was going on one of his lonely expeditions, and that the Wazeer must invent some excuse to account for his absence. Next he disguised himself as an ordinary messenger, mounted a swift camel, and sped away to the place where the slave girl was to be handed over to him. When he got there he gave the messengers who brought her a letter of thanks and a handsome present for their master and rewards for themselves; and then without delay he took the poor woman and her tiny baby-boy up on to his camel and rode off to a wild desert.

After riding for a day and a night, almost without stopping, he came to a great cave where he made the woman dismount, and, taking her and the baby into the cave, he drew his sword and with one blow chopped her head off. But although his anger made him cruel enough for anything so dreadful, the king felt that he could not turn his great sword on the helpless baby, who he was sure must soon die in this solitary place without its mother; so he left it in the cave where it was, and, mounting his camel, rode home as fast as he could.

Now, in a small village in his kingdom there lived an old widow who had no children or relations of any kind. She made her living mostly by selling the milk of a flock of goats; but she was very, very poor, and not very strong, and often used to wonder how she would live if she got too weak or ill to attend to her goats. Every morning she drove the goats out into the desert to graze on the shrubs and bushes which grew there, and every evening they came home of themselves to be milked and to be shut up safely for the night.

One evening the old woman was astonished to find that her very best nanny-goat returned without a drop of milk. She thought that some naughty boy or girl was playing a trick upon her and had caught the goat on its way home and stolen all the milk. But when evening after evening the goat remained almost dry she determined to find out who the thief was. So the next day she followed the goats at a distance and watched them while they grazed. At length, in the afternoon, the old woman noticed this particular nanny-goat stealing off by herself away from the herd and she at once went after her. On and on the goat walked for some way, and then disappeared into a cave in the rocks. The old woman followed the goat into the cave and then, what should she see but the animal giving her milk to a little boy-baby, whilst on the ground near by lay the sad remains of the baby's dead mother! Wondering and frightened, the old woman thought at last that this little baby might be a son to her in her old age, and that he would grow up and in time to come be her comfort and support. So she carried home the baby to her hut, and next day she took a spade to the cave and dug a grave where she buried the poor mother.

Years passed by, and the baby grew up into a find handsome lad, as daring as he was beautiful, and as industrious as he was brave. One day, when the boy, whom the old woman had named Nur Mahomed, was about seventeen years old, he was coming from his day's work in the fields, when he saw a strange donkey eating the cabbages in the garden which surround their little cottage. Seizing a big stick, he began to beat the intruder and to drive him out of his garden. A neighbour passing by called out to him--'Hi! I say! why are you beating the pedlar's donkey like that?'

'The pedlar should keep him from eating my cabbages,' said Nur Mahomed; 'if he comes this evening here again I'll cut off his tail for him!'

Whereupon he went off indoors, whistling cheerfully. It happened that this neighbour was one of those people who make mischief by talking too much; so, meeting the pedlar in the 'serai,' or inn, that evening, he told him what had occurred, and added: 'Yes; and the young spitfire said that if beating the donkey would not do, he would beat you also, and cut your nose off for a thief!'

A few days later, the pedlar having moved on, two men appeared in the village inquiring who it was who had threatened to ill-treat and to murder an innocent pedlar. They declared that the pedlar, in fear of his life, had complained to the king; and that they had been sent to bring the lawless person who had said these things before the king himself. Of course they soon found out about the donkey eating Nur Mahomed's cabbages, and about the young man's hot words; but although the lad assured them that he had never said anything about murdering anyone, they replied they were ordered to arrest him, and bring him to take his trial before the king. So, in spite of his protests, and the wails of his mother, he was carried off, and in due time brought before the king. Of course Nur Mahomed never guessed that the supposed pedlar happened to have been the king himself, although nobody knew it.

But as he was very angry at what he had been told, he declared that he was going to make an example of this young man, and intended to teach him that even poor travelling pedlars could get justice in HIS country, and be protected from such lawlessness. However, just as he was going to pronounce some very heavy sentence, there was a stir in the court, and up came Nur Mahomed's old mother, weeping and lamenting, and begging to be heard. The king ordered her to speak, and she began to plead for the boy, declaring how good he was, and how he was the support of her old age, and if he were put in prison she would die. The king asked her who she was. She replied that she was his mother.

'His mother?' said the king; 'you are too old, surely, to have so young a son!'

Then the old woman, in her fright and distress, confessed the whole story of how she found the baby, and how she rescued and brought him up, and ended by beseeching the king for mercy.

It is easy to guess how, as the story came out, the king looked blacker and blacker, and more and more grim, until at last he was half fainting with rage and astonishment. This, then, was the baby he had left to die, after cruelly murdering his mother! Surely fate might have spared him this! He wished he had sufficient excuse to put the boy to death, for the old hermit's prophecy came back to him as strongly as ever; and yet the young man had done nothing bad enough to deserve such a punishment. Everyone would call him a tyrant if he were to give such an order--in fact, he dared not try it!

At length he collected himself enough to say:--'If this young man will enlist in my army I will let him off. We have need of such as him, and a little discipline will do him good.' Still the old woman pleaded that she could not live without her son, and was nearly as terrified at the idea of his becoming a soldier as she was at the thought of his being put in prison. But at length the king--determined to get the youth into his clutches--pacified her by promising her a pension large enough to keep her in comfort; and Nur Mahomed, to his own great delight, was duly enrolled in the king's army.

As a soldier Nur Mahomed seemed to be in luck. He was rather surprised, but much pleased, to find that he was always one of those chosen when any difficult or dangerous enterprise was afoot; and, although he had the narrowest escapes on some occasions, still, the very desperateness of the situations in which he found himself gave him special chances of displaying his courage. And as he was also modest and generous, he became a favourite with his officers and his comrades.

Thus it was not very surprising that, before very long, he became enrolled amongst the picked men of the king's bodyguard. The fact is, that the king had hoped to have got him killed in some fight or another; but, seeing that, on the contrary, he throve on hard knocks, he was now determined to try more direct and desperate methods.

One day, soon after Nur Mahomed had entered the bodyguard, he was selected to be one of the soldiers told off to escort the king through the city. The procession was marching on quite smoothly, when a man, armed with a dagger, rushed out of an alley straight towards the king. Nur Mahomed, who was the nearest of the guards, threw himself in the way, and received the stab that had been apparently intended for the king. Luckily the blow was a hurried one, and the dagger glanced on is breastbone, so that, although he received a severe wound, his youth and strength quickly got the better of it. The king was, of course, obliged to take some notice of this brave deed, and as a reward made him one of his own attendants.

After this the strange adventures the young man passed through were endless. Officers of the bodyguard were often sent on all sorts of secret and difficult errands, and such errands had a curious way of becoming necessary when Nur Mahomed was on duty. Once, while he was taking a journey, a foot-bridge gave way under him; once he was attacked by armed robbers; a rock rolled down upon him in a mountain pass; a heavy stone coping fell from a roof at his feet in a narrow city alley. Altogether, Nur Mahomed began to think that, somewhere or other, he had made an enemy; but he was light-hearted, and the thought did not much trouble him. He escaped somehow every time, and felt amused rather than anxious about the next adventure.

It was the custom of that city that the officer for the day of the palace guards should receive all his food direct from the king's kitchen. One day, when Nur Mahomed's turn came to be on duty, he was just sitting down to a delicious stew that had been sent in from the palace, when one of those gaunt, hungry dogs, which, in eastern countries, run about the streets, poked his nose in at the open guard-room door, and looked at Nur Mahomed with mouth watering and nostrils working. The kind-hearted young man picked out a lump of meat, went to the door, and threw it outside to him. The dog pounced upon it, and gulped it down greedily, and was just turning to go, when it staggered, fell, rolled over, and died. Nur Mahomed, who had been lazily watching him, stood still for a moment, then he came back whistling softly. He gathered up the rest of his dinner and carefully wrapped it up to carry away and bury somewhere; and then he sent back the empty plates.

How furious the king was when, at the next morning's durbar, Nur Mahomed appeared before him fresh, alert and smiling as usual. He was determined, however, to try once more, and bidding the young man come into his presence that evening, gave orders that he was to carry a secret despatch to the governor of a distant province. 'Make your preparations at once,' added he, 'and be ready to start in the morning. I myself will deliver you the papers at the last moment.'

Now this province was four or five days' journey from the palace, and the governor of it was the most faithful servant the king had. He could be silent as the grave, and prided himself on his obedience. Whilst he was an old and tried servant of the king's, his wife had been almost a mother to the young princess ever since the queen had died some years before. It happened that, a little before this time, the princess had been sent away for her health to another remote province; and whilst she was there her old friend, the governor's wife, had begged her to come and stay with them as soon as she could.

The princess accepted gladly, and was actually staying in the governor's house at the very time when the king made up his mind to send Nur Mahomed there with the mysterious despatch.

According to orders Nur Mahomed presented himself early the next morning at the king's private apartments. His best horse was saddled, food placed in is saddle-bag, and with some money tied up in his waist-band, he was ready to start. The king handed over to him a sealed packet, desiring him to give it himself only into the hands of the governor, and to no one else. Nur Mahomed hid it carefully in his turban, swung himself into the saddle, and five minutes later rode out of the city gates, and set out on his long journey.

The weather was very hot; but Nur Mahomed thought that the sooner his precious letter was delivered the better; so that, by dint of riding most of each night and resting only in the hottest part of the day, he found himself, by noon on the third day, approaching the town which was his final destination.

Not a soul was to be seen anywhere; and Nur Mahomed, stiff, dry, thirsty, and tired, looked longingly over the wall into the gardens, and marked the fountains, the green grass, the shady apricot orchards, and giant mulberry trees, and wished he were there.

At length he reached the castle gates, and was at once admitted, as he was in the uniform of the king's bodyguard. The governor was resting, the soldier said, and could not see him until the evening. So Nur Mahomed handed over his horse to an attendant, and wandered down into the lovely gardens he had seen from the road, and sat down in the shade to rest himself. He flung himself on his back and watched the birds twittering and chattering in the trees above him. Through the branches he could see great patches of sky where the kites wheeled and circled incessantly, with shrill whistling cried. Bees buzzed over the flowers with a soothing sound, and in a few minutes Nur Mahomed was fast asleep.

Every day, through the heat of the afternoon, the governor, and his wife also, used to lie down for two or three hours in their own rooms, and so, for the matter of that, did most people in the palace. But the princess, like many other girls, was restless, and preferred to wander about the garden, rather than rest on a pile of soft cushions. What a torment her stout old attendants and servants sometime thought her when she insisted on staying awake, and making them chatter or do something, when they could hardly keep their eyes open! Sometimes, however, the princess would pretend to go to sleep, and then, after all her women had gladly followed her example, she would get up and go out by herself, her veil hanging loosely about her. If she was discovered her old hostess scolded her severely; but the princess only laughed, and did the same thing next time.

This very afternoon the princess had left all her women asleep, and, after trying in vain to amuse herself indoors, she had slipped out into the great garden, and rambled about in all her favourite nooks and corners, feeling quite safe as there was not a creature to be seen. Suddenly, on turning a corner, she stopped in surprise, for before her lay a man fast asleep! In her hurry she had almost tripped over him. But there he was, a young man, tanned and dusty with travel, in the uniform of an officer of the king's guard. One of the few faults of this lovely princess was a devouring curiosity, and she lived such an idle life that she had plenty of time to be curious. Out of one of the folds of this young man's turban there peeped the corner of a letter! She wondered what the letter was--whom it was for! She drew her veil a little closer, and stole across on tip-toe and caught hold of the corner of the letter. Then she pulled it a little, and just a little more! A great big seal came into view, which she saw to be her father's, and at the sight of it she paused for a minute half ashamed of what she was doing. But the pleasure of taking a letter which was not meant for her was more than she could resist, and in another moment it was in her hand. All at once she remembered that it would be death to this poor officer if he lost the letter, and that at all hazards she must put it back again. But this was not so easy; and, moreover, the letter in her hand burnt her with longing to read it, and see what was inside. She examined the seal. It was sticky with being exposed to the hot sun, and with a very little effort it parted from the paper. The letter was open and she read it! And this was what was written:

'Behead the messenger who brings this letter secretly and at once. Ask no questions.'

The girl grew pale. What a shame! she thought. SHE would not let a handsome young fellow like that be beheaded; but how to prevent it was not quite clear at the moment. Some plan must be invented, and she wished to lock herself in where no one could interrupt her, as might easily happen in the garden. So she crept softly to her room, and took a piece of paper and wrote upon it: 'Marry the messenger who brings this letter to the princess openly at once. Ask no questions.' And even contrived to work the seals off the original letter and to fix them to this, so that no one could tell, unless they examined it closely, that it had ever been opened. Then she slipped back, shaking with fear and excitement, to where the young officer still lay asleep, thrust the letter into the fold so his turban, and hurried back to her room. It was done!

Late in the afternoon Nur Mahomed woke, and, making sure that the precious despatch was still safe, went off to get ready for his audience with the governor. As soon as he was ushered into his presence he took the letter from his turban and placed it in the governor's hands according to orders. When he had read it the governor was certainly a little astonished; but he was told in the letter to 'ask no questions,' and he knew how to obey orders. He sent for his wife and told her to get the princess ready to be married at once.

'Nonsense!' said his wife, 'what in the world do you mean?'

'These are the king's commands,' he answered; 'go and do as I bid you. The letter says "at once," and "ask no questions." The marriage, therefore, must take place this evening.'

In vain did his wife urge every objection; the more she argued, the more determined was her husband. 'I know how to obey orders,' he said, 'and these are as plain as the nose on my face!' So the princess was summoned, and, somewhat to their surprise, she seemed to take the news very calmly; next Nur Mahomed was informed, and he was greatly startled, but of course he could but be delighted at the great and unexpected honour which he thought the king had done him. Then all the castle was turned upside down; and when the news spread in the town, THAT was turned upside down too. Everybody ran everywhere, and tried to do everything at once; and, in the middle of it all, the old governor went about with his hair standing on end, muttering something about 'obeying orders.'

And so the marriage was celebrated, and there was a great feast in the castle, and another in the soldiers' barracks, and illuminations all over the town and in the beautiful gardens. And all the people declared that such a wonderful sight had never been seen, and talked about it to the ends of their lives.

The next day the governor despatched the princess and her bridegroom to the king, with a troop of horsemen, splendidly dressed, and he sent a mounted messenger on before them, with a letter giving the account of the marriage to the king.

When the king got the governor's letter, he grew so red in the face that everyone thought he was going to have apoplexy. They were all very anxious to know what had happened, but he rushed off and locked himself into a room, where he ramped and raved until he was tired. Then, after awhile, he began to think he had better make the best of it, especially as the old governor had been clever enough to send him back his letter, and the king was pretty sure that this was in the princess's handwriting. He was fond of his daughter, and though she had behaved badly, he did not wish to cut HER head off, and he did not want people to know the truth because it would make him look foolish. In fact, the more he considered the matter, the more he felt that he would be wise to put a good face on it, and to let people suppose that he had really brought about the marriage of his own free will.

So, when the young couple arrived, the king received them with all state, and gave his son-in-law a province to govern. Nur Mahomed soon proved himself as able and honourable a governor as he was a brave soldier; and, when the old king died, he became king in his place, and reigned long and happily.

Nur Mahomed's old mother lived for a long time in her 'son's' palace, and died in peace. The princess, his wife, although she had got her husband by a trick, found that she could not trick HIM, and so she never tried, but busied herself in teaching her children and scolding her maids. As for the old hermit, no trace of him was ever discovered; but the cave is there, and the leaves lie thick in front of it unto this day.

[Told the writer by an Indian.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

Story of Wali Dad the Simple-Hearted

Once upon a time there lived a poor old man whose name was Wali Dad Gunjay, or Wali Dad the Bald. He had no relations, but lived all by himself in a little mud hut some distance from any town, and made his living by cutting grass in the jungle, and selling it as fodder for horses. He only earned by this five halfpence a day; but he was a simple old man, and needed so little out of it, that he saved up one halfpenny daily, and spent the rest upon such food and clothing as he required.

In this way he lived for many years until, one night, he thought that he would count the money he had hidden away in the great earthen pot under the floor of his hut. So he set to work, and with much trouble he pulled the bag out on to the floor, and sat gazing in astonishment at the heap of coins which tumbled out of it. What should he do with them all? he wondered. But he never thought of spending the money on himself, because he was content to pass the rest of his days as he had been doing for ever so long, and he really had no desire for any greater comfort or luxury.

At last he threw all the money into an old sack, which he pushed under his bead, and then, rolled in his ragged old blanket, he went off to sleep.

Early next morning he staggered off with his sack of money to the shop of a jeweller, whom he knew in the town, and bargained with him for a beautiful little gold bracelet. With this carefully wrapped up in his cotton waistband he went to the house of a rich friend, who was a travelling merchant, and used to wander about with his camels and merchandise through many countries. Wali Dad was lucky enough to find him at home, so he sat down, and after a little talk he asked the merchant who was the most virtuous and beautiful lady he had ever met with. The merchant replied that the princess of Khaistan was renowned everywhere as well for the beauty of her person as for the kindness and generosity of her disposition.

'Then,' said Wali Dad, 'next time you go that way, give her this little bracelet, with the respectful compliments of one who admires virtue far more than he desires wealth.'

With that he pulled the bracelet from his waistband, and handed it to his friend. The merchant was naturally much astonished, but said nothing, and made no objection to carrying out his friend's plan.

Time passed by, and at length the merchant arrived in the course of his travels at the capital of Khaistan. As soon as he had opportunity he presented himself at the palace, and sent in the bracelet, neatly packed in a little perfumed box provided by himself, giving at the same time the message entrusted to him by Wali Dad.

The princess could not think who could have bestowed this present on her, but she bade her servant to tell the merchant that if he would return, after he had finished his business in the city, she would give him her reply. In a few days, therefore, the merchant came back, and received from the princess a return present in the shape of a camel-load or rich silks, besides a present of money for himself. With these he set out on his journey.

Some months later he got home again from his journeyings, and proceeded to take Wali Dad the princess's present. Great was the perplexity of the good man to find a camel-load of silks tumbled at his door! What was he to do with these costly things? But, presently, after much thought, he begged the merchant to consider whether he did not know of some young prince to whom such treasures might be useful.

'Of course,' cried the merchant, greatly amused; 'from Delhi to Baghdad, and from Constantinople to Lucknow, I know them all; and there lives none worthier than the gallant and wealthy young prince of Nekabad.'

'Very well, then, take the silks to him, with the blessing of an old man,' said Wali Dad, much relieved to be rid of them.

So, the next time that the merchant journeyed that way he carried the silks with him, and in due course arrived at Nekabad, and sought an audience of the prince. When he was shown into his presence he produced the beautiful gift of silks that Wali Dad had sent, and begged the young man to accept them as a humble tribute to his worth and greatness. The prince was much touched by the generosity of the giver, and ordered, as a return present, twelve of the finest breed of horses for which his country was famous to be delivered over to the merchant, to whom also, before he took his leave, he gave a munificent reward for his services.

As before, the merchant at last arrived at home; and next day, he set out for Wali Dad's house with the twelve horses. When the old man saw them coming in the distance he said to himself: 'Here's luck! a troop of horses coming! They are sure to want quantities of grass, and I shall sell all I have without having to drag it to market.' Thereupon he rushed off and cut grass as fast he could. When he got back, with as much grass as he could possibly carry, he was greatly discomfited to find that the horses were all for himself. At first he could not think what to do with them, but, after a little, a brilliant idea struck him! He gave two to the merchant, and begged him to take the rest to the princess of Khaistan, who was clearly the fittest person to possess such beautiful animals.

The merchant departed, laughing. But, true to his old friend's request, he took the horses with him on his next journey, and eventually presented them safely to the princess. This time the princess sent for the merchant, and questioned him about the giver. Now, the merchant was usually a most honest man, but he did not quite like to describe Wali Dad in his true light as an old man whose income was five halfpence a day, and who had hardly clothes to cover him. So he told her that his friend had heard stories of her beauty and goodness, and had longed to lay the best he had at her feet. The princess then took her father into her confidence, and begged him to advise her what courtesy she might return to one who persisted in making her such presents.

'Well,' said the king, 'you cannot refuse them; so the best thing you can do is to send this unknown friend at once a present so magnificent that he is not likely to be able to send you anything better, and so will be ashamed to send anything at all!' Then he ordered that, in place of each of the ten horses, two mules laden with silver should be returned by her.

Thus, in a few hours, the merchant found himself in charge of a splendid caravan; and he had to hire a number of armed men to defend it on the road against the robbers, and he was glad indeed to find himself back again in Wali Dad's hut.

'Well, now,' cried Wali Dad, as he viewed all the wealth laid at his door, 'I can well repay that kind prince for his magnificent present of horses; but to be sure you have been put to great expenses! Still, if you will accept six mules and their loads, and will take the rest straight to Nekabad, I shall thank you heartily.'

The merchant felt handsomely repaid for his trouble, and wondered greatly how the matter would turn out. So he made no difficulty about it; and as soon as he could get things ready, he set out for Nekabad with this new and princely gift.

This time the prince, too, was embarrassed, and questioned the merchant closely. The merchant felt that his credit was at stake, and whilst inwardly determining that he would not carry the joke any further, could not help describing Wali Dad in such glowing terms that the old man would never have known himself had he heard them. The prince, like the king of Khaistan, determined that he would send in return a gift that would be truly royal, and which would perhaps prevent the unknown giver sending him anything more. So he made up a caravan on twenty splendid horses caparisoned in gold embroidered cloths, with fine morocco saddles and silver bridles and stirrups, also twenty camels of the best breed, which had the speed of race-horses, and could swing along at a trot all day without getting tired; and, lastly, twenty elephants, with magnificent silver howdahs and coverings of silk embroidered with pearls. To take care of these animals the merchant hired a little army of men; and the troop made a great show as they travelled along.

When Wali Dad from a distance saw the cloud of dust which the caravan made, and the glitter of its appointments, he said to himself: 'By Allah! here's a grand crowd coming! Elephants, too! Grass will be selling well to-day!' And with that he hurried off to the jungle and cut grass as fast as he could. As soon as he got back he found the caravan had stopped at his door, and the merchant was waiting, a little anxiously, to tell him the news and to congratulate him upon his riches.

'Riches!' cried Wali Dad, 'what has an old man like me with one foot in the grave to do with riches? That beautiful young princess, now! She'd be the one to enjoy all these fine things! Do you take for yourself two horses, two camels, and two elephants, with all their trappings, and present the rest to her.'

The merchant at first objected to these remarks, and pointed out to Wali Dad that he was beginning to feel these embassies a little awkward. Of course he was himself richly repaid, so far as expenses went; but still he did not like going so often, and he was getting nervous. At length, however he consented to go once more, but he promised himself never to embark on another such enterprise.

So, after a few days' rest, the caravan started off once more for Khaistan.

The moment the king of Khaistan saw the gorgeous train of men and beasts entering his palace courtyard, he was so amazed that he hurried down in person to inquire about it, and became dumb when he heard that these also were a present from the princely Wali Dad, and were for the princess, his daughter. He went hastily off to her apartments, and said to her: 'I tell you what it is, my dear, this man wants to marry you; that is the meaning of all these presents! There is nothing for it but that we go and pay him a visit in person. He must be a man of immense wealth, and as he is so devoted to you, perhaps you might do worse than marry him!'

The princess agreed with all that her father said, and orders were issued for vast numbers of elephants and camels, and gorgeous tents and flags, and litters for the ladies, and horses for the men, to be prepared without delay, as the king and princess were going to pay a visit to the great and munificent prince Wali Dad. The merchant, the king declared, was to guide the party.

The feelings of the poor merchant in this sore dilemma can hardly be imagined. Willingly would he have run away; but he was treated with so much hospitality as Wali Dad's representative, that he hardly got an instant's real peace, and never any opportunity of slipping away. In fact, after a few days, despair possessed him to such a degree that he made up his mind that all that happened was fate, and that escape was impossible; but he hoped devoutly some turn of fortune would reveal to him a way out of the difficulties which he had, with the best intentions, drawn upon himself.

On the seventh day they all started, amidst thunderous salutes from the ramparts of the city, and much dust, and cheering, and blaring of trumpets.

Day after day they moved on, and every day the poor merchant felt more ill and miserable. He wondered what kind of death the king would invent for him, and went through almost as much torture, as he lay awake nearly the whole of every night thinking over the situation, as he would have suffered if the king's executioners were already setting to work upon his neck.

At last they were only one day's march from Wali Dad's little mud home. Here a great encampment was made, and the merchant was sent on to tell Wali Dad that the King and Princess of Khaistan had arrived and were seeking an interview. When the merchant arrived he found the poor old man eating his evening meal of onions and dry bread, and when he told him of all that had happened he had not the heart to proceed to load him with the reproaches which rose to his tongue. For Wali Dad was overwhelmed with grief and shame for himself, for his friend, and for the name and honour of the princess; and he wept and plucked at his beard, and groaned most piteously. With tears he begged the merchant to detain them for one day by any kind of excuse he could think of, and to come in the morning to discuss what they should do.

As soon as the merchant was gone Wali Dad made up his mind that there was only one honourable way out of the shame and distress that he had created by his foolishness, and that was--to kill himself. So, without stopping to ask any one's advice, he went off in the middle of the night to a place where the river wound along at the base of steep rocky cliffs of great height, and determined to throw himself down and put an end to his life. When he got to the place he drew back a few paces, took a little run, and at the very edge of that dreadful black gulf he stopped short! He COULD not do it!

From below, unseen in the blackness of the deep night shadows, the water roared and boiled round the jagged rocks--he could picture the place as he knew it, only ten times more pitiless and forbidding in the visionless darkness; the wind soughed through the gorge with fearsome sighs, and rustlings and whisperings, and the bushes and grasses that grew in the ledges of the cliffs seemed to him like living creatures that danced and beckoned, shadowy and indistinct. An owl laughed 'Hoo! hoo!' almost in his face, as he peered over the edge of the gulf, and the old man threw himself back in a perspiration of horror. He was afraid! He drew back shuddering, and covering his face in his hands he wept aloud.

Presently he was aware of a gentle radiance that shed itself before him. Surely morning was not already coming to hasten and reveal his disgrace! He took his hands from before his face, and saw before him two lovely beings whom his instinct told him were not mortal, but were Peris from Paradise.

'Why do you weep, old man?' said one, in a voice as clear and musical as that of the bulbul.

'I weep for shame,' replied he.

'What do you here?' questioned the other.

'I came here to die,' said Wali Dad. And as they questioned him, he confessed all his story.

Then the first stepped forward and laid a hand upon his shoulder, and Wali Dad began to feel that something strange--what, he did not know--was happening to him. His old cotton rags of clothes were changed to beautiful linen and embroidered cloth; on his hard, bare feet were warm, soft shoes, and on his head a great jewelled turban. Round his neck there lay a heavy golden chain, and the little old bent sickle, which he cut grass with, and which hung in his waistband, had turned into a gorgeous scimetar, whose ivory hilt gleamed in the pale light like snow in moonlight. As he stood wondering, like a man in a dream, the other peri waved her hand and bade him turn and see; and, lo! before him a noble gateway stood open. And up an avenue of giant place trees the peris led him, dumb with amazement. At the end of the avenue, on the very spot where his hut had stood, a gorgeous palace appeared, ablaze with myriads of lights. Its great porticoes and verandahs were occupied by hurrying servants, and guards paced to and fro and saluted him respectfully as he drew near, along mossy walks and through sweeping grassy lawns where fountains were playing and flowers scented the air. Wali Dad stood stunned and helpless.

'Fear not,' said one of the peris; 'go to your house, and learn that God rewards the simple-hearted.'

With these words they both disappeared and left him. He walked on, thinking still that he must be dreaming. Very soon he retired to rest in a splendid room, far grander than anything he had ever dreamed of.

When morning dawned he woke, and found that the palace, and himself, and his servants were all real, and that he was not dreaming after all!

If he was dumbfounded, the merchant, who was ushered into his presence soon after sunrise, was much more so. He told Wali Dad that he had not slept all night, and by the first streak of daylight had started to seek out his friend. And what a search he had had! A great stretch of wild jungle country had, in the night, been changed into parks and gardens; and if it had not been for some of Wali Dad's new servants, who found him and brought him to the palace, he would have fled away under the impression that his trouble had sent him crazy, and that all he saw was only imagination.

Then Wali Dad told the merchant all that had happened. By his advice he sent an invitation to the king and princess of Khaistan to come and be his guests, together with all their retinue and servants, down to the very humblest in the camp.

For three nights and days a great feast was held in honour of the royal guests. Every evening the king and his nobles were served on golden plates and from golden cups; and the smaller people on silver plates and from silver cups; and each evening each guest was requested to keep the places and cups that they had used as a remembrance of the occasion. Never had anything so splendid been seen. Besides the great dinners, there were sports and hunting, and dances, and amusements of all sorts.

On the fourth day the king of Khaistan took his host aside, and asked him whether it was true, as he had suspected, that he wished to marry his daughter. But Wali Dad, after thanking him very much for the compliment, said that he had never dreamed of so great an honour, and that he was far too old and ugly for so fair a lady; but he begged the king to stay with him until he could send for the Prince of Nekabad, who was a most excellent, brave, and honourable young man, and would surely be delighted to try to win the hand of the beautiful princess.

To this the king agreed, and Wali Dad sent the merchant to Nekabad, with a number of attendants, and with such handsome presents that the prince came at once, fell head over ears in love with the princess, and married her at Wali Dad's palace amidst a fresh outburst of rejoicings.

And now the King of Khaistan and the Prince and Princess of Nekabad, each went back to their own country; and Wali Dad lived to a good old age, befriending all who were in trouble and preserving, in his prosperity, the simple-hearted and generous nature that he had when he was only Wali Dad Gunjay, the grass cutter.

[Told the author by an Indian.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

Tale of a Tortoise and of a Mischievous Monkey

Once upon a time there was a country where the rivers were larger, and the forests deeper, than anywhere else. Hardly any men came there, and the wild creatures had it all to themselves, and used to play all sorts of strange games with each other. The great trees, chained one to the other by thick flowering plants with bright scarlet or yellow blossoms, were famous hiding-places for the monkeys, who could wait unseen, till a puma or an elephant passed by, and then jump on their backs and go for a ride, swinging themselves up by the creepers when they had had enough. Near the rivers huge tortoises were to be found, and though to our eyes a tortoise seems a dull, slow thing, it is wonderful to think how clever they were, and how often they outwitted many of their livelier friends.

There was one tortoise in particular that always managed to get the better of everybody, and many were the tales told in the forest of his great deeds. They began when he was quite young, and tired of staying at home with his father and mother. He left them one day, and walked off in search of adventures. In a wide open space surrounded by trees he met with an elephant, who was having his supper before taking his evening bath in the river which ran close by. 'Let us see which of us two is strongest,' said the young tortoise, marching up to the elephant. 'Very well,' replied the elephant, much amused at the impertinence of the little creature; 'when would you like the trial to be?'

'In an hour's time; I have some business to do first,' answered the tortoise. And he hastened away as fast as his short legs would carry him.

In a pool of the river a whale was resting, blowing water into the air and making a lovely fountain. The tortoise, however, was too young and too busy to admire such things, and he called to the whale to stop, as he wanted to speak to him. 'Would you like to try which of us is the stronger?' said he. The whale looked at him, sent up another fountain, and answered: 'Oh, yes; certainly. When do you wish to begin? I am quite ready.'

'Then give me one of your longest bones, and I will fasten it to my leg. When I give the signal, you must pull, and we will see which can pull the hardest.'

'Very good,' replied the whale; and he took out one of his bones and passed it to the tortoise.

The tortoise picked up the end of the bone in his mouth and went back to the elephant. 'I will fasten this to your leg,' said he, 'in the same way as it is fastened to mine, and we must both pull as hard as we can. We shall soon see which is the stronger.' So he wound it carefully round the elephant's leg, and tied it in a firm knot. 'Now!' cried he, plunging into a thick bush behind him.

The whale tugged at one end, and the elephant tugged at the other, and neither had any idea that he had not the tortoise for his foe. When the whale pulled hardest the elephant was dragged into the water; and when the elephant pulled the hardest the whale was hauled on to the land. They were very evenly matched, and the battle was a hard one.

At last they were quite tired, and the tortoise, who was watching, saw that they could play no more. So he crept from his hiding-place, and dipping himself in the river, he went to the elephant and said: 'I see that you really are stronger than I thought. Suppose we give it up for to-day?' Then he dried himself on some moss and went to the whale and said: 'I see that you really are stronger than I thought. Suppose we give it up for to-day?'

The two adversaries were only too glad to be allowed to rest, and believed to the end of their days that, after all, the tortoise was stronger than either of them.

A day or two later the young tortoise was taking a stroll, when he met a fox, and stopped to speak to him. 'Let us try,' said he in a careless manner, 'which of us can lie buried in the ground during seven years.'

'I shall be delighted,' answered the fox, 'only I would rather that you began.'

'It is all the same to me,' replied the tortoise; 'if you come round this way to-morrow you will see that I have fulfilled my part of the bargain.'

So he looked about for a suitable place, and found a convenient hole at the foot of an orange tree. He crept into it, and the next morning the fox heaped up the earth round him, and promised to feed him every day with fresh fruit. The fox so far kept his word that each morning when the sun rose he appeared to ask how the tortoise was getting on. 'Oh, very well; but I wish you would give me some fruit,' replied he.

'Alas! the fruit is not ripe enough yet for you to eat,' answered the fox, who hoped that the tortoise would die of hunger long before the seven years were over.

'Oh dear, oh dear! I am so hungry!' cried the tortoise.

'I am sure you must be; but it will be all right to-morrow,' said the fox, trotting off, not knowing that the oranges dropped down the hollow trunk, straight into the tortoise's hole, and that he had as many as he could possibly eat.

So the seven years went by; and when the tortoise came out of his hole he was as fat as ever.

Now it was the fox's turn, and he chose his hole, and the tortoise heaped the earth round, promising to return every day or two with a nice young bird for his dinner. 'Well, how are you getting on?' he would ask cheerfully when he paid his visits.

'Oh, all right; only I wish you had brought a bird with you,' answered the fox.

'I have been so unlucky, I have never been able to catch one,' replied the tortoise. 'However, I shall be more fortunate to-morrow, I am sure.'

But not many to-morrows after, when the tortoise arrived with his usual question: 'Well, how are you getting on?' he received no answer, for the fox was lying in his hole quite still, dead of hunger.

By this time the tortoise was grown up, and was looked up to throughout the forest as a person to be feared for his strength and wisdom. But he was not considered a very swift runner, until an adventure with a deer added to his fame.

One day, when he was basking in the sun, a stag passed by, and stopped for a little conversation. 'Would you care to see which of us can run fastest?' asked the tortoise, after some talk. The stag thought the question so silly that he only shrugged his shoulders. 'Of course, the victor would have the right to kill the other,' went on the tortoise. 'Oh, on that condition I agree,' answered the deer; 'but I am afraid you are a dead man.'

'It is no use trying to frighten me,' replied the tortoise. 'But I should like three days for training; then I shall be ready to start when the sun strikes on the big tree at the edge of the great clearing.'

The first thing the tortoise did was to call his brothers and his cousins together, and he posted them carefully under ferns all along the line of the great clearing, making a sort of ladder which stretched for many miles. This done to his satisfaction, he went back to the starting place.

The stag was quite punctual, and as soon as the sun's rays struck the trunk of the tree the stag started off, and was soon far out of the sight of the tortoise. Every now and then he would turn his head as he ran, and call out: 'How are you getting on?' and the tortoise who happened to be nearest at that moment would answer: 'All right, I am close up to you.'

Full of astonishment, the stag would redouble his efforts, but it was no use. Each time he asked: 'Are you there?' the answer would come: 'Yes, of course, where else should I be?' And the stag ran, and ran, and ran, till he could run no more, and dropped down dead on the grass.

And the tortoise, when he thinks about it, laughs still.

But the tortoise was not the only creature of whose tricks stories were told in the forest. There was a famous monkey who was just as clever and more mischievous, because he was so much quicker on his feet and with his hands. It was quite impossible to catch him and give him the thrashing he so often deserved, for he just swung himself up into a tree and laughed at the angry victim who was sitting below. Sometimes, however, the inhabitants of the forest were so foolish as to provoke him, and then they got the worst of it. This was what happened to the barber, whom the monkey visited one morning, saying that he wished to be shaved. The barber bowed politely to his customer, and begging him to be seated, tied a large cloth round his neck, and rubbed his chin with soap; but instead of cutting off his beard, the barber made a snip at the end of his tail. It was only a very little bit and the monkey started up more in rage than in pain. 'Give me back the end of my tail,' he roared, 'or I will take one of your razors.' The barber refused to give back the missing piece, so the monkey caught up a razor from the table and ran away with it, and no one in the forest could be shaved for days, as there was not another to be got for miles and miles.

As he was making his way to his own particular palm-tree, where the cocoanuts grew, which were so useful for pelting passers-by, he met a woman who was scaling a fish with a bit of wood, for in this side of the forest a few people lived in huts near the river.

'That must be hard work,' said the monkey, stopping to look; 'try my knife--you will get on quicker.' And he handed her the razor as he spoke. A few days later he came back and rapped at the door of the hut. 'I have called for my razor,' he said, when the woman appeared.

'I have lost it,' answered she.

'If you don't give it to me at once I will take your sardine,' replied the monkey, who did not believe her. The woman protested she had not got the knife, so he took the sardine and ran off.

A little further along he saw a baker who was standing at the door, eating one of his loaves. 'That must be rather dry,' said the monkey, 'try my fish'; and the man did not need twice telling. A few days later the monkey stopped again at the baker's hut. 'I've called for that fish,' he said.

'That fish? But I have eaten it!' exclaimed the baker in dismay.

'If you have eaten it I shall take this barrel of meal in exchange,' replied the monkey; and he walked off with the barrel under his arm.

As he went he saw a woman with a group of little girls round her, teaching them how to dress hair. 'Here is something to make cakes for the children,' he said, putting down his barrel, which by this time he found rather heavy. The children were delighted, and ran directly to find some flat stones to bake their cakes on, and when they had made and eaten them, they thought they had never tasted anything so nice. Indeed, when they saw the monkey approaching not long after, they rushed to meet him, hoping that he was bringing them some more presents. But he took no notice of their questions, he only said to their mother: 'I've called for my barrel of meal.'

'Why, you gave it to me to make cakes of!' cried the mother.

'If I can't get my barrel of meal, I shall take one of your children,' answered the monkey. 'I am in want of somebody who can bake my bread when I am tired of fruit, and who knows how to make cocoanut cakes.'

'Oh, leave me my child, and I will find you another barrel of meal,' wept the mother.

'I don't WANT another barrel, I want THAT one,' answered the monkey sternly. And as the woman stood wringing her hands, he caught up the little girl that he thought the prettiest and took her to his home in the palm tree.

She never went back to the hut, but on the whole she was not much to be pitied, for monkeys are nearly as good as children to play with, and they taught her how to swing, and to climb, and to fly from tree to tree, and everything else they knew, which was a great deal.

Now the monkey's tiresome tricks had made him many enemies in the forest, but no one hated him so much as the puma. The cause of their quarrel was known only to themselves, but everybody was aware of the fact, and took care to be out of the way when there was any chance of these two meeting. Often and often the puma had laid traps for the monkey, which he felt sure his foe could not escape; and the monkey would pretend that he saw nothing, and rejoice the hidden puma's heart by seeming to walk straight into the snare, when, lo! a loud laugh would be heard, and the monkey's grinning face would peer out of a mass of creepers and disappear before his foe could reach him.

This state of things had gone on for quite a long while, when at last there came a season such as the oldest parrot in the forest could never remember. Instead of two or three hundred inches of rain falling, which they were all accustomed to, month after month passed without a cloud, and the rivers and springs dried up, till there was only one small pool left for everyone to drink from. There was not an animal for miles round that did not grieve over this shocking condition of affairs, not one at least except the puma. His only thought for years had been how to get the monkey into his power, and this time he imagined his chance had really arrived. He would hide himself in a thicket, and when the monkey came down to drink--and come he must--the puma would spring out and seize him. Yes, on this occasion there could be no escape!

And no more there would have been if the puma had had greater patience; but in his excitement he moved a little too soon. The monkey, who was stooping to drink, heard a rustling, and turning caught the gleam of two yellow, murderous eyes. With a mighty spring he grasped a creeper which was hanging above him, and landed himself on the branch of a tree; feeling the breath of the puma on his feet as the animal bounded from is cover. Never had the monkey been so near death, and it was some time before he recovered enough courage to venture on the ground again.

Up there in the shelter of the trees, he began to turn over in his head plans for escaping the snares of the puma. And at length chance helped him. Peeping down to the earth, he saw a man coming along the path carrying on his head a large gourd filled with honey.

He waited till the man was just underneath the tree, then he hung from a bough, and caught the gourd while the man looked up wondering, for he was no tree-climber. Then the monkey rubbed the honey all over him, and a quantity of leaves from a creeper that was hanging close by; he stuck them all close together into the honey, so that he looked like a walking bush. This finished, he ran to the pool to see the result, and, quite pleased with himself, set out in search of adventures.

Soon the report went through the forest that a new animal had appeared from no one knew where, and that when somebody had asked his name, the strange creature had answered that it was Jack-in-the-Green. Thanks to this, the monkey was allowed to drink at the pool as often as he liked, for neither beast nor bird had the faintest notion who he was. And if they made any inquiries the only answer they got was that the water of which he had drunk deeply had turned his hair into leaves, so that they all knew what would happen in case they became too greedy.

By-and-by the great rains began again. The rivers and streams filled up, and there was no need for him to go back to the pool, near the home of his enemy, the puma, as there was a large number of places for him to choose from. So one night, when everything was still and silent, and even the chattering parrots were asleep on one leg, the monkey stole down softly from his perch, and washed off the honey and the leaves, and came out from his bath in his own proper skin. On his way to breakfast he met a rabbit, and stopped for a little talk.

'I am feeling rather dull,' he remarked; 'I think it would do me good to hunt a while. What do you say?'

'Oh, I am quite willing,' answered the rabbit, proud of being spoken to by such a large creature. 'But the question is, what shall we hunt?'

'There is no credit in going after an elephant or a tiger,' replied the monkey stroking his chin, 'they are so big they could not possibly get out of your way. It shows much more skill to be able to catch a small thing that can hide itself in a moment behind a leaf. I'll tell you what! Suppose I hunt butterflies, and you, serpents.'

The rabbit, who was young and without experience, was delighted with this idea, and they both set out on their various ways.

The monkey quietly climbed up the nearest tree, and ate fruit most of the day, but the rabbit tired himself to death poking his nose into every heap of dried leaves he saw, hoping to find a serpent among them. Luckily for himself the serpents were all away for the afternoon, at a meeting of their own, for there is nothing a serpent likes so well for dinner as a nice plump rabbit. But, as it was, the dried leaves were all empty, and the rabbit at last fell asleep where he was. Then the monkey, who had been watching him, fell down and pulled his ears, to the rage of the rabbit, who vowed vengeance.

It was not easy to catch the monkey off his guard, and the rabbit waited long before an opportunity arrived. But one day Jack-in-the-Green was sitting on a stone, wondering what he should do next, when the rabbit crept softly behind him, and gave his tail a sharp pull. The monkey gave a shriek of pain, and darted up into a tree, but when he saw that it was only the rabbit who had dared to insult him so, he chattered so fast in his anger, and looked so fierce, that the rabbit fled into the nearest hole, and stayed there for several days, trembling with fright.

Soon after this adventure the monkey went away into another part of the country, right on the outskirts of the forest, where there was a beautiful garden full of oranges hanging ripe from the trees. This garden was a favourite place for birds of all kinds, each hoping to secure an orange for dinner, and in order to frighten the birds away and keep a little fruit for himself, the master had fastened a waxen figure on one of the boughs.

Now the monkey was as fond of oranges as any of the birds, and when he saw a man standing in the tree where the largest and sweetest oranges grew, he spoke to him at once. 'You man,' he said rudely, 'throw me down that big orange up there, or I will throw a stone at you.' The wax figure took no notice of this request, so the monkey, who was easily made angry, picked up a stone, and flung it with all his force. But instead of falling to the ground again, the stone stuck to the soft wax.

At this moment a breeze shook the tree, and the orange on which the monkey had set his heart dropped from the bough. He picked it up and ate it every bit, including the rind, and it was so good he thought he should like another. So he called again to the wax figure to throw him an orange, and as the figure did not move, he hurled another stone, which stuck to the wax as the first had done. Seeing that the man was quite indifferent to stones, the monkey grew more angry still, and climbing the tree hastily, gave the figure a violent kick. But like the two stones his leg remained stuck to the wax, and he was held fast. 'Let me go at once, or I will give you another kick,' he cried, suiting the action to the word, and this time also his foot remained in the grasp of the man. Not knowing what he did, the monkey hit out, first with one hand and then with the other, and when he found that he was literally bound hand and foot, he became so mad with anger and terror that in his struggles he fell to the ground, dragging the figure after him. This freed his hands and feet, but besides the shock of the fall, they had tumbled into a bed of thorns, and he limped away broken and bruised, and groaning loudly; for when monkeys ARE hurt, they take pains that everybody shall know it.

It was a long time before Jack was well enough to go about again; but when he did, he had an encounter with his old enemy the puma. And this was how it came about.

One day the puma invited his friend the stag to go with him and see a comrade, who was famous for the good milk he got from his cows. The stag loved milk, and gladly accepted the invitation, and when the sun began to get a little low the two started on their walk. On the way they arrived on the banks of a river, and as there were no bridges in those days it was necessary to swim across it. The stag was not fond of swimming, and began to say that he was tired, and thought that after all it was not worth going so far to get milk, and that he would return home. But the puma easily saw through these excuses, and laughed at him.

'The river is not deep at all,' he said; 'why, you will never be off your feet. Come, pluck up your courage and follow me.'

The stag was afraid of the river; still, he was much more afraid of being laughed at, and he plunged in after the puma; but in an instant the current had swept him away, and if it had not borne him by accident to a shallow place on the opposite side, where he managed to scramble up the bank, he would certainly have been drowned. As it was, he scrambled out, shaking with terror, and found the puma waiting for him. 'You had a narrow escape that time,' said the puma.

After resting for a few minutes, to let the stag recover from his fright, they went on their way till they came to a grove of bananas.

'They look very good,' observed the puma with a longing glance, 'and I am sure you must be hungry, friend stag? Suppose you were to climb the tree and get some. You shall eat the green ones, they are the best and sweetest; and you can throw the yellow ones down to me. I dare say they will do quite well!' The stag did as he was bid, though, not being used to climbing, it gave him a deal of trouble and sore knees, and besides, his horns were continually getting entangled in the creepers. What was worse, when once he had tasted the bananas, he found them not at all to his liking, so he threw them all down, green and yellow alike, and let the puma take his choice. And what a dinner he made! When he had QUITE done, they set forth once more.

The path lay through a field of maize, where several men were working. As they came up to them, the puma whispered: 'Go on in front, friend stag, and just say "Bad luck to all workers!"' The stag obeyed, but the men were hot and tired, and did not think this a good joke. So they set their dogs at him, and he was obliged to run away as fast as he could.

'I hope your industry will be rewarded as it deserves,' said the puma as he passed along; and the men were pleased, and offered him some of their maize to eat.

By-and-by the puma saw a small snake with a beautiful shining skin, lying coiled up at the foot of a tree. 'What a lovely bracelet that would make for your daughter, friend stag! said he. The stag stooped and picked up the snake, which bit him, and he turned angrily to the puma. 'Why did you not tell me it would bite?' he asked.

'Is it my fault if you are an idiot?' replied the puma.

At last they reached their journey's end, but by this time it was late, and the puma's comrade was ready for bed, so they slung their hammocks in convenient places, and went to sleep. But in the middle of the night the puma rose softly and stole out of the door to the sheep-fold, where he killed and ate the fattest sheep he could find, and taking a bowl full of its blood, he sprinkled the sleeping stag with it. This done, he returned to bed.

In the morning the shepherd went as usual to let the sheep out of the fold, and found one of them missing. He thought directly of the puma, and ran to accuse him of having eaten the sheep. 'I, my good man? What had put it into your head to think of such a thing? Have I got any blood about me? If anyone has eaten a sheep it must be my friend the stag.' Then the shepherd went to examine the sleeping stag, and of course he saw the blood. 'Ah! I will teach you how to steal!' cried he, and he hit the stag such a blow on his skull that he died in a moment. The noise awakened the comrade above, and he came downstairs. The puma greeted him with joy, and begged he might have some of the famous milk as soon as possible, for he was very thirsty. A large bucket was set before the puma directly. He drank it to the last drop, and then took leave.

On his way home he met the monkey. 'Are you fond of milk?' asked he. 'I know a place where you get it very nice. I will show you it if you like.' The monkey knew that the puma was not so good-natured for nothing, but he felt quite able to take care of himself, so he said he should have much pleasure in accompanying his friend.

They soon reached the same river, and, as before, the puma remarked: 'Friend monkey, you will find it very shallow; there is no cause for fear. Jump in and I will follow.'

'Do you think you have the stag to deal with?' asked the monkey, laughing. 'I should prefer to follow; if not I shall go no further. The puma understood that it was useless trying to make the monkey do as he wished, so he chose a shallow place and began to swim across. The monkey waited till the puma had got to the middle, then he gave a great spring and jumped on his back, knowing quite well that the puma would be afraid to shake him off, lest he should be swept away into deep water. So in this manner they reached the bank.

The banana grove was not far distant, and here the puma thought he would pay the monkey out for forcing him to carry him over the river. 'Friend monkey, look what fine bananas,' cried he. 'You are fond of climbing; suppose you run up and throw me down a few. You can eat the green ones, which are the nicest, and I will be content with the yellow.'

'Very well,' answered the monkey, swinging himself up; but he ate all the yellow ones himself, and only threw down the green ones that were left. The puma was furious and cried out: 'I will punch your head for that.' But the monkey only answered: 'If you are gong to talk such nonsense I won't walk with you.' And the puma was silent.

In a few minutes more they arrived at the field were the men were reaping the maize, and the puma remarked as he had done before: 'Friend monkey, if you wish to please these men, just say as you go by: "Bad luck to all workers."

'Very well,' replied the monkey; but, instead, he nodded and smiled, and said: 'I hope your industry may be rewarded as it deserves.' The men thanked him heartily, let him pass on, and the puma followed behind him.

Further along the path they saw the shining snake lying on the moss. 'What a lovely necklace for your daughter,' exclaimed the puma. 'Pick it up and take it with you.'

'You are very kind, but I will leave it for you,' answered the monkey, and nothing more was said about the snake.

Not long after this they reached the comrade's house, and found him just ready to go to bed. So, without stopping to talk, the guests slung their hammocks, the monkey taking care to place his so high that no one could get at him. Besides, he thought it would be more prudent not to fall asleep, so he only lay still and snored loudly. When it was quite dark and no sound was to be heard, the puma crept out to the sheep-fold, killed the sheep, and carried back a bowl full of its blood with which to sprinkle the monkey. But the monkey, who had been watching out of the corner of his eye, waited until the puma drew near, and with a violent kick upset the bowl all over the puma himself.

When the puma saw what had happened, he turned in a great hurry to leave the house, but before he could do so, he saw the shepherd coming, and hastily lay down again.

'This is the second time I have lost a sheep,' the man said to the monkey; 'it will be the worse for the thief when I catch him, I can tell you.' The monkey did not answer, but silently pointed to the puma who was pretending to be asleep. The shepherd stooped and saw the blood, and cried out: 'Ah! so it is you, is it? then take that!' and with his stick he gave the puma such a blow on the head that he died then and there.

Then the monkey got up and went to the dairy, and drank all the milk he could find. Afterwards he returned home and married, and that is the last we heard of him.

[Adapted from Folk-lore Bresilien.]

The Brown Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1904], at sacred-texts.com

[f32]

The Knights of the Fish

Once upon a time there lived an old cobbler who worked hard at his trade from morning till night, and scarcely gave himself a moment to eat. But, industrious as he was, he could hardly buy bread and cheese for himself and his wife, and they grew thinner and thinner daily.

For a long while whey pretended to each other that they had no appetite, and that a few blackberries from the hedges were a great deal nicer than a good strong bowl of soup. But at length there came a day when the cobbler could bear it no longer, and he threw away his last, and borrowing a rod from a neighbour he went out to fish.

Now the cobbler was as patient about fishing as he had been about cobbling. From dawn to dark he stood on the banks of the little stream, without hooking anything better than an eel, or a few old shoes, that even he, clever though he was, felt were not worth mending. At length his patience began to give way, and as he undressed one night he said to himself: 'Well, I will give it one more chance; and if I don't catch a fish to-morrow, I will go and hang myself.'

He had not cast his line for ten minutes the next morning before he drew from the river the most beautiful fish he had ever seen in his life. But he nearly fell into the water from surprise, when the fish began to speak to him, in a small, squeaky voice:

'Take me back to your hut and cook me; then cut me up, and sprinkle me over with pepper and salt. Give two of the pieces to your wife, and bury two more in the garden.'

The cobbler did not know what to make of these strange words; but he was wiser than many people, and when he did not understand, he thought it was well to obey. His children wanted to eat all the fish themselves, and begged their father to tell them what to do with the pieces he had put aside; but the cobbler only laughed, and told them it was no business of theirs. And when they were safe in bed he stole out and buried the two pieces in the garden.

By and by two babies, exactly alike, lay in a cradle, and in the garden were two tall plants, with two brilliant shields on the top.

Years passed away, and the babies were almost men. They were tired of living quietly at home, being mistaken for each other by everybody they saw, and determined to set off in different directions, to seek adventures.

So, one fine morning, the two brothers left the hut, and walked together to the place where the great road divided. There they embraced and parted, promising that if anything remarkable had happened to either, he would return to the cross roads and wait till his brother came.

The youth who took the path that ran eastwards arrived presently at a large city, where he found everybody standing at the doors, wringing their hands and weeping bitterly.

'What is the matter?' asked he, pausing and looking round. And a man replied, in a faltering voice, that each year a beautiful girl was chosen by lot to be offered up to a dreadful fiery dragon, who had a mother even worse than himself, and this year the lot had fallen on their peerless princess.

'But where IS the princess?' said the young man once more, and again the man answered him: 'She is standing under a tree, a mile away, waiting for the dragon.'

This time the Knight of the Fish did not stop to hear more, but ran off as fast as he could, and found the princess bathed in tears, and trembling from head to foot.

She turned as she heard the sound of his sword, and removed her handkerchief from his eyes.

'Fly,' she cried; 'fly while you have yet time, before that monster sees you.'

She said it, and she mean it; yet, when he had turned his back, she felt more forsaken than before. But in reality it was not more than a few minutes before he came back, galloping furiously on a horse he had borrowed, and carrying a huge mirror across its neck.

'I am in time, then,' he cried, dismounting very carefully, and placing the mirror against the trunk of a tree.

'Give me your veil,' he said hastily to the princess. And when she had unwound it from her head he covered the mirror with it.

'The moment the dragon comes near you, you must tear off the veil,' cried he; 'and be sure you hide behind the mirror. Have no fear; I shall be at hand.'

He and his horse had scarcely found shelter amongst some rocks, when the flap of the dragon's wings could be plainly heard. He tossed his head with delight at the sight of her, and approached slowly to the place where she stood, a little in front of the mirror. Then, still looking the monster steadily in the face, she passed one hand behind her back and snatched off the veil, stepping swiftly behind the tree as she did so.

The princess had not known, when she obeyed the orders of the Knight of the Fish, what she expected to happen. Would the dragon with snaky locks be turned to stone, she wondered, like the dragon in an old story her nurse had told her; or would some fiery spark dart from the heart of the mirror, and strike him dead? Neither of these things occurred, but, instead, the dragon stopped short with surprise and rage when he saw a monster before him as big and strong as himself. He shook his mane with rage and fury; the enemy in front did exactly the same. He lashed his tail, and rolled his red eyes, and the dragon opposite was no whit behind him. Opening his mouth to its very widest, he gave an awful roar; but the other dragon only roared back. This was too much, and with another roar which made the princess shake in her shoes, he flung himself upon his foe. In an instant the mirror lay at his feet broken into a thousand pieces, but as every piece reflected part of himself, the dragon thought that he too had been smashed into atoms.

It was the moment for which the Knight of the Fish had watched and waited, and before the dragon could find out that he was not hurt at all, the young man's lance was down his throat, and he was rolling, dead, on the grass.

Oh! what shouts of joy rang through the great city, when the youth came riding back with the princess sitting behind him, and dragging the horrible monster by a cord. Everybody cried out that the king must give the victor the hand of the princess; and so he did, and no one had ever seen such balls and feasts and sports before. And when they were all over the young couple went to the palace prepared for them, which was so large that it was three miles round.

The first wet day after their marriage the bridegroom begged the bride to show him all the rooms in the palace, and it was so big and took so long that the sun was shining brightly again before they stepped on to the roof to see the view.

'What castle is that out there,' asked the knight; 'it seems to be made of black marble?'

'It is called the castle of Albatroz,' answered the princess. 'It is enchanted, and no one that has tried to enter it has ever come back.'

Her husband said nothing, and began to talk of something else; but the next morning he ordered his horse, took his spear, called his bloodhound, and set off for the castle.

It needed a brave man to approach it, for it made your hair stand on end merely to look at it; it was as dark as the night of a storm, and as silent as the grave. But the Knight of the Fish knew no fear, and had never turned his back on an enemy; so he drew out his horn, and blew a blast.

The sound awoke all the sleeping echoes in the castle, and was repeated now loudly, now softly; now near, and now far. But nobody stirred for all that.

'Is there anyone inside?' cried the young man in his loudest voice; 'anyone who will give a knight hospitality? Neither governor, nor squire, not even a page?'

'Not even a page!' answered the echoes. But the young man did not heed them, and only struck a furious blow at the gate.

Then a small grating opened, and there appeared the tip of a huge nose, which belonged to the ugliest old woman that ever was seen.

'What do you want?' said she.

'To enter,' he answered shortly. 'Can I rest here this night? Yes or No?'

'No, No, No!' repeated the echoes.

Between the fierce sun and his anger at being kept waiting, the Knight of the Fish had grown so hot that he lifted his visor, and when the old woman saw how handsome he was, she began fumbling with the lock of the gate.

'Come in, come in,' said she, 'so fine a gentleman will do us no harm.'

'Harm!' repeated the echoes, but again the young man paid no heed.

'Let us go in, ancient dame,' but she interrupted him.

'You must call me the Lady Berberisca,' she answered, sharply; 'and this is my castle, to which I bid you welcome. You shall live here with me and be my husband.' But at these words the knight let his spear fall, so surprised was he.

'I marry YOU? why you must be a hundred at least!' cried he. 'You are mad! All I desire is to inspect the castle and then go.' As he spoke he heard the voices give a mocking laugh; but the old woman took no notice, and only bade the knight follow her.

Old though she was, it seemed impossible to tire her. There was no room, however small, she did not lead him into, and each room was full of curious things he had never seen before.

At length they came to a stone staircase, which was so dark that you could not see your hand if you held it up before your face.

'I have kept my most precious treasure till the last,' said the old woman; 'but let me go first, for the stairs are steep, and you might easily break your leg.' So on she went, now and then calling back to the young man in the darkness. But he did not know that she had slipped aside into a recess, till suddenly he put his foot on a trap door which gave way under him, and he fell down, down, as many good knights had done before him, and his voice joined the echoes of theirs.

'So you would not marry me!' chuckled the old witch. 'Ha! ha! Ha! ha!'

Meanwhile his brother had wandered far and wide, and at last he wandered back to the same great city where the other young knight had met with so many adventures. He noticed, with amazement, that as he walked through the streets the guards drew themselves up in line, and saluted him, and the drummers played the royal march; but he was still more bewildered when several servants in livery ran up to him and told him that the princess was sure something terrible had befallen him, and had made herself ill with weeping. At last it occurred to him that once more he had been taken for his brother. 'I had better say nothing,' thought he; 'perhaps I shall be able to help him after all.'

So he suffered himself to be borne in triumph to the palace, where the princess threw herself into his arms.

'And so you did go to the castle?' she asked.

'Yes, of course I did,' answered he.

'And what did you see there?'

'I am forbidden to tell you anything about it, until I have returned there once more,' replied he.

'Must you really go back to that dreadful place?' she asked wistfully. 'You are the only man who has ever come back from it.'

'I must,' was all he answered. And the princess, who was a wise woman, only said: 'Well, go to bed now, for I am sure you must be very tired.'

But the knight shook his head. 'I have sworn never to lie in a bed as long as my work in the castle remains standing.' And the princess again sighed, and was silent.

Early next day the young man started for the castle, feeling sure that some terrible thing must have happened to his brother.

At the blast of his horn the long nose of the old woman appeared at the grating, but the moment she caught sight of his face, she nearly fainted from fright, as she thought it was the ghost of the youth whose bones were lying in the dungeon of the castle.

'Lady of all the ages,' cried the new comer, 'did you not give hospitality to a young knight but a short time ago?'

'A short time ago!' wailed the voices.

'And how have you ill-treated him?' he went on.

'Ill-treated him!' answered the voices. The woman did not stop to hear more; she turned to fly; but the knight's sword entered her body.

'Where is my brother, cruel hag?' asked he sternly.

'I will tell you,' said she; 'but as I feel that I am going to die I shall keep that piece of news to myself, till you have brought me to life again.'

The young man laughed scornfully. 'How do you propose that I should work that miracle?'

'Oh, it is quite easy. Go into the garden and gather the flowers of the everlasting plant and some of dragon's blood. Crush them together and boil them in a large tub of water, and then put me into it.'

The knight did as the old witch bade him, and, sure enough, she came out quite whole, but uglier than ever. She then told the young man what had become of his brother, and he went down into the dungeon, and brought up his body and the bodies of the other victims who lay there, and when they were all washed in the magic water their strength was restored to them.

And, besides these, he found in another cavern the bodies of the girls who had been sacrificed to the dragon, and brought them back to life also.

As to the old witch, in the end she died of rage at seeing her prey escape her; and at the moment she drew her last breath the castle of Albatroz fell into ruins with a great noise.

[From Cuentos, Oraciones, Adivinas recogidos por Fernan Caballaro.]

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: brk.txt =====


    
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1][p. 2][p. 3][p. 4]

The Wisdom of the East Series

EDITED BY

L. CRANMER-BYNG

Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

FIRST EDITION, November 1907

Reprinted, October 1911

  

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE

AN OUTLINE OF

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE VEDANTA

AS SET FORTH BY THE UPANISHADS

AND BY S'ANKARA

By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D.

PROFESSOR OF SANSKRIT AT UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON

  

LONDON

  

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET

  

[1911]

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Front Cover and Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5] [p. 6]

  

CONTENTS

          INTRODUCTION

       <page 9>

     
       

        

     
      PART I

        

     
      AN ACCOUNT OF THE VEDANTA

        

     
      VEDaNTA, THE VEDAS' END

       <page 11>

     
      THE FOUR VEDAS

       <page 11>

     
      THE UPANISHADS

       <page 12>

     
      FOUNDATIONS OF UPANISHADIC IDEAS

       <page 13>

     
      BRAHMA AND PRaNA

       <page 15>

     
      DOCTRINE OF TRANSMIGRATION AND WORKS

       <page 17>

     
      ATMa, SELF OR SPIRIT

       <page 17>

     
      UPANISHADIC PRINCIPLES

       <page 18>

     
      ORIGIN OF UNIVERSE FROM BRAHMA

       <page 20>

     
      BRAHMA IS ABSOLUTE BEING

       <page 23>

     
      BRAHMA IS THOUGHT

       <page 23>

     
      BRAHMA IS ATMa

       <page 24>

     
      BRAHMA IS INCOGITABLE

       <page 33>

     
      PARMENIDES

       <page 34>

     
      PHASES OF THE SELF

       <page 35>

     
      MaYa

       <page 38>

     
      RELATION OF UNIVERSAL TO INDIVIDUAL SOUL

       <page 40>

     
      ORGANISM OF SOUL

       <page 42>

     
      THE SUBTLE BODY

       <page 45>

     
      KARMA

       <page 46>

     
      FREEDOM OF WILL

       <page 47>

     
      GOD

       <page 47>

     
      BRAHMA THE DESTROYER

       <page 49>

     
      SALVATION

       <page 50>

     
      THE AFTER LIFE

       <page 52>

     
       

        

     
      PART II

        

     
      SOME TEXTS OF THE VEDANTA

        

     
      APPENDIX I., THE SAMBANDHAS

       <page 109>

     
      APPENDIX II., LIST OF CHIEF UPANISHADS AND ABBREVIATIONS

       <page 111>

     
      BIBLIOGRAPHY

       <page 112>

     
       

        

     
   
     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7] [p. 8]

  

EDITORIAL NOTE

THE object of the Editors of this series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nation of another creed and colour.

L. CRANMER-BYNG.
 S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
    21, CROMWELL ROAD,
        KENSINGTON, S.W.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

INTRODUCTION

THE following pages sketch in outline--and therefore inadequately--the most important elements in the series of ideas which, under the general name of Vedanta, have been in one form or another the basis of all Indian thought worthy of the name. No attempt is made here either to justify or to refute them. Their philosophic weakness is obvious; no less patent is the intensity of the longing for an intellectual resting-place, a "Rock of Ages," which has driven millions of the most thoughtful Hindus to drown their soul's disquiet in the utterly blank abstraction of "Brahma."

In the main the Vedanta agrees with the teaching of Parmenides and the early Eleatics of his school, and has many points of contact with Plato's idealism. But whereas the Greek philosophers were only professors, the Vedanta has always had a deep practical significance. Like the early Christian Church, it preached as highest consummation the renunciation of the world and

[p. 10]

of self, passing in some of its phases into a religious self-surrender fully equal in completeness, if not superior, to that of European monasticism; and even as a purely intellectual force it has had an incalculable influence upon the minds and characters of millions of Hindus in nearly every station of civilised life. To discuss this issue is beyond the province of our book; it must suffice to point to it.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

PART I

  

AN ACCOUNT OF THE VEDANTA

 section 1. VEDaNTA, THE VEDAS' END.--The Sanskrit word Vedanta (veda-anta) signifies "end" or "bound of the Vedas." It was originally given, at a somewhat advanced stage of their development, to the works called Upanishads, and subsequently to the various philosophies claiming to be based upon them. Besides the Upanishads, one of these philosophies will be noticed in the following pages, namely the system promulgated in the ninth century by S'ankara in his great commentary (S'ariraka-bhashya) upon the epitome of Upanishadic doctrine commonly known as the Brahma-sutra, or "Aphorisms of Brahma," and traditionally ascribed to one or the other of the legendary sages Badarayana and Vyasa.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 2. THE FOUR VEDAS.--The hymns of the Rig-veda, composed by various authors some three thousand years ago, are almost the only monument of the first period of Indian thought; for the collections known as the Yajur-veda and

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Sama-veda are for the most part merely adaptations of the Rig-veda for special liturgical purposes, while the Atharva-veda, which was not admitted until much later into the Vedic canon, combines Rig-vedic hymns selected for ritual objects with a mass of various incantations of little or no philosophic and literary merit. The study of these hymn-collections in their liturgical application by the Brahman schools bore as fruit the bulky volumes known generically as Brahmanas.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 3. THE UPANISHADS. [*1]--The earlier Upanishads, a series of philosophic tracts of varying length and character, arose in the schools of the Brahmanas, and especially were attached to the sections of the latter styled Aranyakas. The Hindus class together Vedas, Brahmanas, Aranyakas, and Upanishads under the general title of "Veda" (knowledge) or "Revelation" (s'ruti, "hearing").

The Vedas and Brahmanas are the handbooks of a crude naturalistic ritualism; but the Aranyakas ("Forest-books"), apparently intended

[p. 13]

for the study of anchorites in the woods, where the more elaborate liturgies were suspended, deal more with the theory of ritual, chiefly from an allegorical point of view. Hence they lead over to the earlier Upanishads, which express a series of generally cognate metaphysical and psychological ideas, at first by allegorical interpretation of Vedic ritual and myth, later with increasing independence of method. Their relation towards Vedic ritualism was at first one of opposition; preaching the saving grace of knowledge alone, they regarded as inadequate the actual liturgies, which admittedly aimed only at worldly welfare. Later their attitude became more conciliatory, and we find them styling themselves Vedanta (first Mund. III. ii. 6, S'vet. VI. 22).

Footnotes

^12:1 The etymology of the word Upanishad is not clear. European scholars generally regard it as from the root sad (compare Latin sedeo), so that it would mean "a sitting before," i.e. a lesson; but native tradition interprets it as "mystery," and the enigmatic formulae in which the older Upanishads sometimes convey their theories lend some support to this view (see Deussen, Philosophy of Upanishads, English translation, pp. 10 ff.).

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 4. FOUNDATIONS OF UPANISHADIC IDEAS.--The Rig-veda contains many strata of religious and philosophic thought. Its oldest element is a worship of nature-deities, such as the Sky-Father, Earth-Mother, Dawn, etc., who were inherited from the time before the division of the Indo-European stocks. These figures, however, are not as a rule living forces in religion; for the most part they are kept alive merely by conservatism and poetic convention. The most real gods of the Vedic pantheon are peculiarly Indian. Often indeed a distant connection can be traced between them and nature-deities in the other Indo-European races; but their myths and

[p. 14]

legends have undergone a long process of development on Indian soil, by which they have acquired the characteristic stamp of the Hindu genius. But even in the naturalistic polytheism of this mythology we can trace in the Rig-veda, especially in its later parts, a tendency towards a pantheism merging all being into a Supreme Spirit of vaguely defined character, a primal Infinite.

Thus "there is one Existence, sages call it by many names" (Rig-veda, I. clxiv. 46; cf. x. cxiv. 5). The primitive spirit and source of being is called Hiranya-garbha ("Germ of Gold"), or Praja-pati ("Lord of Creatures"), x. cxxi.; as his own firstborn he enters the universe created by him (x. lxxii., lxxxii., etc.). In x. cxxix. the first Being is neither existent nor non-existent, a watery void, from which arose a primal Unity, whence sprang Desire as first bond between being and non-being. Another poet (x. xc.) tells how the universe arose from Purusha, "Man," that is, an ideal human sacrifice offered by the gods. For as, to the Vedic mind, a sacrifice is a power controlling Nature, and the human sacrifice is the most powerful of all, then the greatest of all forces, the cosmogonic energies, must have arisen from an ideal offering of this kind made by the highest agents, the gods.

To the demand of philosophy for a final and absolute Reality beyond the temporary and merely relative reality of phenomenal experience

[p. 15]

the Vedic poets thus gave almost the same answer as the early Greek thinkers. They asserted, in very diverse and often very mystic terms, the existence of a single cosmic matter or World-Spirit, whom they styled variously Praja-pati, Brahma (masculine), Purusha, Hiranaya-garbha, etc.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 5. BRAHMA AND PRanA.--This conception, however it might be disguised in cosmogonic and mythopoeic forms, was in essence strictly materialistic. But by its side there arose in the schools of the Brahmanas two somewhat different currents of thought--the doctrines of Brahma and of Prana. Brahma, in the earlier Vedic books, is a neuter noun, meaning the spell or prayer of the priest and the magic power which it exerts over gods, men, and the universe. Prana, again, is properly the breath of the body, hence the incorporeal forces or functional energies on which depends the existence of material life. Thus arose the idea of Force, cosmic power, Brahma, as the ultimate reality and origin of phenomenal being, the knowledge of which brought with it the knowledge of all the phenomena evolved from it.

Often the Upanishads, especially the older texts, identify Brahma (and the individual Self which is one with Brahma), with the "life-breath" in the microcosm and its analogue, the wind of the macrocosm. On the supremacy of

[p. 16]

the breath over the other functions, see B.A. I. v. 14, Ch. I. xi. 5, v. i. 6 f., VI. vii., VII. xv., Pra. VI. 3 f.; breath or wind the guiding force of nature, B.A. I. v. 21 f., III. iii. 2, vii. 2 f.; first principle of nature, Kau. II. 12 f.

In the same mythological fashion Brahma is often symbolised by the manas, or organ of determinate sense-perception and will (see  section 18), and by the ether, the macrocosmic analogue of the manas.

The earlier Upanishads often also speak of the cosmic principle as Purusha, literally "man." This term, as we have seen, arises from the Vedic hymn which mystically describes the origin of the world from the body of an ideal man sacrificed by the gods; hence it often denotes the Demiurge, or first principle of cosmic life (with a false etymology from puri-s'aya, "lying in the city," viz. in the microcosmic and macrocosmic body), and sometimes is used loosely for spirit generally.

As the sun is sometimes mentioned as a symbol of Brahma, so also Brahma is sometimes typified macrocosmically by the purusha in the sun and microcosmically by the purusha in the eye (i.e. the reflected figure in the pupil).

Another symbol of Brahma as identified with the individual soul is the bodily heat (Ch. III. xiii. 7 f.). In Ch. IV. x.-xv. the sacred fires are identified with Brahma, to which are given the especial attributes of space (kham) and joy (kam). See further  section section 8, 22.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

 section 6. DOCTRINE OF TRANSMIGRATION AND WORKS.--At this point we may note two new ideas which henceforth dominated Indian thought--transmigration of the soul (samsara, literally "wandering") and the influence of works (karma). The Vedic Hindu was passionately convinced of the joy of life, the Hindu of a later generation no less impressed by its misery. This pessimism finds expression in two ideas. The first is that the only life worth living is that vouchsafed to the few elect--union of the soul with the transcendent Brahma; all other existence, whatever it may seem, is wretched, an infinite number of souls flitting in constant sorrow and blindness through every degree of organic embodiment. The second idea is that every instant of experience is the rigidly predetermined resultant of a previous act; a present pleasure is the requital of a relatively good deed, a present sorrow the repayment of an ill deed, in a previous life; and every act whatsoever, whether of deed, thought, or speech, is absolutely evil, as attaching the soul still further to the fetters of embodiment. Gloomy and impracticable as is this attitude, it is simply a phase of extreme idealism.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 7. ATMa, SELF OR SPIRIT.--The word atma is several times used in the Rig-veda with the meaning of "breath," "spirit," in the literal sense; and so far there was little to distinguish it from the word prana ( section 5). But from this

[p. 18]

sense was further evolved the meaning "self." Then we can imagine that men began to reflect upon their own words. What, they doubtless asked, is the "self" of which we speak when we use sentences like "he finds it out by [him]self," "he goes by [him]self," "he sees [him]self"? It must be the inmost essence, the indwelling reality, the ayto of each agent, the informing eidos of subjecthood. Therefore it must be thought itself. For subjecthood is a mode of thought; and to thought or will all action is finally traceable. And the Atma, the Self, the consciousness of self-identity on which is based all further ideation of the thinking subject, is one with Brahma, the universal Power. My Idea is the World-Idea; "I am Brahma."

There is another link in this chain. The Vedic poets speak now and then of a god Daksha, who, as his name implies, is simply the abstract idea of "skill" or "intelligence" rather vaguely personified; and twice (x. v. 7, lxxii. 4, 5) Daksha is regarded as primal Being and universal father, from whom sprang the great gods and the universe. Thus Vedic mythology furnished two fruitful ideas--that the objective universe sprang from Intelligence, Daksha, and from an ideal Man, Purusha; and hence grew up gradually the idealistic conception of the universe as arising from, and existing in, the Thought of man.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 8. UPANISHADIC PRINCIPLES.--These conceptions,

[p. 19]

which are conveyed by the Upanishads in very diverse and often mystic and contradictory utterances, may be summed up in three propositions. Firstly, the whole of finite or phenomenal being is evolved from an infinite and unconditioned substrate of absolute reality, Brahma. Secondly, Brahma is pure Thought, absolute Spirit. Thirdly, Brahma is one with the essential thought of each individual subject of thought, the Soul or Atma.

S'ankara, in following these principles, lays down a broad distinction between Brahma as absolute, unqualified, and indeterminate (nirguna), and Brahma as secondary, determined by self-imposed limitations of space, time, and causality (saguna). The former is real, and object of real knowledge; the latter is essentially unreal, an illusion arising from the congenital error of the subject of thought, and vanishing away as soon as the latter by enlightenment ceases to conceive the Absolute in forms of determinate thought, and realises his essential unity with it. Thus all objects of thought must be regarded from two standpoints: the first is that of empiric experience, determined by conditions of space, time, and causality; the second is transcendental, admitting the existence of nothing but an absolute unqualified One. Sankara argues from both standpoints without much regard for consistency. He justifies the Upanishadic habit of describing Brahma under

[p. 20]

the qualified forms of empirical thought, or as represented by a symbol, as a concession to feebler intellects, which cannot comprehend an abstract and unqualified principle, and are by these representations induced to worship Brahma in his qualified character, and thereby to attain freedom from ignorance and sin, worldly welfare, and "gradual release," krama-mukti (see  section 25), whereas the true essence of Brahma is conveyed only by those passages which deny of him all qualification (see especially his commentary on Ch. VIII. i. and on Brahma-sutra, I. iii. 14 f., III. ii. 11 f.).

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 9. ORIGIN OF UNIVERSE FROM BRAHMA.--I. Upanishads.--The Upanishads, being the work of Brahmans, are naturally influenced to a great extent by the naturalism of Vedic myth, especially in their conception of the origination of the universe from Brahma. As we saw ( section 4), the Veda already speaks of a primal Being that created a phenomenal world from itself and became its indwelling soul; and thus, by its empiric distinction between the first Being as cause and the world as its effect, the Veda has arrived at a pantheistic standpoint.

From this the Upanishadic authors started, and struggled slowly towards the strictly idealistic position from which the universe, organic and inorganic, subjects and objects, is regarded as a single Idea which is the same as the Idea of the

[p. 21]

individual subject of thought. In this progress they still made frequent use of the Vedic ideas and the mythical forms embodying them; they admitted their distinction of Brahma as cause and the world as effect, but admitted it as a mode of empiric thought of merely relative validity, while from the standpoint of transcendental reality they asserted the identity of the two.

Brahma (Atma), causing the hitherto unconditioned universe to become conditioned as Name and Form (the elements of cogitable being), entered into it "up to the nail-tips" as immanent soul, B.A. I. iv. 7; cf. Ch. VI. ii. 3, iii. 3, Ait. I. i. 11 f., Taitt. II. 6. Brahma is wholly present as its soul in every living thing, B.A. II. i. 16, iv., III. iv., v., Ch. VI. viii.-xvi. The Cosmic Soul, Hiranya-garbha or Brahma (masculine), enters into creation as firstborn of Brahma (neuter), or highest manifestation, B.A. II. v. ("the brilliant immortal Male," Purusha), Ait. III. iii. (Brahma-Atma is intelligence), Kau. I. Brahma is Cosmic Soul, universal subject of thought from which arise the principles of finite thought (mahan atma, Kath. III. 10, mahan purushah, S'vet. III. 19). The world is created from and by Brahma as the web from the spider, sparks from fire, B.A. II. i. 20, S'vet. VI. 10, Mund. I. i. 7, II. i. 1. Brahma is "the Eternal cloaked by (empirical) reality," B.A. I. vi. 3, cf. I. iv. 7, II. iv. 12, v. 18, etc., Ch. III. xiv. 1, IV. iv.-ix., VI. xiii., etc. The

[p. 22]

individual soul, according to the Upanishads, does not exist previous to the creation by Brahma.

The universe is created from water, B.A. I. v. 13, Ch. VII. x. 1, Ait. I. 1. Three elements, B.A. I. ii. 2, Ch. VI. ii. (heat, water, and food, successively created one from the other, after which each was blended with part of the others). Five elements (adding ether and wind), Taitt. II. i., Pra. IV. 8.

II. Later Vedanta.--S'ankara (on Brahma-sutra, II. iii. 1 f.) endeavours to reconcile the discrepant cosmogonic theories of Ch. VI. ii. and Taitt.II. i., by laying down that from the Self arises ether, thence wind, thence fire, thence water, thence earth, and that this process is reversed on the dissolution of the universe. With this qualification he follows the Ch. in its derivation of inorganic nature from heat (fire), water, and food (earth). These he regards as primitive subtle elements, which by being mixed together form the gross elements; a gross element is produced by the predominance of the corresponding subtle element in admixture with the other two. For his metaphysical explanation of creation, see  section 12.

S'ankara does not mention the theory of quintuplication (panchikarana) adopted by the later Vedanta. This doctrine assumes that there are five elements--ether, air, fire, water, earth--in both subtle and gross forms; in order that a particular gross element, e.g. water, may arise,

[p. 23]

it is necessary that a proportion of one-half of the corresponding subtle form of water be mixed with a proportion of one-half of the half of the other four subtle elements. These five elements, according to the same theory, arise from the union of the Cosmic Self or Is'vara with cosmic ignorance, in the order above mentioned (see further below,  section 12).

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 10. BRAHMA IS ABSOLUTE BEING.--The question whether the universal substrate, or Brahma, should properly be called being (sat) or non-being (a-sat), already agitated the Vedic poets (see Rig veda, x. cxxix. 1), and passed through the schools of the Brahmanas to those of the older Upanishads. The debate, however, was merely over words. As Brahma is beyond all the limiting conditions of phenomenal being, either term may be applied to it; it is at once metaphysically existent and empirically non-existent.

Brahma is non-being, B.A. II. iii. 1, Ch. III. xix. 1, Taitt. II. vi.-vii.; being, Ch. VI. ii. 1, etc. Brahma is "reality of reality," B.A. II. i. 20, iii. 6; "the Eternal cloaked in (empirical) reality," I. vi. 3. A reconciliation from the transcendental standpoint is found in S'vet. IV. 18, v. 1, Mund. II. ii. 1, etc. S'ankara (on Brahma-sutra, I. iv. 14 f.) rightly notes the twofold meaning of the terms "being" and "not-being."

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 11. BRAHMA IS THOUGHT.--The Vedic brahma, "prayer" or "spell," is naturally a function

[p. 24]

of intellect; and when it had risen to the rank of a cosmic Force, it retained this character. It is the universal subject of thought; but as it is itself the universe, and there is nothing beside, it is also its own object, like the Aristotelian noesis noeseus; and as it is above the conditions of space, time, and causality, we can say of it only that it exists, and is Thought.

Frequently, from the natural tendency to conceive a higher sphere of existence as a realm of light and thought as itself light, Brahma and the individual Self identified with it are described as supreme self-luminous light: B.A. IV. iv. 16, Ch. VIII. iii. 4, XII. 3, Kath. v. 15, S'vet. VI. 14.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 12. BRAHMA IS ATMa.--I. Upanishads.--This idealistic conception became more marked when Brahma was identified with the Atma, the subject of individual thought. "The universe is an Idea, my Idea"--this doctrine is constantly preached in detailed expositions and in pithy phrases like the famous "I am Brahma" (aham brahmasmi), "thou art that" (tat tvam asi). Hence all phenomena are known when their substrate Brahma is known as the Self of the knower.

For tat tvam asi see Ch. VI. viii. 7 f.; aham brahmasmi, B.A. I. iv. 10; cf. tad vai tat, "truly this is that," B.A. V. iv., etad vai tat, Kath. IV. 3-6. The most adequate treatment of this theme is B.A. IV. iii.-iv.: the Self is "the Spirit (Purusha)

[p. 25]

made of understanding amid the Breaths, the inward light within the heart, that travels abroad, remaining the same, through both worlds," wandering in waking and dreaming through this world, and in deep sleep or death through the world of Brahma; in dreams it builds up a fairy world from the materials of waking thought; in dreamless sleep it is merged in the "understanding self," prajna atma, viz. Brahma as universal subject of thought, without consciousness of objects distinct from itself (cf.  section section 11, 15,18). Atma is pure consciousness, Kau. III f.; as a purely intellectual force pervading all being, it is compared to salt dissolved in water, B.A. II. iv. 12, Ch. VI. xiii. Atma known, all is known, Ch. VI. i. f.; the later view of it as impassive spectator of the subjects, objects, and activity of finite thought, Pra. VI. 5, S'vet. VI. 11, Sarvopanishatsara, etc.

Ch. VIII. i. f. lays special emphasis on the presence of the whole macrocosm, the universal Self, in the heart of man, and hence on the absolute freedom of him who knows the Self within him. The whole world of cognitions exists for us only in so far as it enters into the range of our egoity; our pleasures are only for the satisfaction of our Self, which is the All; this recognition unites our soul with the universe and gives us control of all things from their source, B.A. II. iv., IV. v. The final reality of cognition is infinitude, bhuma,

[p. 26]

illimitable ideation, on realising which the soul wins absolute freedom, Ch. VII. xxiii. f.

Very important in this connection is the theory of the Five Selves propounded in the Taittiriya Upanishad, ii., an attempt to interpret the phenomena of physical existence in terms of the Atma. The author conceives the first four Selves as sheaths surrounding the fifth. The first is anna-maya, "formed of food"; that is, it comprises the physical organs of microcosmic and macrocosmic body. Within this is the second, the prana-maya, "formed of life-breaths"; it is the Self as embodied in the incorporeal functions on which depends the activity of the gross organs in the microcosm and macrocosm. The third is mano-maya, "formed of will," namely of the Vedas and Brahmanas, which are the powers inspiring the life of the world for worldly ends, for they ordain rituals for the carnal benefit of gods and their worshippers in this and other worlds. The fourth is vijnana-maya, "formed of understanding," namely that phase of consciousness in which the vanity of this Vedic ritual is recognised and superseded by an intellectual worship of Brahma, which however still distinguishes Brahma as object from the Self as worshipper. Within this is the inmost Self, the ananda-maya, "formed of bliss," the incogitable spirit of infinite peace and joy (cf. Ch. IV. x.-xv., where Brahma is essentially space and joy).

[p. 27]

II. Later Vedanta.--The triad of attributes often mentioned in the later Vedanta, Existence, Thought, and Bliss (sack-chid-ananda), does not occur as a formula in S'ankara's writings; it is however anticipated by his definition of Brahma as "eternal, omniscient, omnipresent, eternally satisfied, eternally pure, intelligent, and free of nature, understanding, and bliss" (on Brahma-sutra I. i. 4). Brahma is the omnipotent and omniscient cause of the origin, maintenance, and dissolution of the universe, the intelligence forming the Self or true Ego of every being, of which the only possible predicates are absolute Being and Thought (on I. i. 2, 4, II. iii. 7, III. ii. 21, etc.).

In accordance with his principles, S'ankara regards the creation by and from Brahma from both an esoteric and an exoteric standpoint. On the one hand, he remarks, the creation of the phenomenal world as described in terms of empiric thought by the Vedas and Upanishads has no absolute reality at all; it is intended to teach parabolically that the Self of all things is Brahma (see commentary on Brahma-sutra II. i. 33). On the other hand, the world of experience cannot be ignored altogether; it is a fact of consciousness, though only of unenlightened consciousness, and accordingly an explanation of its process must be found. Creation consists in a division of Brahma by himself into a boundless variety of "names and forms," intelligible existences 

[p. 28]

which constitute the empiric world and possess determinate principles of being, formal and material potentialities (s'akti) that never vary throughout all the world's successive cycles (see  section 23). These potential forces, which relatively to one another are of infinite variety but intrinsically are strictly determinate, include not only the germinal principles of all phenomena but also the empiric souls (jiva) as such; and collectively they constitute the "powers" or s'aktis, i.e. the eternal demiurgic potencies of Brahma, which in the intervals between the creations of the worlds lie dormant in a deep sleep of illusion as a sum of merely potential energies, waiting for the next creation to arise in cosmopoeic activity (on I. iii. 30, IV. 9, II, i. 30 f., etc.). Thus the Upanishadic theory of a single creation is replaced by a doctrine of beginningless and endless successions of emergence and reabsorption of the phenomenal world (see  section 23).

The force that moves the absolute Idea to conceive itself as a plurality of determinate subjects and objects of empiric thought is, according to S'ankara, Ignorance, which, though itself strictly negative, is the basis of that positive illusion, the phenomenal world (see  section 16). Ignorance creates "determinations," upadhi, modes of thought limiting the self-conception of the absolute Brahma, and Ignorance causes the empiric soul thus produced to confuse Brahma with the determinations 

[p. 29]

falsely imposed upon him, so that Brahma is imagined variously as individual soul, a world of experience, and a personal God.

The "determinations" that play the most important part in S'ankara's system are those which form the structure of individual consciousness by constituting the idea of an embodied individual soul, jiva. These are the pranas, or "breaths," the "works," the "subtle body," the gross body, and sometimes also the sensations and phenomenal perceptions (see  section 18). A favourite metaphor by which Sankara illustrates his theory of upadhis is that of a jar. The space enclosed within a certain jar is really the same as the infinite space filling the universe, and the conception of it as limited by the jar nowise limits the infinitude of space itself; and so the conception of the Self as determined by the forms of embodied existence nowise excludes the identity of the embodied Self with the absolute Brahma. The soul itself, says S'ankara (on II. iii. 40), is totally incapable of (empiric) action, whether as subject or object; its apparent activity, e.g. in desire, grief, etc., is based merely upon Ignorance, for the activity arises because the soul falsely ascribes to itself the properties of "determinations" (cf. the definitions of the individual soul given on IV. ii. 4 as "the intelligent self, vijnanatma, having the determinations of ignorance, works, and previous experience").

The Vedantic schools which followed S'ankara

[p. 30]

theorised more schematically on the origin of the phenomenal world. They regard Ignorance as a cosmic sum of forces including all finite powers, causes, and effects, which has two characteristic properties, viz. "obscuration" (avarana), causing the Absolute Idea to conceive itself as distinct individual egos, and "distention" (vikshepa), arousing in the Self the illusive idea of an external world of phenomena. Accepting the Sankhya's division of matter into the three gunas or modes of sattva ("goodness" or "truth"), rajas ("passion"), and tamas ("gloom"), they identify matter with Cosmic Ignorance, or the sum of individual Ignorances, which acts as a "determinant" to the Supreme Self or Absolute Thought. The latter as "determined" in Cosmic Ignorance acts as a world-soul, directing the universal order of phenomena with supreme power and knowledge, and hence is called Is'vara, "the Lord." The Cosmic Ignorance is hence called "Is'vara's body," and also "Deep Sleep" (sushupti), for in it the force of Ignorance investing Thought is almost wholly inoperative, and the phenomenal world exists only in potentiality. This sphere of being is called the "sheath of Bliss," ananda-maya kos'a. To it corresponds a stage of existence in the individual soul, in which the Self or Thought (here styled Prajna) is "determined" by individual Ignorance. From Is'vara as "determined" by Cosmic Ignorance arise the subtle

[p. 31]

elements ( section 18) and thence both the "subtle bodies" ( section 19) and gross elements. The "subtle bodies" in the aggregate determine the Self into a mode called Prana, Sutratma, or Hiranyagarbha; individually they determine it into the mode called Taijasa. These combinations of matter with the Self form three successive phases of being for the individual soul: (1) the "sheath of understanding," vijnana-maya kos'a, composed of intelligence (buddhi) and the "organs of knowledge" ( section 18), which constitutes the real agent in empiric experience; (2) the "sheath of mind," mano-maya kos'a, formed of manas and the organs of action, thus constituting the instrument of empiric experience; and (3) the "sheath of the breaths," prana-maya kos'a, formed of vital breaths and organs of action, and constituting the effect of experience. These three phases of being are together called "Dream-Sleep," as in them arise the subtle or elementary forms of phenomena and the reflection of them upon the "determined" Self. The gross elements which arise from the subtle collectively "determine" the Self into the phase called Vais'vanara or Virat; individually they "determine" it into Vis'va. This lowest determination is called anna-maya kos'a, the "sheath of food," or the state of Waking, for into it the forms of both gross and subtle phenomena are displayed to the Self, as in waking both memory and sense-perception are active.

[p. 32]

The scheme is thus as follows:

          1. Individual Gross Body, determinant of Vis'va, in state of Waking.

       Sheath of Food.

       Cosmic Gross Body determinant of Virat, in state of Waking.

     
      2. Individual Subtle Body, determinant of Taijasa, in state of Dreaming.

       (1) Sheath of Breaths.
   (2) Sheath of Mind.
   (3) Sheath of Understanding.

       Cosmic Subtle Body, determinant of Prana, in state of Dreaming.

     
      3. Individual Causal Body, determinant of Prajna, in state of   Dreamless Sleep.

       Sheath of Bliss.

       Cosmic Causal Body, determinant of Is'vara, in state of Dreamless   Sleep.

     
   
     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

 section 13. BRAHMA IS INCOGITABLE.--Brahma or Atma, being an absolute Reality, the supreme Thing-in-Itself, is therefore inconceivable by the reason, and only capable of being comprehended by an inspired intuition. The Self, whether universal or individual, is a single subject of thought, and so cannot be an object of thought; and it is by nature absolute, above all conditions of finite determination. This negative conception is most forcibly expressed by the famous formula ascribed to Yajnavalkya, neti  neti, "not so, not so," a denial of all possible predicates to the Self (B.A. IV. ii. 4, IV. 22, v. 15, etc.), and also by frequently describing Brahma or Atma in contradictory terms as limitless, infinitely extended and yet immeasurably limited in space and time, and denying to it all activity as cause or effect. See also B.A. II. iv. 14, III. iv. 2, vii. 23, viii. 11, Ch. III. xiv. 2, VII. xxiv. 1, Kena. III., XI., Kath. VI. 12 f. S'ankara (on Brahma-sutra II. iii. 29) explains these contradictions in the description of the size of the Self by asserting that the mention of it as immeasurably small refers to its condition as empiric soul, when it is limited by "determinations" ( section 12) and is conceived under the attributes of the "determination" of intelligence, buddhi ( section 18).

S'ankara (on Brahma-sutra III. ii. 17) tells a tale of a sage who, on being asked to teach the doctrine of Brahma, remained silent, and on the request

[p. 34]

being thrice repeated said simply, "I have told you, but you understand not; this Self is still" (cf. Ch. III. xiv. 1).

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 14. PARMENIDES.--The opportunity here presents itself to point to the singularly close parallel between Upanishadic thought and the doctrines of the early Eleatic philosophers, and especially Parmenides, who may well have been contemporary with the authors of some of the most important Upanishads. Following Xenophanes, who had defined God as eternal, one, and neither in motion nor immobile, Parmenides asserts a single universal Being which is identical with thought. Existence is a whole indivisible in space and time; non-being does not exist. "Thus there remains but one way to tell of, namely that Being is. There are many tokens to show that it is unborn and imperishable, whole, only-begotten, unshakeable, and endless. Never was it nor will it be, for it exists entirely in present time, one and indivisible... Thus it must exist either absolutely or not at all. The power of belief can never admit that from non-being anything else (but non-being) could arise... And it (viz., being) is not divisible, for it is identical throughout; nor is there any higher (being) that could prevent its uniformity, nor any less; it is entirely full of being. So it is wholly uniform, for being unites with being. But it is immobile in the limitations of mighty bonds, beginningless

[p. 35]

and endless; for birth and destruction have been driven very far away, right conviction has rejected them. It abides the same in the same and by itself, and thus remains constantly in its place... Thought and the object of thought are the same, for you cannot find thought without the existent thing in which it is expressed. There is and can be nothing except being, for fate has bound it down to be whole and immobile. Thus all (ideas) that men have set up, believing them to be true--birth and death, being and non-being, change of place, and alteration of bright hue--are mere words" (fragment 8, ed. Diels); cf. fragment 5, "thought (of being) and being are the same," fragment 6, "speech and thought must be real, for being exists and a naught does not exist," fragment 7, "non-being can never be proved to exist." Except in his view of Being as a sphere, Parmenides is in perfect accord with the Vedanta. The similarity of Plato's doctrines is well known.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 15. PHASES OF THE SELF.--The highest existence is thus Thought without thinking, the state in which the soul has no consciousness of any external object, or indeed of any object at all, strictly speaking, for it is itself in conscious identity with the sum of all being or Universal Idea; "whilst he seeth not a thing, yet doth he see, though he see not the thing erstwhile to be seen. He that hath sight loseth not his sight, for it is imperishable. But there is naught beside

[p. 36]

him, naught apart from him, that he may see" (B.A. IV. iii. 23).

The only analogy that experience furnishes for this supposed condition of soul is that of dreamless sleep; and it was inferred that in such sleep the soul is actually in this transcendent state.

Besides this, the earlier Upanishads recognise two other states of the soul, waking and dreaming. When awake the soul puts forth out of itself a world of sense and organs of sense and empirical thought, and renders itself the subject of the experiences conjured up by them. In dreaming sleep the sense-organs swoon away and are absorbed into the manas, the organ forming the centre of empirical cognition and will ( section 18), which thus has now the vision of the world as it is reflected from the waking state; at the same time the "life-breaths," pranas, are active as in waking.

The later Upanishads assume yet another phase, which they call the "Fourth" (turiya, chaturtha). In this the soul, transcending dreamless sleep, is absolutely wakeful in its union with the universal subject of thought, and exercises in perfect stillness an infinite real consciousness of all in the Self which is different in kind from the "unconscious consciousness" ascribed to dreamless sleep.

The waking, dreaming, and dreamless phases are respectively termed Vais'vanara ("common to all mankind"), Taijasa ("luminous," for in

[p. 37]

dreams the soul is its own light, B.A. IV. iii. 9), and Prajna ("intelligent," for in deep sleep the Self is one with the Universal Idea or "intelligent Self," prajna atma, B.A. IV. iii. 21); these terms do not occur until Mand. iii. ff. On dreaming sleep see also B.A. II. i. 18 (soul wanders about within the body), IV. iii. 9-14 (two accounts, in one of which soul leaves the body, while in the other it remains in it), iii. 20 f., Ch. VIII. x. 2, Pra. IV. 2 f. Dreamless sleep, B.A. IV. iii. 19-33, Ch. VIII. vi. 3, x.-xi. Fourth State, Mand. VII., Maitr. VI. 19, VII. 11, Mandukya-karika I. 12-16, III. 33 f. See also S'ankara on Brahma-sutra I. iii. 19 f., 40 f., III. ii. 1 f. S'ankara, following Ch. IV. iii. 3, holds that in deep sleep, in which the soul is in temporary identity with Brahma, the functions of sense, together with the manas, in which they are absorbed, are merged in the "breaths" travelling through the pericardium and veins (cf.  section 18), while the soul becomes one with the Brahma residing under "determinations" in the heart (in B.A. II. i. 19, it rests in the pericardium, in Ch. VIII. vi. 3 in the veins). The statement of Ch. VIII. xii. 3, that "the Calm (samprasada), rising from this body, wins to the Supreme Light, and shows itself in its own form; this is the highest spirit (purusha)" is taken by S'ankara (on Brahma-sutra IV. iv. 1 f.) as referring to the soul not in dreamless sleep, but in its final release from the body after enlightenment (see  section 24); this "own form" is the existence

[p. 38]

of the soul in its absolute selfhood, where there is no longer a distinction between individual and universal soul. For the theories of the Vedanta after S'ankara see above,  section 12.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 16. MaYa.--The word maya, magic illusion, is commonly used in the later Vedanta to denote the phantom character of the phenomenal world; and in this sense it does not appear in the Upanishads until the S'vetas'vatara (IV. 10). It is not found in the Brahma-sutra; and hence the question has often been raised whether the idea denoted by it was actually present in the minds of the authors of the older Upanishads.

That phenomena, even to the first principles under which they are cognised (space, time, and causality), are unreal relatively to Absolute Being, is a cardinal doctrine not only of the Upanishads but of all metaphysics. Even the Vedic poets assert a real being of primal unity concealed behind the manifold of experience; and on this is founded the Upanishadic principle that the universe exists only in and by virtue of a World-Idea essentially identical with the individual consciousness. This, however, is still far from the maya-theory of the later Vedanta. The authors of the older Upanishads were still much influenced by the realism of the Vedas, and it is therefore doubtful whether they could have agreed with the Vedantists who treat the world of experience as absolutely unreal, a mere phantom

[p. 39]

conjured up by the Self for its own delusion. As typical of the Upanishadic attitude we may regard the theory of the Five Atmas ( section 12) and the long passage of the Brihad-aranyaka (III. vii. 3 f.) where the Self is described in detail as the antaryami, or "inward controller," functioning as soul within matter as its body. Their view was in the main somewhat as follows. Phenomena are evolved from the Self, and hold their existence as intelligibilia in fee from the Self; with the knowledge of the Self they become known as phases of it; hence they are, to this extent, and no further, really existent (satya, B.A. I. vi. 3), provisionally true, although it is only ignorance of the Self that regards them as really independent of the Self and manifold. The Upanishads on the whole conceive the empiric soul's ignorance as a negative force, an absence of light; with S'ankara and the later Vedanta it is positive, a false light, a constructive illusion. Brahma as cause of phenomena is in the Upanishads a real material, in S'ankara's school an unreal material.

The difficulties besetting S'ankara when he endeavours to bring logical order into the vague idealism of the Upanishads are very serious. On the one hand he maintains that the whole phenomenal world is unreal (avastu). As a magician (mayavi) causes a phantom or wraith to issue from his person which has no real existence and by which the magician himself is entirely unaffected,

[p. 40]

so Brahma creates from himself a universe which is an utter phantom and nowise modifies his absolute existence. His creative "powers" (which are real only when regarded from the standpoint of his creation, the world of finite subjects and objects) constitute the demiurgic principle of an empiric universe, which is, from its own standpoint, coextensive with him, whereas absolutely speaking it does not exist at all (see commentary on Brahma-sutra, II. i. 6, 9, etc., and above,  section 9). On the other hand, the universe, phantom as it is, nevertheless is a fact of consciousness. Illusion though it be, the illusion is. This predicate of existence is the bond uniting it with its source, the truly existent, Brahma (on II. i. 6). Brahma is absolute thought, the world is false thought; but the subject in both cases is the same, the thinking Self. Thus Maya denotes the sum of phenomena--or, as more narrowly defined by some later Vedantists, the sum of matter--as illusively conceived by the Self; it is the Ignorance which creates the phantom of a universe and of an individual ego by imposing its figments upon pure Thought ( section 12).

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 17. RELATION OF UNIVERSAL TO INDIVIDUAL SOUL.--It is a first principle of the Upanishads that the numberless individual souls are really one with the Universal Self. But how is this relation conceivable? To this question no answer is vouchsafed. The older texts instead give us

[p. 41]

cosmogonic myths, which realistically depict a Universal Spirit creating the phenomenal world and then animating it as world-soul; and the latter they simply identify with the self of the individual, sometimes more pantheistically (Ch. VI. iii.), sometimes more idealistically (B.A.II. iv. 5, III. iv. 1, v. 1, etc.). But why should there be this division between the one Absolute Soul and the innumerable individual souls condemned to suffer the intellectual darkness and physical sorrows of embodied life? The Upanishads find a solution in their theory of karma, the acts done in previous births requiring further embodiment to work away their influence upon the soul. This implies a regressus ad infinitum, as every act is the resultant of a former act; and this conclusion is cheerfully drawn by the later Vedanta, which thus avoids the necessity of explaining the "origin of evil." The older Upanishads, whose cosmogonies contradict this theory, simply avoid the question.

The theory which begins to appear in a somewhat late Upanishad (the Maitrayaniya), that the Soul conceives division and plurality in consequence of the delusive attractions of physical Nature, and hence assumes embodied form and comes under the influence of "works," is partly connected with the dualism of the Sankhya school, and partly with the theory of "illusion" developed in the later Vedanta (see  section 16). S'ankara generally regards the universe itself, i.e. the

[p. 42]

aggregate of subjects and objects of experience, as created in order to furnish finite souls with experiences in recompense of previous "works"; but the reason moving the Supreme Brahma to render himself an efficient and material cause of a universe distinct from himself, says S'ankara, can only be motiveless sport (see commentary on Brahma-sutra, II. i. 33).

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 18. ORGANISM OF SOUL.--I. Upanishads.--Every organic being is a soul, according to the Upanishads; and the degree of its organic development is directly proportioned to the merits of its former works. The highest therefore are the souls of gods and men. The soul in its human embodiment exercises three classes of functions: (1) the sense-organs (indriya), which in slumber or swoon become paralysed and merge themselves into (2) the organ of thought (manas), which converts the data of the sense-organs into conscious modes of thought and volition; and (3) the "breaths" (prana), a term originally denoting all the functions of physical life, then those higher functions upon which generally depends all life, whether conscious or unconscious, and into which during sleep or swoon are merged the manas and the sense-organs already absorbed in the latter.

The name indriya for the sense-organs appears first in Kath. and Kau. Other texts usually call them prana (a collective term, from the supremacy of the prana, or breath), and comprise under the

[p. 43]

name ordinarily breath, speech, sight, hearing, and manas (e.g. B.A. I. iv. 7). The same ten indriyas as in the later system occur first in B.A. II. iv. 11, IV. v. 12, which adds manas and heart (cf. Pra. IV. 2). On manas as central function of cognition and action see B.A. I. v. 3, IV. i. 6, Ch. VII. iii f., Kath. VI. 7. The sense-organs are compared to horses drawing the car of the body, manas to their bridle, Kath. III. 3; in Maitr. II. 6 the organs of action are the horses, the organs of intelligence (see below) the reins, manas the driver. On the immersion of organs with manas in prana see especially B.A. IV. iii. 12, Ch. VI. viii. 2, Pra. IV. 2 f. The "breaths" are usually given as five, viz.: (1) prana in the strict sense, which in B.A. and Ch. denotes exspiration, and later exspiration and inspiration together; (2) apana, in B.A. and Ch. the inspiration, later the wind causing digestion in the bowels or evacuation; (3) vyana, respiratory action connecting prana and apana, variously conceived; (4) samana, sometimes the wind digesting food, sometimes connection between exspiration and inspiration; (5) udana, which carries food and drink up and down (Maitr. II. 6) and guides the soul to Brahma in death and sleep (Pra. III. 7, IV. 4).

II. Later Vedanta.--In the system of S'ankara the gross body, subtle body ( section 19), karmas'raya ( section 20), and pranas are classed together as the "determinations" or upadhis by which the Self

[p. 44]

conceives itself as an individual soul (above,  section 12). Whereas the gross body is abandoned on death, the other organisms travel in a potential form with the soul throughout all its births. By the term prana S'ankara, following the old Upanishadic usage, designates not only the unconscious "breaths," but also the conscious indriyas. The indriyas (the functional forces whence arise the material sense-organs) according to him comprise the five functions of action (viz. speech, grasp, locomotion, generation, and excretion) and the five of buddhi or intelligence (viz. sight, hearing, taste, touch, and smell), with which is associated the manas as their centre. The pranas, or "breaths" in the strict sense are the five known in the Upanishads. S'ankara explains prana as exspiration, apana as inspiration, vyana as the force maintaining life when both exspiration and inspiration are checked, samana as the digestive force, and udana as the current leading the soul from the body on death (on II. iv. 8 f.). When death takes place, the indriyas sink into manas, this into the pranas, these into the individual soul (lodged in the heart), this into the "subtle body" ( section 19), which then starts on its wanderings. Thus S'ankara (on IV. ii. 1 f.) explains the statement of Ch. VI. viii. 6 that on death Speech is merged in manas, this into prana, this into Heat, this into the Higher Godhead. These words, he holds, mean that the potential functions of conscious sensation are

[p. 45]

merged into those of unconscious vitality, the latter into the individual soul, this again into the "Heat," i.e. the "subtle body," which conveys the soul through its wanderings. See also  section section 12, 15.

The later Vedanta (e.g. the Vedanta-sara and the Atma-viveka and Vakya-sudha ascribed to S'ankara) schematises the functions of empiric thought by dividing the antah-karana, its collective organisation, into chitta, manas (often loosely called antah-karana), buddhi, and aham-kara. To chitta it ascribes the function of passing notice, to manas that of deliberation, and to buddhi that of determination. Sometimes also it uses buddhi as a general term denoting both aham-kara, the conception of egoity, which is the agent in empiric mental action, and manas, the instrument of egoity; in the false identification of these functions with the Self or Spirit lies the root of phenomenal illusion.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 19. THE SUBTLE BODY.--According to the later Vedanta, the Soul in its wanderings from birth to birth is accompanied by the sense-organs and "breaths" as sums of potential faculties, and has for its vehicle the "subtle body," sukshmas'arira. The latter consists of portions of the five elements in their higher suprasensual form, and thus is as it were a seed which on occasion grows by the accession of gross matter into a physical body.

There is no clear evidence for the existence of

[p. 46]

this idea in the Upanishads until the mention of a linga (the term used in the Sankhya school for "subtle body") in B.A. IV. iv. 6; cf. Kath. VI. 8, S'vet. VI. 9, Maitr. VI. 10. For S'ankara's view see especially on Brahma-sutra, III. i. 1 f., IV. ii. 6 f. The "subtle body" adheres to the soul until it attains perfect enlightenment and release in Brahma; the souls which never reach this goal are always attended by it.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 20. KARMA.--The propelling force which conducts the Soul with its potential functions through endless incarnations as man, god, beast, or vegetable, is the karmas'raya, the substrate of its karma or works. By "work" is understood not only every act of will, and of body in obedience to will, but also every act of ideation in which the subject of thought posits a non-self in opposition to itself, for in this false duality begins the Will, desire, attachment of the soul to its fetters of finitude, and therewith moral blindness. Every such act transforms itself into a positive force acting upon the soul, and demanding a corresponding requital of good for good and evil for evil in future experiences; and the sum of these forces at the end of each life determines the form of birth in the next incarnation. [*1]

Footnotes

^46:1 See especially B.A. III. ii. 13 (probably the earliest assertion of this theory as a solution of the problem of moral character), IV. iv. 2-6, Ch. III. xiv. 1, S'ankara on Brahma-sutra, III, iv. 11, IV. ii, 6, and above,  section 6, below,  section 24.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

 section 21. FREEDOM OF WILL.--It follows that in so far as man shares in the empiric world his whole moral and physical life is at every instant strictly predestined. But at the same time his Self is implicitly free, inasmuch as in essence it is one with the Absolute Brahma, no matter how it be empirically sunk in the phenomenal world; and as soon as he attains the knowledge of this fundamental unity which is itself salvation, his freedom is complete; he is the One Absolute Brahma, and beside him there exists no empiric world. 

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 22. GOD.--These two ideas, empiric servitude to Works and transcendental freedom, leave little room for a Supreme God or moral guide of the experiences of souls. The older texts practically ignore such a power; their polytheistic myths are merely echoes from the Veda, allegorically turned, and when they refer to a supreme deity they mean the higher Self within man. Later authors, however, began occasionally to set up in theistic fashion a distinction between the Self within and the Self without. This finally led to the conception of the later Vedanta, in which the Supreme Self, styled "the Lord" (Is'vara), is given the function of directing as efficient cause the course of "works," so that each comes to its

[p. 48]

requital in due season and form, while the direct responsibility for all man's experiences is thrown upon the inward Self. In other circles the same theistic current led to the identification of this Atma-God with one of the great popular deities, usually Vishnu or S'iva; and thus arose the great theologies, of which the most significant is the Bhagavad-gita, a compromise between Upanishadic idealism, Sankhya physics, and practical faith. The first definite theism is in Kath. II. 20 (?), 23, III. i., v. 13, Mund. III. ii. 3, Is'a 8, S'vet. III 20, IV.-VI., etc. Worship of Brahma-Atma is however frequently mentioned in the Upanishads. It is an adoration of the Self either in its unqualified absoluteness (cf. Ch. III. xiv. 1, "Brahma in sooth is this All; it hath therein its beginning, end, and breath; so one should worship it in stillness"), or as allegorically typified by some physical force (see  section 5), or as represented by the sacred syllable Om or Aum, upon which see especially Mand. and Pra. v., which sets forth the three degrees of reward for meditation upon one, two, or three elements of this word; cf. S'ankara on Brahma-sutra, I. iii. 13. See also  section section 8, 24.

S'ankara (on Brahma-sutra, II. iii. 29) claims that wherever the Vedas and Upanishads represent the absolute Brahma under the form of "determinations" ( section 12), this is for the purpose of worship of Brahma as qualified Supreme, saguna, e.g. in Ch. III. xiv. The conception of the soul's

[p. 49]

relation to God as that of a servant to his master is justified by him (on II. iii. 43 f.), inasmuch as Brahma by his supreme "determinations" regulates the activity of the empiric soul in the exercise of its inferior "determinations." He permits the worship of this "qualified Brahma," i.e. the Absolute conceived under the forms of empiric thought, but regards it as inferior in saving power to the true knowledge (see  section section 24, 25). The works of religion--ritual and devotion--are of value only as aids to enlightenment; they are not necessary, and after enlightenment is gained they lose all significance (on III. iv. 25 f., IV. i. 1 f.).

Footnotes

^47:1 Predestination for empiric life, B.A. III. viii. 9, IV. iv. 5, Ch. III. xiv. 1, VIII, i. 5; Unconscious freedom of transcendental Self, Ch. VIII. iii. 2; Absolute freedom in enlightenment, Ch. VII. xxv. 2, VII. i. 6, v. 4.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 23. BRAHMA THE DESTROYER.--As we saw, the Upanishads are full of cosmogonies inherited from Vedic religion; but apparently they have not yet arrived at the belief in a periodical course of alternate creation, maintenance, and dissolution of worlds which later became general in India. The earlier texts several times describe Brahma or some cognate power as consuming his creatures separately; but a collective destruction is nowhere mentioned in them. [*1]

In the later Vedanta the theory of periodical cataclysms is formally accepted. Again and again the universe is created, and after a time dissolved again into indiscrete potentiality; this cycle of birth and death is without beginning and

[p. 50]

without end ( section 12). In the intervals between destruction and the following creation the eternal Veda, with its Brahmanas and Upanishads, rests as a potential force in the thought of Brahma; and at the beginning of creation the ideas contained in it serve as archetypes for the formation of all phenomena in the now emerging universe, and are revealed to inspired sages, its karma-kanda or practical section (the four Vedas and the bulk of the Brahmanas) to guide men to ritual and consequent worldly welfare, its jnana-kanda or theoretical section (chiefly the Upanishads) to teach them the true knowledge of Brahma.

Footnotes

^49:1 See especially B.A. I. ii. 1, Ch. I. ix. 1, Taitt. III. 1, Kath. II. 25. Universal dissolution appears first in S'vet. III. 2, IV. 1.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 24. SALVATION.--I. Upanishads.--Release of the soul (mukti, moksha), which falls to the lot of the elect few, consists in enlightenment, intuitive vision of the eternal unity of the thinker's Self with Brahma, to which he has hitherto been blind. When once this saving knowledge has been gained, the enlightened man is no longer under the power of "works." He has everything in himself, for he is one with the All; together with the false idea of a self distinct from the universal Self the forces of former works have vanished away; thus he has no desire and no pain, and can have none. And when his soul has cast off the body, it will be reborn nevermore; it is united for ever with the Absolute Brahma. See especially the fine exposition in B.A. IV. ii.-iv.; also Ch. VII. xxvi. 2, Taitt. II. 9, Kena 11-12,

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] Mund. II. ii. 8, III. ii. 9, and S'ankara on Brahma-sutra, I. i. 4, III. iv. 1 f., IV. i. 13 f.

II. Later Vedanta.--S'ankara points out that this saving intuition is unattainable by effort of will or thought; it arises from the power of the inner self, the metaphysical ego within us, which from a theistic and therefore empiric standpoint may be conceived as personal God, "the Lord," or "qualified Brahma" ( section section 12, 22). This knowledge annuls not only all sins, but likewise all works, no matter whether good or bad, which have not yet begun to bear fruit in present experience. The works however which are the cause of the present series of experience must continue in operation even after the attainment of enlightenment, until their power is exhausted, whereupon the soul leaves the flesh for ever, as the potter's wheel continues to run round for a while after the potter's hand has been removed; but this subsequent bodily experience no longer has any influence upon the soul. The B.A. IV. iv. 6 teaches that, whereas on death the souls of those who have only exoteric knowledge or no knowledge at all go forth to continue in empiric conditions, the Self of the enlightened man does not "go out" (na utkramanti), but enters into Brahma, with entire annihilation of spatial conditions; its upadhis or "determinations" wholly vanish, and it is absorbed in abstract entirety into the abstract Brahma (on Brahma-sutra III. iii. 30, IV. ii. 12 f.). See  section 15.

[p. 52]

There has been much speculation upon the divisions of karma. A common classification is that which divides it into sanchita, prarabdha, and kriyamana. The sanchita or "accumulated" karma is that which was created in former births and has not yet begun to operate upon the soul. Prarabdha or "commenced" karma is that which has already begun to affect the soul. Kriyamana is "being made," that is, it is the activity of the present which will influence the soul in future births. The intellectual illumination of perfect "Brahma-knowledge" annuls both sanchita and kriyamana; only the prarabdha remains, and this exhausts itself mechanically by prolonging the sage's physical life until all influence of karma is spent, and his body then dies.

The later Vedanta designates by the term jivanmukti the condition of the enlightened sage previous to death, while his prarabdha karma is exhausting itself; his subsequent condition is called videha-mukti, "emancipation in freedom from the body."

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 section 25. THE AFTER LIFE.--I. Upanishads.--Good deeds are requited, according to the Veda, in another world, the heaven of the gods and the fathers. The Brahmanas regard the heaven of the gods as a place of recompense for the good, and the abode of the fathers as a hell in which men are reborn to lives of suffering proportioned to their sins in this world. Finally we meet the

[p. 53]

doctrine of transmigration definitively set forth in the Upanishads, by which retribution is effected, in part at any rate, by rebirth in this world.

The fullest eschatological scheme in the Upanishads is given in the parallel passages Ch. V. iii.-x., B.A. VI. ii. The first half of these sections (Ch. V. iii.-ix., B.A. VI. ii. 1-14) sets forth the theory that on death the soul goes to heaven in a sublimated form, here allegorically styled "waters" and "faith" (a conception in which are united the two ideas of "subtle body" and "works"), and from heaven returns at once to earthly birth, being sacrificed by the gods successively in the fires of heaven, the atmosphere, earth, man, and woman. Here there is no idea of requital in any world but this. The further paragraphs expound a more complicated theory of requital both in the other world and here. The souls of the sages who "worship Faith as their mortification in the woods" (they who have the saving knowledge) ascend by a series of stages which lead to the sun, thence to the moon, thence to the lightning, and thence to Brahma, the "supreme light," from which they never return. This is the "Way of the Gods," deva-yana. The souls of those who do pious works in the village (but have not won full enlightenment and withdrawn from the world) rise by the "Way of the Fathers," pitri-yana, which leads finally to the moon, where in the company of the gods they enjoy the full recompense

[p. 54]

of their good deeds; after this they pass down to honourable rebirth on earth through successive stages (ether, wind, smoke, mist, cloud, rain, vegetation, food, and seed). The sinful, according to Ch. V. x. 7, have also a proportionate share in the joys of the moon, and are afterwards reborn in the forms of base animals or equally degraded races of men; according to B.A. this rebirth is immediate. On the other hand the famous passage B.A. IV. iv. 2-6 knows only of rebirth in recompense.

II. Later Vedanta.--S'ankara's system in the main follows these doctrines. He holds that the truly enlightened become immediately one with Brahma ( section 24). But those souls which are bound in the empirical world must accordingly pass through empirical spheres of recompense. They who have the lower or exoteric knowledge and worship the "qualified Brahma" ( section 12) pass through the "Way of the Gods" to the paradise called the "world of Brahma"; here according to their merits they either gain by degrees the saving knowledge which transports them for ever to the Absolute Brahma (krama-mukti), or else they have due enjoyment of heavenly bliss until their "works" have shrunk to a residue (anus'aya), whereupon they descend to honourable earthly incarnations. They who have done pious works travel by the "Way of the Fathers" to the moon, where they share the pleasures of paradise

[p. 55]

with the gods, and thence in due time return to earth. Those who have neither knowledge nor good works pass to hell, there to expiate their sins in part before rebirth in lower forms; and besides hell S'ankara, following the obscure words of the Ch., admits a "third place" of punishment, viz. rebirth as the lowest and most ephemeral animals (on Brahma-sutra, III. i. 8 f.).

When men of inferior knowledge or good works die, their sense-functions are merged into the manas, manas into "breaths," "breaths" into the individual soul, which together with the "subtle body" passes into the heart, of which the peak is now lit up (B.A. IV. iv. 2); thence the soul of the man of lower knowledge travels out by the sushumna (an imaginary vein leading to the top of the head) by the road of the sun's rays (Ch. VIII. vi. 5), to the "Way of the Gods," but that of the man of good works issues by way of the other 100 chief veins of the body into the "Way of the Fathers" (on Brahma-sutra IV. ii. 17 f.). On IV. iii. 1 f. S'ankara endeavours to reconcile the discrepant lists of the stations in the "Way of the Gods" given in Ch. IV. xv. 5, V. x. 1, B.A. VI. ii. 15, and Kau. I. iii., and points out that by their names are to be understood their presiding deities. As regards the road of return to rebirth, he follows Ch. V. x. 5 f. and B.A. VI. ii. 16 (on III. i. 22 f.).

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

PART II

  

SOME TEXTS OF THE VEDANTA

  

I. CREATION [*1]

1. IN the beginning this universe was Self alone; there was naught else open-eyed. He bethought Himself: "Now I will create worlds!"

He created these worlds--the Ocean, the Light, the Dead, the Waters. That is the Ocean which is beyond the heaven; the heaven is its foundation. The Light is the sky. The Dead is the Earth; the Waters are those beneath.

He bethought Himself: "There are the worlds; now I will create world-wardens!" He drew from the waters Man, [*2] and made him solid. He brooded over him. When he had been brooded over, his mouth burst asunder like an egg; from his mouth arose Speech, from speech Fire. His nostrils burst asunder; from his nostrils arose the incoming Breath, from the

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues] Breath Wind. His eyes burst asunder; from his eyes arose Sight, from Sight the Sun. His ears burst asunder; from his ears arose Hearing, from Hearing Space. His skin burst asunder; from his skin arose hair, from the hair plants and trees. His heart burst asunder; from his heart arose Mind, from Mind the Moon. His navel burst asunder: from his navel arose the outgoing Breath, from the Breath Death. His secret parts burst asunder; from his secret parts arose seed, from seed the Waters.

2. These gods, having been created, fell into this great ocean; this He gave over to Hunger and Thirst. [*1] They said to Him: "Find out for us a dwelling-place in which we may rest and eat food." He brought them a cow. They said: "This is not enough for us." He brought them a horse. They said: "This is not enough for us." He brought them a man. They said: "Well done, forsooth!" For man is in sooth well done. He said to them: "Enter, each according to your dwelling-places." So Fire, becoming Speech, entered his mouth; Wind, becoming the incoming Breath, entered his

[p. 58]

nostrils; the Sun, becoming Sight, entered his eyes; Space, becoming Hearing, entered his ears; the Plants and Trees, becoming hair, entered his skin; the Moon, becoming Mind, entered his heart; Death, becoming the outgoing Breath, entered his navel; the Waters, becoming seed, entered his secret parts.

Hunger and Thirst said to Him: "Find out for us a dwelling-place." He said to them: "I give you a share with these gods, I make you partners with them." Therefore it is that whosoever be the godhead for whom an offering is taken, Hunger and Thirst are partners therein.

3. He bethought Himself: "There are the worlds and the world-wardens; now I will create for them Food."

He brooded over the waters; when they had been brooded over, there arose from the waters a shape. The shape that arose was Food.

When this was created, it sought to escape Him. He sought to seize it with Speech, but could not; if He had seized it with Speech, one might have been filled with food through speaking only. He sought to seize it with the incoming Breath, but could not; if He had seized it with the Breath, one might have been filled with food through breathing only. He sought to seize it with the Eye, but could not; if He had seized it with the Eye, one might have been filled with food through sight only. He sought to seize it with the Ears

[p. 59]

but could not; if He had seized it with the Ear, one might have been filled with food through hearing only. He sought to seize it with the Skin, but could not; if He had seized it with the Skin, one might have been filled with food through touch only. He sought to seize it with the Mind, but could not; if He had seized it with the Mind, one might have been filled with food through thinking only. He sought to seize it with the secret parts, but could not; if He had seized it with the secret parts, one might have been filled with food through excretion only. He sought to seize it with the outgoing Breath, and He swallowed it. It is the Wind that grasps Food, the Wind that wins Food. [*1]

He bethought Himself: "How can this be without me?" He bethought Himself: "By what way shall I come in?" He bethought Himself: "If speaking is by speech, in-breathing by the in-breath, sight by the eye, hearing by the ear, touch by the skin, thinking by the mind, out-breathing by the out-breath, excretion by the secret parts, then who am I?" [*2]

He cleft asunder the crown of the head, and by that door came in. This door is called the "cleft"; it makes for bliss. [*3]

[p. 60]

Three dwellings has He, and three dream-states --this is His dwelling, this His dwelling, this His dwelling. 

Having been born, He surveyed living things. "What is here," said He, "that one would call other [than Me]?" He saw man to be most utterly Brahma, and He said, "idam adars'am" ("I have seen it"). Therefore He has the name Idan-dra. His name is indeed Idan-dra; but him who is Idan-dra men call Indra,  in a dark manner; for the gods love what is dark.

Footnotes

^56:1 Aitareya Upanishad, i.

^56:2 Purusha; see above,  section section 4, 5, 7.

^57:1 The cosmic powers, Fire, Wind, Sun, Space, Vegetation, Moon, Death, and Water (each of which is created from a corresponding function of the ideal Man) are in themselves powerless. They sink back into the primitive waters, and suffer hunger and thirst; they must have a home in the real Man in order to be satisfied and active. The forces of Nature exist only through and in the human subject

^59:1 The outgoing breath, apana, probably is here identified with the function of digestion (p. 43). The rest of the sentence is based upon a word-play.

^59:2 For the answer to this question, see the next extract.

^59:3 See above,  section 9.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. WHO AM I? [*3]

The heart, the mind, consciousness, comprehension, understanding, intelligence, wisdom, insight, resolution, thought, prudence, eagerness, memory, conception, power, life, desire, will--all these are names of the Intelligence. This is Brahma, this is Indra, this is Praja-pati, this is all the gods, the five great elements Earth, Wind, Ether, Water, and Light, the tiny creatures and they that are midway, the seeds of either kind, the creatures born from eggs, membranes, sweat,

[p. 61]

and sprouts, the horses, oxen, men, elephants, whatsoever is breathing, walking or flying, and whatso is motionless; all this is guided by intelligence, founded on intelligence. The universe is guided by intelligence, founded on intelligence. Intelligence is Brahma.

Footnotes

^60:1 See above,  section section 12, 15. Brahma dwells in the eye during the waking state, in the mind during dreams, and in the heart during dreamless sleep.

^60:2 Indra is a Vedic god of the first rank; hence by a wordplay our writer identifies him with Brahma.

^60:3 Aitareya Upanishad, iii.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. THE WORLD WITHIN [*1]

"Now within this town of Brahma [*2] is a dwelling, a little lotus-flower; within this is a little space; what is therewithin men should inquire after, yea, should seek to know."

If they should say to him: "Within this town of Brahma is a dwelling, a little lotus-flower; within this is a little space; what is found there-within which men should inquire after, yea, should seek to know?"--

he shall say: "Verily that space within the heart is as great as this Space; therein are lodged both heaven and earth, both fire and wind, both sun and moon, lightning and stars, what one hath here and what he hath not, all this is lodged therein."

If they should say to him: "If all this is lodged in this town of Brahma, and all beings and all

[p. 62]

desires--what remains thereof when old age comes upon it, or it dissolves?"--

he shall say: "This grows not old with his aging, nor is it smitten by slaying of him. This is the true town of Brahma. In it are lodged the Desires. [*1] It is the Self, free from evil, ageless, deathless, sorrowless, hungerless, thirstless, real of desire, real of purpose...So they who depart without finding here the Self and these real Desires, walk not as they list in any worlds; but they who depart after finding here the Self and these real Desires, walk as they list in all worlds...

These real Desires are covered over by Untruth; real as they are, Untruth is their covering. Man here can see no more any of his folk who depart hence. But when he goes there [*2] he finds all--those of his folk who are living, and those who have departed, and whatever else he wins not for seeking. For there those real Desires are that were covered over by Untruth. It is as with men who, knowing not the ground, should walk again and again over a hidden treasure and find it not; even so all creatures,

[p. 63]

coming to it day by day, find not this Brahma-world, for they are cast back by Untruth ...

Now that perfect Peace, rising up from this body, enters into the Supreme Light and issues forth in its own semblance. This is the Self," said he, "this is the deathless, the fearless; this is Brahma...

Now the Self is the dyke holding asunder the worlds that they fall not one into another. Over this dyke pass not day and night, nor old age, nor death, nor sorrow, nor good deeds, nor bad deeds. All ills turn away thence; for this Brahma-world is void of ill. Therefore in sooth the blind, after passing over this dyke is no more blind, the wounded no more wounded, the sick no more sick. Therefore in sooth even Night after passing over this dyke issues forth as Day; for in this Brahma-world is everlasting light"

Footnotes

^61:1 Chhandogya Upanishad, viii. 1 f.

^61:2 The body, whose organs of sense are compared to gates; the king within is the soul, or Self; the lotus the heart.

^62:1 Namely, the knowledge and will of the absolute subject of thought, or true Self. As such, these Desires are essentially infinite; their limitation arises from an external "Untruth," the finite conditions of the world of physical experience, which the thinker is able to cast off.

^62:2 Namely, into his own heart, into the full consciousness of his selfhood.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV. THE INFINITE I [*2]

"Verily this All is Brahma. It has therein its birth, end, breath; as such one should worship it in stillness.

Verily man is made of will. As is man's will

[p. 64]

in this world, such he becomes on going hence; so let him frame the will.

Made of mind, bodied in breath, shaped in light, real of purpose, ethereal of soul, all-working, all-desiring, all-smelling, all-tasting, grasping this All, speaking naught, heeding naught--this is my Self within my heart, smaller than a rice-corn, or a barley-corn, or a mustard-seed, or a canary-seed, or the pulp of a canary-seed--this is my Self within my heart, greater than earth, greater than sky, greater than heaven, greater than these worlds. All-working, all-desiring, all-smelling, all-tasting, grasping this All, speaking naught, heeding naught--this is my Self within my heart, this is Brahma; to Him shall I win when I go hence. He with whom it is thus has indeed no doubt." Thus spake S'andilya.

Footnotes

^63:1 They pass every day into dreamless sleep, the perfect union with Brahma in the heart; but they are not conscious of this union, and the condition of their existence causes it to be only temporary. See above,  section 15.

^63:2 Chhandogya Upanishad, iii. 14.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

V. KNOW THY SELF [*1]

The world then was not yet unfolded. It became unfolded in Name and Shape, so that one might say, "He of this or that name is of this or that shape." So even now it becomes unfolded in Name and Shape, so that one may say, "He of this or that name is of this or that shape." He [*2] passed into it up to the nail-tips, as a razor might

[p. 65]

be laid in a razor-case or the All-Supporter [*1] in the All-Supporter's nest. They see Him not; for He is divided. As breathing, He is called Breath; as speaking, Speech; as seeing, Sight; as hearing, Hearing; as thinking, Mind; these are the names for his workings. A man who worships one or another thereof understands not; for He is but in division as one or another thereof. So He should be worshipped as the Self; for therein do all these become one.

This Self is the track of the universe, for by it is the universe known, yea, as a thing may be followed up by its track. Fame and praise a man finds who has such knowledge.

This Self is dearer than a son, dearer than substance, dearer than all beside, more inward. If of a man who calls another than the Self dear it should be said that he will lose his darling, it may well come to pass. He should worship the Self only as darling; for him who worships the Self as darling his darling perishes not.

They say: "Seeing that men deem that by knowledge of Brahma they shall become the universe, what did Brahma know that He became the universe?"

The world forsooth was in the beginning Brahma. It knew itself, "I am Brahma"; therefore it became the universe. And whosoever of the gods understood this also became the same;

[p. 66]

likewise of sages and of men. Seeing this, the sage Vamadeva set it forth, saying: "I have become Manu and the Sun."  So now likewise he who knows "I am Brahma" becomes the universe. The very gods have no power that he should not be so; for he becomes the Self of them.

Now he who worships another godhead, saying "This is not the same as I," understands not; he is as it were a beast belonging to the gods. Even as many beasts profit a man, so each man profits the gods. It is unpleasing when one beast is taken away; how much more when many are taken! Therefore it is not pleasing to them  that men should know this.

Footnotes

^64:1 Brihad-aranyaka Upanishad, I. iv. 7-10.

^64:2 Namely, the Self, or Brahma.

^65:1 The Fire-God.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI. PARABLES [*3]

"If one should smite upon the root of this great tree, beloved, it would sweat sap, and live. If one should smite upon its midst, it would sweat sap, and live. If one should smite upon its top, it would sweat sap, and live. Instinct with the Live Self, it stands full lush and glad.

But if the Live One leave one bough, it withers. If it leave another bough, it withers. If it leave a third bough, it withers. If it leave the whole, the whole withers. So know, beloved," said he,

[p. 67]

"the thing whence the Live One has departed does indeed die; but the Live One dies not. In this subtleness has this All its essence; it is the True; it is the Self; thou art it, S'vetaketu."

"Let my lord teach me further."

"Be it so, beloved," said he.

"Bring from yonder a fig."

"Here it is, my lord."

"Break it."

"It is broken, my lord."

"What seest thou in it? "

"Here are but little seeds, my lord."

"Now break one of them."

"It is broken, my lord."

"What seest thou in it?"

"Naught whatsoever, my lord."

And he said to him: "Of that subtleness which thou canst not behold, beloved, is this great fig-tree made. Have faith, beloved. In this subtleness has this All its essence; it is the True; it is the Self; thou art it, S'vetaketu."

"Let my lord teach me further."

"Be it so, beloved," said he.

"Lay this salt in water, and on the morrow draw nigh to me." And he did so. Then he said to him: "Bring me the salt which thou laidst in the water yester eve."

[p. 68]

He felt, but found it not; it was as melted away.

"Drink from this end thereof. How is it?"

"It is salty."

"Drink from the midst. How is it?"

"It is salty."

"Drink from yonder end. How is it?"

"It is salty."

"Lay it aside, and draw nigh to me." And he did so.

"It is still present," said he to him; "herein forsooth thou canst not behold Being, beloved, but herein soothly it is. In this subtleness has this All its essence; it is the True; it is the Self; thou art it, S'vetaketu."

Footnotes

^66:1 Rig-veda, IV. xxvi. 1.

^66:2 Namely to the gods.

^66:3 Chhandogya Upanishad, VI., xi.-xiii.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII. THE SOUL IN SLEEP [*1]

"What is the Self?"

"It is the Spirit [*2] made of understanding among the Breaths, the inward light within the heart, that walks abroad, abiding the same, through both worlds. [*3] He meditates, as it were; He hovers about, as it were. Turned to sleep, He passes beyond this world, the shapes of death.

This Spirit at birth enters into the body, and is

[p. 69]

blent with evils; at death He passes out, and leaves evils.

Two seats has this Spirit, this and the seat in the world beyond [*1]; and midway is a third, the seat of dreams. Standing in this midway seat, He looks upon these two seats, this and the seat in the world beyond. Now as this is a step toward the seat in the world beyond, He makes this step and beholds both evils and delights.

When He sleeps, He takes matter from this all-containing world, Himself hews it down, Himself builds it up, and sleeps in His own brightness, His own light. Here the Spirit has Self for light.

Therein are no cars, no car-teams, no roads; but He creates cars, car-teams, roads. Therein are no joys, mirths, merriments; but He creates joys, mirths, merriments. Therein are no pools, lakes, streams; but He creates pools, lakes, streams. For He is the maker...

When in this dreaming He has wantoned and wandered, and seen good and evil, He hastens back according to His entrance and His place to the bound of waking. He is followed by naught of all that He has seen there; for to this Spirit nothing clings...

[p. 70]

When in this waking He has wantoned and wandered, and seen good and evil, He hastens back according to His entrance and His place to the bound of dreams. Even as a great fish passes along both banks, on this side and on yonder side, so this Spirit passes along both bounds, the bound of dreaming and the bound of waking.

But as a falcon or an eagle, when it is wearied with flying about in yonder sky, folds its wings and sets itself to couch down, so this Spirit hastens toward that bound wherein He sleeps desiring no desire, beholding no dream... Whatever waking terror He sees [in dreams], when men seem to smite Him or to oppress Him, when an elephant seems to crush Him, or He seems to fall into a ditch, this in His ignorance He deems true. But when like a god, like a king, He thinks "I am this All, universal," this is the highest world for Him.

This is His shape wherein He is beyond desire, free from ill, fearless. As when a man embraced by his beloved knows naught of whatsoever is without or within, so this Spirit embraced by the Self of Intelligence knows naught of what is without or within. [*1] This is His shape wherein desire is won, desire is of Self, desire is not, grief is gone. Herein the father is no father, the mother no mother, the worlds no worlds, the Gods no

[p. 71]

[paragraph continues] Gods, the Vedas no Vedas; herein the thief is no thief, the murderer no murderer, the Chandala no Chandala, the Paulkasa no Paulkasa, [*1] the beggar-monk no beggar-monk, the ascetic no ascetic. Good attaches not, evil attaches not; for then has He overpast all griefs of the heart.

While He sees not, yet without seeing He sees; the sight of the seer is not to be broken, for it is imperishable. But there is naught beside Him, naught apart from Him, that He should see... When He understands not, yet without understanding He understands; the understanding of the understander is not to be broken, for it is imperishable. But there is naught beside Him, naught apart from Him, that He should understand.

If there should be as it were another, one would see another, smell another, taste another, speak to another, hear another, think of another, feel another, understand another.

The Seer is the Waters, [*2] one with naught beside. He is the Brahma-world, O king." Thus did Yajnavalkya teach him. "This is the highest way for Him, this the highest fortune for Him,

[p. 72]

this the highest world for Him, this the highest bliss for Him; of this bliss other creatures live on but a morsel."

Footnotes

^68:1 Brihad-aranyaka Upanishad, IV. iii. 7-33.

^68:2 Purusha; see above p. 56.

^68:3 Namely, this world in waking and dreaming, and the world of Brahma in deep sleep or death.

^69:1 The soul's seats are (1) that in this world, and (2) that in the transcendental "Brahma-world," which it visits on death. The former is the site of sorrows, the latter of pure joy. Between these is the condition of sleep; for dreaming sleep is still in touch with waking experience, and dreamless sleep is a temporary approach towards the "Brahma-world."

^70:1 In dreamless sleep the individual consciousness is merged into universal consciousness, prajna atma or "Self of Intelligence," and thus arises absolute unconsciousness.

^71:1 Two of the basest castes.

^71:2 This may refer to an Indian theory according to which water is essentially tasteless, but derives its special flavour from its surroundings, as in a cocoanut or a lemon (see Sankhya-karika, xvi.); or perhaps it is based upon the Vedic theory that made water the first principle of cosmic being, as in the doctrine of Thales of Miletus.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII. GaRGi AND YaJNAVALKYA [*1]

"Yajnavalkya," said she, "as a warrior from the land of Kas'i or Videha might string his unstrung bow and come forward holding in his hand two arrows to pierce through his foe, even so I have come forward against thee with two questions; answer me them."

"Ask, Gargi."

"Yajnavalkya," said she, "that which is above the heavens, which is beneath the earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth, which they call What hath been, What is, and What shall be--in what is it woven and woofed?"

"Gargi," said he, "that which is above the heavens, which is below the earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth, which they call What hath been, What is, and What shall be, is woven and woofed in the ether."

"Homage to thee, Yajnavalkya," said she. "for thou hast answered me this; make ready for the other."

"Ask, Gargi."

[p. 73]

"Yajnavalkya," said she, "that which is above the heavens, which is below the earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth, which they call What hath been, What is, and What shall be--in what is it woven and woofed?"

"Gargi," said he, "that which is above the heavens, which is below the earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth, which they call What hath been, What is, and What shall be, is woven and woofed in the ether."

"And in what is the ether woven and woofed?"

"Gargi," said he, "that is what Brahmans call the Unfading; it is not gross, not fine, not short, not long, not red, not fluid, not shadow, not darkness, not wind, not ether, not clinging, without taste, without smell, without eye, without ear, without speech, without mind, without vital force, without breath, without mouth, without measure, without aught inward, without aught outward; it consumes nothing, none consumes it. At the behest of the Unfading, Gargi, sun and moon are held asunder; at the behest of the Unfading, Gargi, heaven and earth are held asunder; at the behest of the Unfading, Gargi, minutes, hours, days and nights, fortnights, months, seasons, and years are held asunder; at the behest of the Unfading, Gargi, flow the rivers, some eastward from the white mountains, some westward, each in its own way. At the behest of the Unfading, Gargi, men praise

[p. 74]

givers, the Gods hang upon the sacrifice-giver, the Fathers upon the ladle. Indeed, Gargi, to him who makes oblation and sacrifice, and mortifies himself in this world for many thousands of years without knowing the Unfading, it comes to an end. Indeed, Gargi, he who departs from this world without knowing the Unfading is wretched. But he who departs from this world knowing the Unfading, Gargi, is the Brahman. Indeed, Gargi, the Unfading unseen sees, unheard hears, unthought thinks, uncomprehended comprehends. There is naught else than this which sees, naught else that hears, naught else that thinks, naught else that comprehends. In the Unfading, forsooth, Gargi, is the ether woven and woofed."

Footnotes

^72:1 Brihad-aranyaka Upanishad, III. viii. 2-11.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX. THE EVERLASTING NAY [*1]

Verily this great unborn Self it is that is compact of understanding amid the life-breaths, that lies in the ether within the heart, master of all, lord of all, ruler of all; He becomes not greater by a good deed nor less by an ill deed; He is king of all, ruler of born beings, guardian of born beings, the dyke holding asunder these worlds that they fall not one into another. Brahmans seek to know Him by reading the Veda, by sacrifice, by charity, by mortification. Knowing

[p. 75]

[paragraph continues] Him, a man becomes a saint; wandering friars wander forth seeking Him for their world. Understanding this, the ancients desired not offspring: "What is offspring to us who have this Self for this world?" So having departed from desire of sons, from desire of substance, and desire of the world, they went about begging. For desire of sons is desire of substance, desire of substance is desire of the world; these are both desires.

This Self is Nay, Nay: not to be grasped, for He is not grasped; not to be broken, for He is not broken; unclinging, for He clings not; He is not bound, He trembles not, He takes no hurt. One [who knows this] is overcome neither by having done evil for His sake nor by having done good for His sake; he overcomes both; work done and work not done grieve him not.

This is said by a verse:

The Brahman's constant majesty by works
 Nor waxes more, nor wanes. This shall he trace;
 This known, ill deeds defile him nevermore.

Footnotes

^74:1 Brihad-aranyaka Upanishad, IV. iv. 22-23.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

X. THE SPIRIT WITHIN [*1]

Then Uddalaka Aruni [*2] questioned him.

"Yajnavalkya," said he, "we dwelt among

[p. 76]

the Madras, in the house of Patanchala Kapya, [*1]. studying sacrifice. He had a wife who was possessed by a spirit [*2]; we asked him who he was, and he answered that he was Kabandha Atharvana, and said to Patanchala Kapya and to the students of sacrifice, "Knowest thou, Kapya, that Thread whereby this world and the world beyond and all creatures are bound together?" "Nay, my lord," said Patanchala Kapya, "I know it not." Then he said to Patanchala Kapya and the students of sacrifice, "Knowest thou, Kapya, that Inward Ruler who rules inwardly this world and the world beyond and all creatures?" "Nay, my lord," said Patanchala Kapya, "I know him not." Then he said to Patanchala Kapya and the students of sacrifice, "Verily, Kapya, he who should know that Thread and that Inward Ruler knows Brahma, knows the worlds, knows the Vedas, knows the creatures, knows the Self, knows the All." This he said to them: this I know. If thou, Yajnavalkya, shalt drive home the Brahman's cows without knowing that Thread and that Inward Ruler, thy head shall split." [*3]

[p. 77]

"Verily, Gautama, I know that Thread and that Inward Ruler."

"Any man may say, "I know, I know"; but do thou say how thou knowest."

"Truly, Gautama," said he, "the wind is that Thread; for by the wind as thread, Gautama, this world and the world beyond and all creatures are bound together. Therefore, Gautama, they say of a man who has died that his limbs are relaxed; for by the wind as thread, Gautama, were they bound together."

"It is so, Yajnavalkya. Tell of the Inward Ruler."

"He who, dwelling in the earth, is other than the earth, whom the earth knows not, whose body the earth is, who inwardly rules the earth, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the waters, is other than the waters, whom the waters know not, whose body the waters are, who inwardly rules the waters, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the fire, is other than the fire, whom the fire knows not, whose body the fire is, who inwardly rules the fire, is thy Self, the

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the sky, is other than the sky, whom the sky knows not, whose body the sky is, who inwardly rules the sky, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the wind, is other than the wind, whom the wind knows not, whose body the wind is, who inwardly rules the wind, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the heavens, is other than the heavens, whom the heavens know not, whose body the heavens are, who inwardly rules the heavens, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the sun, is other than the sun, whom the sun knows not, whose body the sun is, who inwardly rules the sun, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in space, is other than space, whom space knows not, whose body space is, who inwardly rules space, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in moon and stars, is other than moon and stars, whom moon and stars know not, whose body moon and stars are, who inwardly rules moon and stars, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the ether, is other than the ether, whom the ether knows not, whose body the ether is, who inwardly rules the ether, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the dark, is other than the dark, whom the dark knows not, whose body the dark is, who

[p. 79]

inwardly rules the dark, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the light, is other than the light, whom the light knows not, whose body the light is, who inwardly rules the light, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. Thus as to godhead; now as to nature. He who, dwelling in all beings, is other than all beings, whom all beings know not, whose body all beings are, who inwardly rules all beings, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. Thus as to nature; now as to personality. He who, dwelling in the breath, is other than the breath, whom the breath knows not, whose body the breath is, who inwardly rules the breath, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in speech, is other than speech, whom speech knows not, whose body speech is, who inwardly rules speech, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the eye, is other than the eye, whom the eye knows not, whose body the eye is, who inwardly rules the eye, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the ear, is other than the ear, whom the ear knows not, whose body the ear is, who inwardly rules the ear, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the mind, is other than the mind, whom the mind knows not, whose body the mind is, who inwardly rules the mind, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling

[p. 80]

in the skin, is other than the skin, whom the skin knows not, whose body the skin is, who inwardly rules the skin, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the understanding, is other than the understanding, whom the understanding knows not, whose body the understanding is, who inwardly rules the understanding, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He who, dwelling in the seed, is other than the seed, whom the seed knows not, whose body the seed is, who inwardly rules the seed, is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. He unseen sees, unheard hears, unthought thinks, uncomprehended comprehends. There is no other than he who sees, no other who hears, no other who thinks, no other who comprehends. He is thy Self, the Inward Ruler, the deathless. All else is fraught with sorrow."

Then Uddalaka Aruni held his peace.

Footnotes

^75:1 Brihad-aranyaka Upanishad, III. vii.

^75:2 A patronymic, meaning "son of Aruna."

^76:1 A patronymic signifying a descendant of Kapi. Similarly Atharvana, below, means a descendant of the mythical sage Atharvan.

^76:2 In Sanskrit Gandharva; originally, perhaps, the Gandharvas were spirits of fertility, but in classical literature they are a kind of fairies, with musical proclivities. See especially Pischel and Geldner, Vedische Studien, vol. i., p. 183 foll.

^76:3 This dialogue between Uddalaka and Yajnavalkya forms[p. 77] part of a disputation between Brahman theologians, as the prize of which a thousand cows were offered by King Janaka of Videha (Brihad-ar. Up. III. i. 1). The mention of a splitting head occurs several times in a similar connection in the Upanishads; practically it means that he who accepts the challenge and fails in these tourneys of wit is doomed to death by "visitation of God."

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI. THE WISDOM OF RAIKVA [*1]

Janas'ruti Pautrayana was a devout giver, bestowing much largesse, preparing much food. He caused lodgings to be built everywhere, that he might have men everywhere fed. Now in the night there flew swans by. One swan said to another, "Ho, ho, Dim-eye, Dim-eye! Janas'ruti 

[p. 81]

[paragraph continues] Pautrayana's splendour is outspread like that of the heavens; so touch it not, lest thou burn thyself."

The other answered him, "Who forsooth is he of whom thou speakest as though he were Raikva of the Cart?"

"What meanest thou by Raikva of the Cart?"

"As the lower dice-throws fall under the winning four-throw, so whatsoever good deed the people do falls to him; of him who knows this and of that which he knows do I speak." [*1]

Janas'ruti Pautrayana overheard this. When he rose up, he said to his chamberlain, "Ho, thou speakest as of Raikva of the Cart [*2]; what meanest thou by Raikva of the Cart?"

"As the lower dice-throws fall under the winning four-throw, so whatsoever good deed the people do falls to him; of him who knows this and of that which he knows do I speak."

The chamberlain sought [Raikva], and came back, saying "I have found him not." [Janas'ruti] said to him, "Ho, go for him in the place where a Brahman is to be sought."

[p. 82]

[Raikva] was under a waggon, scratching his scabs; and he [*1] sat down before him, and said to him, "Art thou Raikva of the Cart, my lord?"

"Yea, I am," he answered.

The chamberlain came back, saying, "I have found him."

Then Janas'ruti Pautrayana took six hundred kine, a golden chain, and a mule-car, and drew near to him, and said, "Raikva, here are six hundred kine, a golden chain, and a mule-car; my lord, teach me the deity that thou worshippest."

But the other answered, "Fie on thee, base fellow; keep them for thyself, with thy kine!"

Then Janas'ruti Pautrayana took a thousand kine, a golden chain, a mule-car, and his daughter, and drew near to him, and said, "Raikva, here are a thousand kine, a golden chain, a mule-car, a wife, and the village in which thou art sitting; my lord, teach me!"

He lifted up her face, and said, "He has brought these! Base fellow, with this face alone thou mightest have made me speak."

That is the place called Raikva-parna in the land of the Mahavrishas where he dwelt at his bidding.

Thus he said to him:

"The Wind in sooth is an ingatherer. When fire goes out, it sinks into the Wind. When the sun goes down, it sinks into the Wind. When

[p. 83]

the moon goes down, it sinks into the Wind. When waters dry up, they sink into the Wind. For the Wind gathers in all these. Thus as to godhead.

Now as to personality. The Breath is an in-gatherer. [*1] When one sleeps, the speech sinks into the Breath, the eye into the Breath, the ear into the Breath, the mind into the Breath. For the Breath gathers in all these. These are the two ingatherers, the Wind among the gods and the Breath among the breaths.

A Brahman-student begged alms of S'aunaka Kapeya and Abhipratari Kakshaseni when their meal was set before them. They gave him nothing. He said:

"Who is the one God, guardian of the world,
 Who swallowed up the other mighty four?
 On him, Kapeya, mortals may not look;
 Abhipratari, many are his homes.

To him forsooth who has this food it is not given."

Then S'aunaka Kapeya, having pondered, answered him thus:

"The spirit of the Gods, the creatures' sire,
 Golden of tooth and greedy he, nor witless.
 Exceeding is his majesty, they say,
 For he uneaten eats what none may eat.

"So this is what we worship, O Brahman student.

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] Give him alms!" And they gave to him.

These in sooth are the ten, five and five ; this is the four-throw. Therefore the ten, the four-throw, are in all parts of the world as food. This is Virat, eater of food; thereby all the world is seen. All the world is seen by him, he becomes an eater of food, who has this knowledge."

Footnotes

^80:1 Chhandogya Upanishad, IV. 1-3.

^81:1 The Hindus know of four casts of the dice--the krita, counting as four, the treta, counting as three, the dvapara, counting as two, and the kali, reckoned as one; the krita outweighs all the other throws, and hence has the value of 10. Raikva has universal wisdom; hence the virtues of all other men are merely parts of his excellence, which includes them all.

^81:2 The chamberlain, after Hindu custom, had addressed him in strains of panegyric on his rising from bed.

^82:1 The chamberlain of Janas'ruti

^83:1 See  section 18.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII. SATYAKaMA [*2]

Satyakama Jabala thus addressed his mother Jabala: "I would keep the term of Brahman-studentship, madame; of what family am I?"

She said to him: "I know not, child, of what family thou art. I got thee in my youth, when I was much busied in doing service. I myself know not of what family thou art. But I am named Jabala, thou art named Satyakama; call thyself then Satyakama Jabala." [*3]

[p. 85]

He went to Haridrumata Gautama and said: "I would keep the term of Brahman-studentship with thee, sir; let me come to thee, sir."

He said to him: "Of what family art thou, beloved?"

"I know not, sir," said he, "of what family I am. I asked my mother, and she answered me saying, "I got thee in my youth, when I was much busied in doing service; I myself know not of what family thou art; but I am named Jabala, thou art named Satyakama." So I am myself Satyakama Jabala, sir."

He said to him: "None but a Brahman can speak out thus. Bring the faggots, [*1] beloved. I will receive thee; thou hast not departed from truth."

When he had received him, he set aside four hundred lean and feeble cows, and said: "Herd thou these, beloved." As he drove them forth, [Satyakama] said: "I will not return but with a thousand." He stayed away some years; then when they had grown to a thousand, a bull said to him, "Satyakama!" "Sir!" he answered.

"We have come to a thousand, beloved; take us to the master's homestead. I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma."

[p. 86]

"Tell me, sir."

And he said to him: "The eastern region is a sixteenth, the western region a sixteenth, the southern region a sixteenth, the northern region a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Brilliant. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Brilliant, becomes brilliant in this world; brilliant worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Brilliant. The Fire will tell thee a quarter."

In the morning he drove out the cows. When they came home at evening, he laid a fire, closed in the cows, laid on fuel, and sat down facing the east westward of the fire.

The Fire said to him, "Satyakama!" "Sir!" he answered.

"I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma, beloved."

"Tell me, sir."

And he said to him: "The earth is a sixteenth, the sky a sixteenth, the heaven a sixteenth, the ocean a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Boundless. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Boundless, becomes boundless in this world; boundless worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma

[p. 87]

in four sixteenths as The Boundless. The Swan will tell thee a quarter."

In the morning he drove out the cows. When they came home at evening, he laid a fire, closed in the cows, laid on fuel, and sat down facing the east westward of the fire. A swan flew towards him and said, "Satyakama!" "Sir!" he answered.

"I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma, beloved."

"Tell me, sir."

And he said to him: "Fire is a sixteenth, the sun a sixteenth, the moon a sixteenth, the lightning a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Lustrous. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Lustrous, becomes lustrous in this world; lustrous worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Lustrous. The madgu-bird will tell thee a quarter."

In the morning he drove out the cows. When they came home at evening, he laid a fire, closed in the cows, laid on fuel, and sat down facing the east westward of the fire. A madgu-bird flew towards him and said, "Satyakama!" "Sir!" he answered.

"I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma, beloved."

"Tell me, sir."

And he said to him: "The breath is a sixteenth,

[p. 88]

the eye a sixteenth, the ear a sixteenth, the mind a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Spacious. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Spacious, becomes spacious in this world; spacious worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Spacious."

He came to the master's homestead. The master said to him, "Satyakama!" "Sir!" he answered.

"Thou art bright, beloved, as one who knows Brahma. Who has taught thee?"

"Other than men," he answered; "but prithee do thou tell it to me, sir. For I have heard from men like thee, sir, that knowledge learned from a master is the best guide."

He told him thereof; and naught of it was lost.

Footnotes

^84:1 The first five are wind, fire, sun, moon, and water, in the cosmos; the second five are breath, speech, eye, ear, and mind, in the microcosm. Wind and Breath are the final principles of being. He who knows himself to be identical with Wind and Breath, and thus becomes himself the highest principle, gathers to himself all the nourishing powers of nature. These ten natural forces are typified by the four-throw in dice, which counts as ten, and by Virat, which is both the name of a metre of ten syllables and a mythological figure symbolic of primitive matter.

^84:2 Chhandogya Upanishad, iv. 4-9.

^84:3 In default of a father's name, that of his mother is to serve our hero to form his patronymic.

^85:1 Used in the ceremony of the reception (upanayana) of the Brahman-student (brahma-chari) by the teacher in whose house he was henceforth to lodge.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII. LIGHT AND DARKNESS [*1]

In the Lord is to be veiled this universe, whatsoever stirs in the world. With renunciation thereof [*2] thou mayst enjoy; lust thou after the wealth of none.

[p. 89]

One may seek to live a hundred years doing works here. So it is with thee, not otherwise; his work defiles not man. [*1]

Daemonic are in sooth these worlds, veiled in blind darkness; into them pass after death whatsoever folk slay their own souls.

The One, unstirring, is yet swifter than the mind; the gods cannot reach it as it travels before. Standing it outspeeds others that run; in it the Wind-spirit lays the waters.

It stirs, and stirs not; it is far, and near. It is within all, and outside all that is.

But he who discerns all creatures in his Self, and his Self in all creatures, has no disquiet thence.

What delusion, what grief can be with him in whom all creatures have become the very self of the thinker discerning their oneness?

He has spread around, a thing bright, bodiless, taking no hurt, sinewless, pure, unsmitten by evil; a sage, wise, encompassing, self-existent, he has duly assigned purposes for all time.

Into blind darkness pass they who worship Ignorance; into still greater dark they who are content with Knowledge. [*2]

It is neither what comes by Knowledge, they

[p. 90]

say, nor what comes by Ignorance; thus have we heard from the sages who taught us this lore.

He who understands both Knowledge and Ignorance [*1] passes by Ignorance over death and by Knowledge enjoys deathlessness.

Into blind darkness pass they who worship Change-into-naught; into still greater dark they who worship Change-into-aught. [*2]

It is neither what comes by Change-into-aught, they say, nor what comes by Change-into-naught; thus have we heard from the sages who taught us this lore.

He who understands [*3] both Change-into-aught and Destruction passes by Destruction over death and by Change-into-aught enjoys deathlessness.

The face of truth is covered with a golden bowl. O Pushan, remove it, that the keeper of truths may see. [*4]

O Pushan, sole seer, O Yama, Sun, child of

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] Praja-pati, part asunder thy rays, mass together thy radiance. I see that fairest shape of thee. Yonder, yonder spirit am I.

The breath to the everlasting wind; and be this body ended in ashes.

Om! remember, O my spirit, remember the work! remember, O my spirit, remember the work! O Fire, lead us by good ways to riches, thou god who knowest all courses; keep far from us crooked sin, and we will offer to thee exceeding homage and praise. 

Footnotes

^88:1 The Is'avasya or Vajasaneyi-samhita Upanishad.

^88:2Viz. of the phenomenal world of sense-perception.

^89:1 Provided he has knowledge of Brahma.

^89:2 "Ignorance" probably means the conception of the phenomenal world as really existent in itself; "Knowledge," the attempt to trace the universe back to a first principle different from the Self.

^90:1 Viz. he who knows both these forms of knowledge to be delusive.

^90:2 The author here attacks those who believe that Being undergoes change either into non-being or into a different phase of being. His cardinal principle is that Being is one and changeless.

^90:3 I.e., he who knows both ideas to be false.

^90:4 This and the following verses (a death-bed prayer, according to tradition) are a prayer to the Sun-god to reveal the figure of the Purusha in the sun (corresponding to the figure in the human eye, and symbolic of Brahma; see p. 16). The Sun-god is here identified with Yama, the ruler of the dead. On Praja-pati, see p. 14; in the next extract he is mythically represented as a teacher of philosophic lore.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIV. THE FALSE AND THE TRUE [*2]

"The Self, free from evil, ageless, deathless, sorrowless, hungerless, thirstless, real of desire, real of purpose, this should men inquire after, yea, should seek to know. All worlds he wins and all desires who traces out and understands the Self," said Praja-pati.

Both the gods and the demons marked this. "Come," said they, "let us seek out this Self by seeking out which one wins all worlds and all desires." So Indra of the gods and Virochana of the demons set out on a travel, and without being in compact they both came with faggots

[p. 92]

in their hands [*1] to Praja-pati, and stayed as Brahman-students for two-and-thirty years.

Then said Praja-pati to them, "What would ye, that ye have stayed?"

And they said, "The Self, free from evil, ageless, deathless, sorrowless, hungerless, thirstless, real of desire, real of purpose, this should men inquire after, yea, should seek to know. All worlds he wins and all desires who traces out and understands this Self. This they report to be thy saying, sir; in desire thereof have we stayed."

Then Praja-pati said to them, "The Being [*2] who is seen in the eye is the Self"--thus he spake--"this is the deathless, the fearless; this is Brahma."

"Then who is he, sir, that is discerned in water and in a mirror?"

"It is he that is discerned in all these beings."

"Look upon yourselves in a basin of water," said he, "and tell me what of yourselves you do not perceive."

They looked in a basin of water; and Praja-pati said to them, "What see you?"

"We see in this image the whole of our selves, sir," said they, "even to our hair and nails."

Then Praja-pati said to them, "Put on goodly

[p. 93]

ornament and fine clothing, attire yourselves, and look in the basin of water."

They put on goodly ornament and fine clothing, attired themselves, and looked in the basin of water. Praja-pati said to them, "What see you?"

They said, "Even as we stand here wearing goodly ornament and fine clothing, and attired, sir, so are we there wearing goodly ornament and fine clothing, and attired, sir."

"This is the Self," said he, "this is the deathless, the fearless; this is Brahma."

The twain travelled away content of heart. Gazing after them, Praja-pati said: "They are travelling away, yet have they not found and traced out the Self. They who shall follow this doctrine, be they the gods or the demons, shall be brought low."

Now Virochana came content of heart to the demons, and declared to them this doctrine: "The Self [*1] should be gladdened here, the Self should be tended; he that gladdens the Self here and tends the Self gains both this world and that beyond." Therefore it is that here even now men say of one who is not bountiful nor believing nor given to sacrifice, "Fie, a demon!" For this is the doctrine of the demons; and when one has died men furnish his body with food and clothing

[p. 94]

and ornament, imagining that therewith they will win the world beyond.

But Indra, ere he reached the gods, foresaw this peril: "Even as this [Self] [*1] wears goodly ornament when this body wears goodly ornament, is finely clothed when it is finely clothed, and is attired when it is attired, so likewise this [Self] becomes blind when this [body] is blind, lame when it is lame, maimed when it is maimed; yea, it perishes with the perishing of this body. I see no pleasure herein."

He came back, faggots in hand. Praja-pati said to him, "Maghava, as thou didst depart content of heart with Virochana, what wouldst thou, that thou hast come back?"

And he said: "Even as this [Self], sir, wears goodly ornament when this body wears goodly ornament, is finely clothed when it is finely clothed, and is attired when it is attired, so likewise this [Self] becomes blind when this [body] is blind, lame when it is lame, maimed when it is maimed; yea, it perishes with the perishing of this body. I see no pleasure herein."

"Thus indeed it is, Maghava," said he; "but I will teach thee yet more of it. Stay another two-and-thirty years."

He stayed another two-and-thirty years. Then he said to him: "He who wanders about rejoicing

[p. 95]

in dreams, [*1] is the Self"--thus he spake "this is the deathless, the fearless; this is Brahma."

He departed content of heart. But ere he reached the gods, he foresaw this peril: "This [Self] indeed becomes not blind though the body be blind, nor lame though it be lame, nor is it defiled by the defilement thereof; it is not stricken by the smiting thereof, nor is it lamed with the lameness thereof; but nevertheless it is as if it were stricken, as if it were hustled, as if it were feeling unpleasantness, as if it were weeping. I see no pleasure herein."

He came back, faggots in hand. Praja-pati said to him, "Maghava, as thou didst depart content of heart, what wouldst thou, that thou hast come back?"

And he said: "This [Self] indeed becomes not blind though the body be blind, nor lame though it be lame, nor is it defiled by the defilement thereof; it is not stricken by the smiting thereof, nor is it lamed with the lameness thereof; but nevertheless it is as if it were stricken, as if it were hustled, as if it were feeling unpleasantness, as if it were weeping. I see no pleasure herein."

[p. 96]

"Thus indeed it is, Maghava," said he; "but I will teach thee yet more of it. Stay another two-and-thirty years."

He stayed another two-and-thirty years. Then he said to him: "When one sleeps utterly and in perfect peace so that he beholds no dream, [*1] this is the Self"--thus he spake--"this is the deathless, the fearless; this is Brahma."

He departed content of heart. But before he reached the gods, he foresaw this peril: "Truly one thus [*2] knows no longer himself as "I am," nor these creatures. He has sunk into destruction. I see no pleasure herein."

He came back, faggots in hand. Praja-pati said to him, "Maghava, as thou didst depart content of heart, what wouldst thou, that thou hast come back?"

And he said: "Truly, sir, one thus knows no longer himself as "I am," nor these creatures. He has sunk into destruction. I see no pleasure herein."

"Thus indeed it is, Maghava," said he; "but I will teach thee yet more of it; it is nowhere but in this. Stay another five years."

He stayed another five years. These amount to one hundred and one years; so men say, "Verily Maghava stayed for one hundred and

[p. 97]

one years as Brahman-student with Praja-pati." Then he said to him: "Verily, Maghava, this body is mortal, held in the grasp of Death; but it is the seat of this deathless, bodiless self. [*1] The Embodied is held in the grasp of joy and sorrow; for what is embodied cannot be quit of joy and sorrow. But joy and sorrow touch not what is unembodied. Unembodied is the wind; unembodied are the cloud, the lightning, the thunder. As these, rising up from yonder ether, pass into the Supreme Light and issue forth each in its own semblance, so likewise this perfect Peace, rising up from this body, passes into the Supreme Light and issues forth in its own semblance. This is the Highest Spirit...Now when the eye is fixed upon the ether,

[p. 98]

that is the spirit in the eye [which sees]; the eye is but a means to see. When one thinks that he will smell a thing, it is the Self; the nostril is but a means to smell. When one thinks that he will utter a word, it is the Self; speech is but a means to utterance. When one thinks that he will hear a thing, it is the Self; the ear is but a means to hearing. When one thinks that he will think of a thing, it is the Self; the mind is his divine eye; with this divine eye he sees these desires and rejoices therein...All worlds he wins and all desires who traces out and understands the Self." Thus spake Praja-pati.

Footnotes

^91:1 This verse is Rig-veda, i. 189, I.

^91:2 Chhandogya Upanishad, VIII. vii.-xii.

^92:1 See above, p. 85.

^92:2 Purusha; cf. extract i., p. 56. This answer of Praja-pati conveys the materialistic view of the Self, viz. as the visible material body, Elsewhere Purusha regularly denotes the soul.

^93:1 The physical self, i.e. the conception of the material body.

^94:1 The physical self, i.e. the conception of the material body.

^95:1 The individual soul or Self, which in dreams is free from the physical afflictions of empiric existence, but nevertheless is still tormented by the mental concepts of these. This standpoint is that of realism.

^96:1 The standpoint of pure transcendental idealism.

^96:2 In dreamless sleep.

^97:1 Praja-pati, in answer to Indra's criticism of his last definition of the Self, explains that the utter unconsciousness of dreamless sleep is not a state of non-being, but a state of transcendental Being-Consciousness. Finite consciousness is active in embodied existence, which is attended by sensations of pleasure and pain. But the finite consciousness of embodied being is but an illusive phase of the infinite consciousness of unembodied existence, which is represented by the state of dreamless sleep. The great forces of cosmic nature are in essence incorporeal; when confined within the category of space or ether they produce in the macrocosm the phenomena of a finite universe; but essentially they transcend space, being the infinite powers of Absolute Being. Similarly in the microcosm the physical functions which cause the conceptions of individual existence as subject of empiric thought are really phases of the Absolute Consciousness, the objectless Subject, essentially transcending individual existence.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

XV. GLORIA IN EXCELSIS [*1]

I know that great Spirit, sun-hued, beyond the darkness. Knowing Him, man escapeth Death; there is no other way to walk.

Than this naught else is higher, nor subtler,

[p. 99]

nor mightier. As a tree firm-set in the heavens [*1] stands the One; with this Spirit the universe is filled.

Formless, sorrowless is the Highest; they become deathless who know it; but others come to very grief.

With face, head, neck everywhere, dwelling in covert in every creature, pervading all, the Lord is He; thus everywhere is the presence of the Gracious. [*2]

A great lord is the Spirit, mover of the understanding, ruler of this pure approach, Light, [*3] unfading.

The Spirit dwells ever as inward soul, an inch in stature, within men's hearts, conceived by the heart, the imagination, the thought; deathless they become who know this...

Showing himself in the qualities of all senses, void of all senses, He is lord, ruler of all, refuge of all.

Bodied in the nine-gated city, [*4] the Swan hovers without, master of all the motionless and moving world. [*5]

Handless and footless, He speeds and seizes;

[p. 100]

eyeless, He sees; earless, He hears. He knows what may be known, but there is none to know Him. Men call Him the Primal, the Great Spirit.

Subtler than the subtle is He, greater than the great, the soul lodged in covert in living beings. Freed from grief, man sees by the Almighty's grace Him the desireless, Him the Power sovereign.

I know Him, the ageless, ancient, All-soul, dwelling everywhere in universal presence, to whom Brahma-teachers deny birth, whom they call the Eternal.

The one hue that by blending of powers lends manifold hues in diverse wise from gathered substance, the Beginning and End wherein the All dissolves--He is God; may He unite us with blessed understanding!

That same is the Fire, that is the Sun, that the Wind, that the Moon; that same is the Bright, that Brahma, that the Waters, that the Creator.

Thou art woman, Thou art man, Thou art boy and maiden; Thou art the old man tottering on the staff; Thou art born with face looking all ways.

Thou art the black bird, the green with red eyes, the lightning-bearing [cloud], the seasons, the seas; Thou art that which is beginningless, Thou livest in universal presence, whence are born all beings...

In vision of the Lord, the bounteous worshipful

[p. 101]

[paragraph continues] God, who stands sole warder over every womb, in whom this All falls together and dissolves asunder, man comes to this everlasting peace.

May He who is the fount and origin of the gods, the lord of all, Rudra, the great sage, who beheld the Germ of Gold  coming into being, unite us with blessed understanding...

Where there is not darkness, nor day and night, nor being or not-being, but the Gracious One alone, that is the Unfading, that is the lovely [light] of Savita ; thence has streamed forth the ancient Intelligence.

He may not be grasped above, nor athwart, nor in the midst. There is no likeness of Him whose name is Great Glory.

His form is not to be beheld; none sees Him with the eye. Deathless they become who in heart and mind know Him as heart-dwelling.

Footnotes

^98:1 S'vetas'vatara Upanishad, iii. 8--iv. 20. This work, one of the earliest metrical Upanishads, is marked by a singular combination of philosophical idealism with theistic feeling. In it Brahma appears as a living God, especially in his manifestation as S'iva, or Rudra, the spirit of cosmic destruction. Here accordingly we find the first expression of the doctrine of Divine Grace and of worship in love, which later became one of the chief features in Hindu religion, especially in the Vishnuite church.

^99:1 Compare Kath. Upan. vi. 1. The universe is compared to an as'vattha tree, the Ficus religiosa, of which the branches are the phenomenal world and the root Brahma.

^99:2 S'iva, a title of Rudra which has gradually ousted the, latter name.

^99:3 See extract vii., p. 68.

^99:4 Compare above, p. 61.

^99:5 Compare extract vii., above.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVI. THE ADVAITA-MAKARANDA OF LAKSHMiDHARA [*3]

1. Homage to Krishna of infinite bliss, the incarnate blessing of the world, who by the sunbeams

[p. 102]

of his glances evaporates the ocean of delusion!

2. Always I [*1] am, I give light; never am I unbeloved; thus I am proved to be Brahma, consisting in Being, Thought, and Bliss.

3. In me, the sky of Thought, arises the mirage of the universe [*2]; then how can I be aught but Brahma, knowing all, cause of all?

4. Destruction cannot come upon me from myself, because of my recognition; nor from anything else, for I have no parts; nor from the destruction of an [external] basis, for I have no such basis. [*3]

5. I, the ether of Thought, cannot be dried, burned, soaked, or cut even by real wind, fire, water, or weapons, much less by imaginary ones. [*4]

6. The universe, having no light of its own,

[p. 103]

could not possibly come to light but for the presence of light; I am the Light, and therefore am everywhere. [*1]

7. Without manifestation there can be no Being, without consciousness there can be no manifestation of the unconscious, and without transference there can be no union with consciousness. Thus I have none beside me. [*2]

8. I am not body, nor organ of sense, nor vital function, nor mind, nor intelligence; for they are embraced by the idea of "mine" and are a playground for the conception of "this." [*3]

9. I am the Witness, related to all things, most

[p. 104]

dear; I am never the Ego, for that is plunged in affections, limitations, and pains. [*1]

10. When the Ego is [dreamlessly] slumbering, sorrow, guilt, and activity do not appear; thus it is he who wanders, not I, who am the wanderer's witness. [*2]

11. The sleeper [*3] knows not his sleeping; in him who sleeps not there is no dreaming and no waking. I am the Witness of waking, dreaming, and dreamless sleep, and thus am not under these conditions.

12. [Dreamless] sleep is a halting of [finite] understanding, dreaming and waking are the rise thereof; how can these three exist in me, who am the Witness of them and infinite of knowledge?

[p. 105]

13. I am the one who knows the beings of sixfold change, [*1] and myself changeless; were it not so, I should be altogether incapable of observing their changes.

14. For a changing thing goes again and again through birth and dissolution in this and that form; how can it be an observer of these [changes]?

15. Nor can any one behold his own birth and destruction; for these are [respectively] the last and first moments of antecedent and subsequent non-being. [*2]

16. How can the not-Light touch the Self which is Light itself, and by whose light alone are caused the words, "I give not light"? [*3]

17. Nevertheless there is apparent in the sky

[p. 106]

of Thought a certain mist which subsists on the lack of reflection and ends with the rise of the sun of reflection. [*1]

18. In this long-drawn dream of which our world is made, and which arises from the great slumber of Self-ignorance, there appear Heaven, Salvation, and the other phantoms. [*2]

19. This distinction between unconscious and conscious being is imaginarily imposed on me, the conscious being, like the distinction between moving and motionless figures in a picture on a level wall.

20. Even my Witnesshood is unreal, is but a colouring reflected from the objects of thought; it merely suggests the billowless ocean of Thought. [*3]

21. I, the ocean of ambrosia, decay not because phantom bubbles arise; I, the mountain of crystal, am not flushed by the play of dream-fashioned evening clouds. [*4]

[p. 107]

22. Being is my very essence, not a property, like ether's being; for as there is no Being save me, no class-concept [of Being] can be allowed. [*1]

23. Knowledge is my very essence, not a quality; if it were a quality, [Soul] would be if intelligible not-Self, and if unintelligible non-being. [*2]

24. Bliss am I, which is naught else [but me]; were it aught else, it would not be bliss; for if not subordinate to me, it would not be agreeable, and if subordinate, it could not be of itself agreeable.

25. No real thing forsooth can ever be of diverse essences; thus I am without inward distinction, void of the differences arising from the world.

26. By the words "That art thou" is indicated a Power of single essence, pure by the absence of the variety [consisting in] the transcendence [of

[p. 108]

the Supreme] and the distinction [of individual souls]. [*1]

27. I am the Power self-authoritative and absolute, in which are stilled the phantom figures of the world and separate souls, of disciples and masters.

28. May this "Nectar of Monism" of the poet Lakshmidhara, gathered from the autumnal lotuses of poesy, be drunk by the scholar-bees.

Footnotes

^101:1 See above,  section 4.

^101:2 The light of the sun; Rig-veda, III. lxii. 10

^101:3 This is a somewhat modern poem, which is here added as it conveys with great clearness the leading psychological doctrines of the later Vedant.

^102:1 Throughout this little work the pronoun "I" is used to denote the individual soul as witness of the sense of personality, (aham-kara, egoity), and the other "determinations" of soul, while itself it consciously transcends them. The verse means that as the same predicates--existence, thought, and agreeableness--apply both to the soul and to Brahma, these two are identical.

^102:2 See above,  section 16.

^102:3 The soul is eternal; for it cannot be destroyed from within, since it has self-recognition, i.e. continuous consciousness of self-identity; and it cannot be destroyed from without, for as it has no parts it cannot be dissolved into its parts; and as it is dependent upon nothing but itself it cannot suffer from the destruction of its basis.

^102:4 The physical elements, which seem real, are in truth imaginary.

^103:1 In the process of cognition, according to the Vedanta, there are two elements--viz. the object or matter of the cognition and the subject of it. The former, being wholly lifeless and inert, can only emerge into consciousness when the light of subject Thought falls upon it from without. The first word of this verse, abha-rupasya, is wrongly printed abharupasya and accordingly mistranslated in the "Pandit" of 1873, pp. 11, 130.

^103:2 No object exists unless it becomes cognised--i.e. it becomes the object of a subject conscious thereof. Thus conscious being enters into relation with unconscious being; and how is this possible? It can only be explained by assuming an adhyasa or "transference," an inveterate error of the individual consciousness making it identify itself with the phenomenal world, which is properly nothing more than an unreal emanation of the consciousness. Hence there exists in reality nothing but consciousness. See S'ankara on Brahma-sutra, i. 1.

^103:3 The sense-organs (indriya), vital functions (prana), sensorium (manas), and intelligence (dhi, i.e. buddhi), are only "determinants," upadhis, external to the soul; see p. 28 f.

^104:1 The "witness" is the consciousness impassively cognising the affections of the psychical upadhis, such as love or hate. It is "related to all things," for things exist only in so far as they are objects of thought (see v. 7). It is thus universal Being, Thought, and Bliss. On the error of confusing the absolute Self with the Ego, see p. 45. The Ego (aham-kara) is really the subject of dreaming and dreamless sleep and waking, not the transcendental Self, according to the later, Vedanta.

^104:2 In deep sleep or swoons the Ego or sense of personality disappears and with it disappear its resultant activities and affections; hence the samsara, or continuance of rebirth, which consists essentially of these activities, cannot co-exist with the absence of the Ego, i.e. with the condition of abstract impersonal self-consciousness.

^104:3 The Ego, or sense of personality, which in dreamless sleep is unconscious that it is sleeping. On the other hand the transcendental Soul or Self is everlastingly conscious; it is the "Witness" of the three states.

^105:1 The six changes of finite being are origin, continuance, increase, attainment of maturity, commencement of decay, and dissolution. As subject of the cognition of these phenomena, the Soul must be itself devoid of these properties.

^105:2 If the Soul were liable to changes, it would be conscious of its changes, which is not the case (verse 14). Every change of a thing implies destruction of its previous condition; hence, even if we could imagine soul as passing through the six changes, we should have to admit that when it is in a particular state it cannot as such be conscious of itself at the beginning of that state (which is the last moment of the previous state), nor can it be conscious of itself at the end of that state (which is the first moment of the next state).

^105:3 The illusion of a phenomenal world cannot be in any real connection with the pure consciousness of the absolute Soul; for the conception of a physical world opposed to thought is essentially a partial negation of consciousness by consciousness, and nothing more.

^106:1 The illusion of the phenomenal world, which falsely appears as really existent, until its unreality is proved by "reflection."

^106:2 Even salvation, or release of the Soul (moksha), is only real from the standpoint of empiric thought. The transcendent Self is never in bondage, and therefore is never released.

^106:3 Since the objects of finite Thought are strictly unreal, there cannot be a real consciousness of them in the real Self. The function of witness of phenomena which apparently is exercised by the Self is really a mere indication of the absolute supra-phenomenal immobility of consciousness which is characteristic of the real Self.

^106:4 The essential nature of the Soul is in no way affected by[p. 107] the emergence from it of an imaginary universe, nor by the false idea, reflected upon it from the illusory universe without, that it is a subject or object of action, etc.

^107:1 We must not say that "existence" is only a property or attribute of the Soul. For an attribute is a generic concept implying more than one individual in which it resides; but in the case of Soul there is only one individual, the Soul itself, in which resides the attribute "existence," in the same way as in the phenomenal world there is only one ether, or space, in which therefore "etherhood" is essence, not attribute.

^107:2 If the Self is an object to its assumed property of knowledge, it is no longer Self; for the object of knowledge cannot be identical with the subject (which here is the property of knowledge). If again the Self is not an object of its know ledge, the Self is non-existent; for the incogitable is unreal.

^108:1 See Appendix I.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

APPENDIX I

  

THE SAMBANDHAS

The 25th and 26th verses of the Advaitamakaranda given above refer to a topic of importance in the later Vedanta, viz. the logical relation (sambandha) of terms. The relations are three: (1) "common reference," samanadhikaranya, (2) "relation as predicate (vis'eshana) and subject (vis'eshya)," and (3)"relation as indicated (lakshya) and indicative term (lakshana)." The proposition "Thou art That," tat tvam asi, which is the keynote of the Vedanta (see p. 24), comes under all these categories. The term That denotes literally the whole aggregate of Ignorances together with the omniscient cosmic consciousness "determined" by the latter and with the transcendental consciousness (see p. 30); but by "indication" or metonymy (lakshana) it signifies only the transcendental consciousness. The term Thou literally denotes the aggregate of Ignorances conceived distributively (see p. 30 f.) together with limited individual consciousness "determined" by the

[p. 110]

latter, and with unlimited consciousness; and by "indication" it signifies only the last. Now the proposition Thou art That comes under the relation of "common reference"; for both Thou and That signify Consciousness (Brahma), in the former case as transcending perception, in the latter case as manifested to perception in the form of finite distinction. Again, these terms are related as subject and predicate, that is, they are identified in thought by abstraction of their difference (their difference lying in the fact that the one transcends perception, and the other does not). Lastly, these terms have a metonymic relation. When we have abstracted the difference already mentioned, we may use both to signify the Consciousness, That being the "indicated" and Thou the "indicative" term. In the same way the three several terms Being, Thought, and Bliss, after due abstraction of difference (namely phenomenal distinctions) designate "indicatively" the single indivisible Brahma essentially characterised by infinite being, thought, and bliss. For further details of the Hindu theories on these subjects see Vedanta-sara, Jacob's translation, p. 83 f., Athalye's notes on Tarka-sangraha,  section 59, Kavyaprakas'a, ch. ii., etc.

     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 111]

APPENDIX II

  

LIST OF THE CHIEF UPANISHADS

The following list gives the names of the most ancient and important Upanishads, together with the contractions used for them in the preceding pages. The canon generally accepted in modern India contains 108 Upanishads; most of these are however comparatively late and distinctly sectarian (later Vedanti, Vishnuite, S'ivaite, Yogi, Sannyasi, etc.).

          B.A.

       Brihad-aranyaka

       Upanishad.

     
      Ch.

       Chhandogya

       "

     
      Taitt.

       Taittiriya

       "

     
      Ait.

       Aitareya

       "

     
      Kau.

       Kaushitaki

       "

     
      Kena

       Kena (Talavakara)

       "

     
      Kath.

       Katha

       "

     
      Is'a

       Is'avasya

       "

     
      S'vet.

       Svetas'vatara

       "

     
      Mund.

       Mundaka

       "

     
       

       Maha-narayana

       "

     
      Pra.

       Pras'na

       "

     
      Maitr.

       Maitrayaniya

       "

     
      Mand.

       Mandukya

       "

     
   
     
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The beginner will find the following works useful:

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST, edited by F. Max Muller: vol. 1 & 15, Upanishads, translated by F. Max Muller; vol. .34, Vedanta-sutra (i.e. Brahma-sutra) with the commentary by S'ankara, translated by G. Thibaut. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1879, etc.

PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISHADS, by A. E. Gough. London, Trubner, 1882.

THE UPANISHADS (in Sanskrit and English) and S'ankara's commentary (in English), translated by Sitarama S'astri and Ganganatha Jha. Madras, Seshachari, 1898, etc.

SECHZIG UPANISHADS DES VEDA, ubersetzt von Dr. Paul Deussen. Leipzig, Brockhaus, 1897

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISHADS, by Paul Deussen. Translated by Rev. A. Geden. Edinburgh, T. & T. Clark, 1906.

DAS SYSTEM DES VEDANTA, von P. Deussen. Leipzig, Brockhaus, 1883.

THE SIX SYSTEMS OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY, by F. Max Muller. London, Longmans, 1899.

Of the numerous compendia of the later Vedanta we may mention two which have been published in English--the Vedanta-sara of Sadananda, translated under the title "A Manual of Hindu Pantheism" by Col. G. A. Jacob (London, Trubner, 1881), and the Advaita-makaranda of Lakshmidhara,

[p. 113]

with Svayamprakas'a's commentary, translated by A. E. Gough in "The Pandit," vol. 8, 9 (Benares, 1873).

Of the chief Sanskrit texts of the Vedanta schools numerous editions have been published in India. Among the best are those issued in the "Anandas'rama Sanskrit Series" from the Anandas'rama Press, Poona.

The student is not likely to derive much exact knowledge from the publications of irresponsible neo-vedantic societies in Europe and America. These bodies have the commendable object of making the principles of the Vedanta intelligible to modern Western thinkers; but until they display a more scientific and historical spirit their success is likely to be limited.

Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.

    
Brahma Knowledge,  by L. D. Barnett, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 114] [p. 115]

The following advertisements appeared at the end of the original book. They are included for completeness.--MEC.

THE WISDOM OF THE EAST

SERIES

  

Edited by L. CRANMER-BYNG and Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE SERIES AND ITS PURPOSE

THE object of the Editors of this Series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour.

NEW VOLUMES

In the Press

TAOIST TEACHINGS. From the Mystical Philosophy of Leih Tzu. Translated by LIONEL GILES, M.A. 2/- net.

Just Out

ANCIENT JEWISH PROVERBS. Compiled and Classified by A. COHEN, late Scholar of Emanuel College, Cambridge. 2/- net.

THE FLIGHT OF THE DRAGON. As Essay on the Theory and Practice of Art in China and Japan, based on Original Sources. By LAURENCE BINYON. 2/- net:

[p. 116]

LEGENDS OF INDIAN BUDDHISM. Translated from "L'Introduction a l'Histoire du Buddhisme Indien" of Eugene Burnouf, with an Introduction by WINIFRED STEPHENS. 2/- net.

THE BUSTAN OF SADI. From the Persian. Translated with Introduction by A. HART EDWARDS. 2/- net.

THE RUBA'IYAT OF HAFIZ, Translated with Introduction by SYED ABDUL MAJID, LL.D. Rendered into English Verse by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

THE ALCHEMY OF HAPPINESS. By AL GHAZZALI. Rendered into English by Claud Field. 2/- net.

THE SINGING CARAVAN. Some Echoes of Arabian Poetry. By HENRY BAERLEIN. 2/- net.

THE WISDOM OF THE APOCRYPHA. With an Introduction by C. E. LAWRENCE, Author of "Pilgrimage," etc. 2/- net.

THE BURDEN OF ISIS. Being the Laments of Isis and Nephthys. Translated from the Egyptian with an Introduction by JAMES TEACKLE DENNIS. 1/-net.

THE MASTER-SINGERS OF JAPAN. Being Verse Translations from the Japanese Poets. By CLARA A. WALSH. 2/- net.

THE PATH OF LIGHT. Rendered for the first time into English from the Bodhi-charyavatara of S'anti-Deva. A Manual of Maha-Yana Buddhism. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D. 2/- net.

THE SPLENDOUR OF GOD. Being Extracts from the Sacred Writings of the Bahais. With Introduction by ERIC HAMMOND. 2/- net.

A LUTE OF JADE. Being Selections from the Classical Poets of China. Rendered with an Introduction by L. CRANMER BYNG. 2/- net.

THE CONFESSIONS OF AL GHAZZALI. Translated for the first time into English by CLAUD FIELD, M.A. 1/ net.

THE HEART OF INDIA. Sketches in the History of Hindu Religion and Morals. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D., Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 2/- net.

[p. 117]

THE BOOK OF FILIAL DUTY. Translated from the Chinese of the Hsiao Ching by IVAN CHeN, first Secretary to the Chinese Legation. 1/- net.

THE DIWAN OF ABU'L-ALA. By HENRY BARLEIN. 1/- net.

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE: An Outline of the Philosophy of the Vedanta. As set forth by the Upanishads and by Sankara. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D., Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 2/- net.

THE CONDUCT OF LIFE; or, The Universal Order of Confucius. A translation of one of the four Confucian Books, hitherto known as the Doctrine of the Mean. By KU HUNG MING, M.A. (Edin.). 1/- net.

THE TEACHINGS OF ZOROASTER. Translated with Introduction by Dr. S. A. KAPADIA, Lecturer, University College, London, 2/- net,

THE PERSIAN MYSTICS.

I. Jalalu'd-din Rumi, By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2/- net.

II. Jami By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2/-net.

THE WAY OF THE BUDDHA. Selections from the Buddhist texts, together with the original Pali, with Introduction by HERBERT BAYNES, M.R.A.S. 2/- net.

THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS. A new Translation of the greater part of the Confucian Analects, with Introduction and Notes by LIONEL GILLS, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant in the Department of Oriental Books and Manuscripts of the British Museum. 2/- net.

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC. Selections from the Philosophy of Chuang Tzu. With Introduction by LIONEL GILLS, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant at the British Museum. 2/- net.

THE AWAKENING OF THE SOUL. From the Arabic of IBN TUFAIL. Translated with Introduction by PAUL BRoNNLE, Ph.D. 1/6 net.

[p. 118]

THE RELIGION OF THE KORAN. With Introduction by Sir ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 1/-net.

THE WISDOM OF ISRAEL: Being Extracts from the Babylonian Talmud and Midrash Rabboth. Translated from the Aramaic with an Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS. 1/- net.

SA'DI'S SCROLL OF WISDOM. By SHAIKH SA'DI. With Introduction by Sir ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 1/- net. With Persian Script added. 2/- net.

THE INSTRUCTION OF PTAH-HOTEP AND THE INSTRUCTION OF KE'GEMNI. The Oldest Books in the World. Translated from the Egyptian with Introduction and Appendix by BATTISCOMBE G. GUNN, 1/- net.

THE ROSE GARDEN OF SA'DI. Selected and Rendered from the Persian with Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG, 1/- net.

THE CLASSICS OF CONFUCIUS.

I. The Book of History (Shu-King). By W. GORN OLD, 1/- net.

II. The Book of Odes (Shi-King). By L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

THE SAYINGS OF LAO TZU. From the Chinese. Translated with Introduction by LIONEL GILES, of the British Museum. 1/- net.

WOMEN AND WISDOM OF JAPAN. With Introduction by S. TAKAISHI. 1/- net.

ARABIAN WISDOM. Selections and Translations from the Arabic by JOHN WORTABET, MD. 1/- net.

THE DUTIES OF THE HEART. By RABBI BACHYE. Translated from the Hebrew with Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS. Hollier Hebrew Scholar, U.C.L. 1/- net.

  

LONDON

  

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

[p. 119]

Elphinstone, Hon. M. HISTORY OF INDIA--the Hindu and Mahometan Periods. With Notes and additions by E. B. COWELL, M.A. Ninth Edition. Demy 8vo. 15s. net.

Fanshawe, H. C. DELHI: PAST AND PRESENT. With Maps and Illustrations. Cheap Edition. Demy 8vo. 8s. net.

Handbook. INDIA, BURMA AND CEYLON, including Bengal, Bombay and Madras, the Panjab, North-West Provinces, Rajputana, the Central Provinces, Mysore, etc., the Native States and Assam. With 78 Maps and Plans of Towns and Buildings. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo. 20s.

Indian Records Series. Published for the Government of India:--

BENGAL IN 1756-57. A Selection of Public and Private Papers dealing with the Affairs of the British in Bengal during the reign of Siraj-Uddaula. Edited, with Notes and an Historical Introduction, by S. C. HILL, B.A., B.SC. 3 Vols. Medium 8vo. 12s. net. each Vol.

OLD FORT WILLIAM IN BENGAL. A Selection of Official Documents dealing with its History. Edited by C. R. WILSON, M.A., D.LITT. 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. 12s. net each Vol.

Indian Text Series. Edited by T. W. RHYS DAVIDS, PHD., LLD.

STORIA DO MOGOR; OR, THE MOGUL MEMOIRS (1653-1708). By NICCOLAO MANUCCI, Venetian. Translated and edited, with Notes and Introduction, under the supervision of the Royal Asiatic Society, by WILLIAM IRVINE. Medium 8vo. 4 Vols. 12s. net each Vol.

[p. 120]

Crooke, William. THINGS INDIAN. Being Discursive Notes on various subjects connected with India. Demy 8vo. 12s. net.

Eggar, Mrs. H. C. AN INDIAN GARDEN. With Coloured Frontispiece and 18 Illustrations. Square Demy 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

Lyall, Sir Alfred. ASIATIC STUDIES.; Religious and Social. 2 Vols. Cheaper Edition. Demy 8vo. 5s. net each.

--THE RISE AND EXPANSION OF THE BRITISH DOMINION IN INDIA. Cheap Edition. With 5 Maps. Demy 8vo. 5s. each.

Murray, A. H. Hallam. THE HIGH ROAD OF EMPIRE. Reproductions in Colour of 47 Water-Colour Drawings and numerous Pen and Ink Sketches made in India. Medium 8vo. 21s. net. Edition de Luxe, L2 2s. net.

Yule, Colonel Sir Henry. THE BOOK OF SER. MARCO POLO, THE VENETIAN, concerning the Kingdoms and Marvels of the East. Sir Henry Yule's Translation, revised throughout in the light of Modern Discoveries by Professor HENRI CORDIER. With a Memoir of Henry Yule, by his DAUGHTER. With Maps and Illustrations. 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. L3 3s. net.

--and Burnell, Arthur Coke. HOBSON-JOBSONs. Being a Glossary of Anglo-Indian Colloquial Words and Phrases and of Kindred Terms, Etymological, Historical, Geographical; and Discursive. New Edition. Thoroughly revised by WILLIAM CROOKE. Demy 8vo. 28s. net.

Yusuf-Ali, A LIFE AND LABOUR IN INDIA. With Illustrations. Including Drawings by Native Artists. Demy 8vo. 12s. net.

  

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

 

 

      
